
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22351/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 25th June 2015                        |On 29th June 2015                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                           SURAJU OLANSILE RAZZAQ
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. c. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Karim, Counsel, instructed by M.A.
Consultants (London)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 History of Appeal

 1. The Respondent, who was born on 2nd February 1982,  is  a  national  of
    Nigeria. He entered the  United  Kingdom  on  3rd  January  2009  as  a
    student. He married Diorella Maura Davelaar on 4th December  2009.  She
    is a Dutch national, who was born on 7th July 1977. The Respondent  was
    granted a residence card as her spouse on 13th December 2010, which was
    valid until 25th March 2015.

 2. A decree absolute was granted by Bow County Court in  relation  to  the
    Respondent's marriage to his former wife on 29th January  2014  and  on
    25th March 2014 an application for a residence card  was  made  on  his
    behalf on the basis that he had retained a right of  residence  on  his
    divorce. The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  refused  his
    application on 2nd May 2014 on the basis that he had not  provided  any
    evidence to establish that his former  wife  was  exercising  a  Treaty
    right at the time of the decree absolute. She also asserted that he had
    not continued to be a worker, self-employed  or  self-sufficient  since
    his divorce. In addition, she said that the residence card which he had
    provided for his former wife was one which had been reported stolen  or
    lost.

 3. The Appellant  appealed  and  his  appeal  was  allowed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Morris in a decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  9th
    March 2015. She said that she was assisted by the case of Samsam  (EEA:
    revocation and retained rights) Syria [2011] UKUT 00165 and found  that
    it was more likely than not that  the  Respondent's  ex-wife  had  been
    working at the date of their divorce.  Therefore,  he  had  retained  a
    right of residence under Regulation 10(5) of the Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 4. The Secretary of State appealed against this  decision  on  13th  March
    2015. She submitted that there was no evidence that the Respondent's ex-
    wife was exercising a Treaty right at the date  of  their  divorce  and
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had not given adequate  reasons  for
    concluding [on a balance of  probabilities]  that  she  was.  She  also
    submitted that the case of Samsam could not be relied  upon  to  assert
    that the burden of proof was reversed and that the Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department was required  to  inquire  as  to  whether  the
    Respondent's ex-wife was exercising a Treaty right at the date of their
    divorce.  She  also  asserted  that  the  case  of  Samsam  should   be
    distinguished as it referred a situation where  an  applicant's  rights
    under the EEA regulations had been revoked.

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler granted the Secretary of State for the
    Home Department permission to appeal on 30th April 2015  on  the  basis
    that  it  was  arguable  that  the  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   had
    misunderstood the ratio of Samsam and had also failed to give  adequate
    reasons for finding that the Respondent's ex-wife was exercising Treaty
    rights at the time of their divorce.

 Error of Law Hearing

 6. At the hearing Mr. Avery noted that there was no evidence to show  that
    the Appellant's ex-wife had been exercising a Treaty right at the  date
    of the hearing and that the facts in Samsam were very different as  the
    Secretary of State had granted the sponsor in that case.  In  addition,
    he noted that in paragraph 13(iii) of her determination the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had said that paragraph 26 of Samsam related  to  action
    taken when considering revocation of a residence card but still  relied
    upon it in her reasoning in the current case.  He also  relied  on  the
    case of Amos & Anor v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]
    EWCA Civ 552 and submitted that the burden of proof did not lie on  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department to  obtain  evidence  as  to
    whether the Appellant's wife was still working at  the  time  of  their
    divorce.

 7. Mr. Karim then replied. He submitted that Samsam was relevant and noted
    that at paragraphs  9  and  10  of  her  determination  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge set out the Respondent and the Appellant's case. He also
    submitted that the Judge's approach had mirrored that in  paragraph  60
    of Samsam. In addition, he submitted that the failure by the  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department to obtain further  evidence  was  only
    one of a number of factors which she had taken into  account.  He  also
    submitted that at paragraph 59 of Samsam the Upper Tribunal  had  noted
    that "in marriage breakdown cases, the EEA national spouse may not wish
    to cooperate with the non-national former family  member  in  providing
    evidence of the retained right of residence. This may cause problems if
    the burden lies fully on the applicant in making  a  first  application
    for  a  residence  document  or   permanent   residence.   A   material
    consideration to whether the applicant  can  discharge  the  burden  of
    proof is whether the Home  Office  had  previously  accepted  that  the
    relevant person was working or otherwise exercising Treaty rights".  In
    addition,  he  submitted  that  there  was  nothing   in   Amos   which
    contradicted Samsam.

 8. At paragraph 34 of Amos Lord  Justice  Stanley  Burnton  held  that  he
    "would reject Ms Theophilus' contention that the Secretary of State was
    required to assist her to establish her  case  [by  producing  her  ex-
    partner's National Insurance and tax records]. The procedure before the
    Tribunal is essentially adversarial: the appellant seeks to  show  that
    the decision of the Secretary of State was unlawful or otherwise wrong.
    The Secretary of State must present the facts as known to  her  fairly,
    and seek a decision of the Tribunal that accords with the law,  but  to
    go beyond those requirements  would  be  irrational.  It  would  be  to
    require the Secretary of State to take steps  to  prove  that  her  own
    decision was wrong".

 9. Furthermore, in paragraph 59 of Samsam the Upper Tribunal noted that an
    applicant may have difficulty providing sufficient evidence in marriage
    breakdown cases but went no further than saying that in such  cases  "a
    material consideration to  whether  the  applicant  can  discharge  the
    burden of proof is whether the Home Office had previously accepted that
    the relevant person was working or otherwise exercising Treaty rights".
    However, in the case of Samsam the facts indicated that the ex-wife had
    a permanent right of residence in the United Kingdom  at  the  time  in
    question, which meant that the evidential test was slightly different.

10. I also note that the Upper Tribunal referred in  paragraph  59  to  the
    applicant discharging the burden of proof and  this  accords  with  the
    head note of the case, which states that:

       "2. Regulation 10 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006  requires
       the applicant to demonstrate that:  a  genuine  marriage  has  lasted
       three years and the couple have spent one year together in the United
       Kingdom and that the EEA national spouse was exercising treaty rights
       at the time he ceased to be a family member".

11. In contrast, at paragraph 13(iii) of her determination in this case the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge adopts part of the reasoning in Samsam  which
    was explicitly related to an  example  of  a  case  where  a  right  of
    residence had been revoked and where the Upper Tribunal had found  that
    the Home Office should make further enquires. In paragraph  13(iv)  she
    also asserted that the Secretary of  State  should  have  made  further
    enquiries of the HMRC or Social Security agencies. This did not  accord
    with the law as confirmed in Amos or Samsam.

12. Mr. Karim argued that this was not fatal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision as she had relied on other factors  in  paragraph  13.
    However, on closer analysis these factors were that  there  was  a  gap
    between August 2013 and 29th January 2014 when the  Appellant  did  not
    know whether his wife had been working; he had last  seen  her  in  May
    2013 and that she was due to give birth in August 2013.  The First-tier
    Tribunal Judge speculated that the baby may not have been born or  that
    the Appellant's ex-wife may have obtained alternative  employment  when
    he or she was born.  However,  these  factors  taken  together  do  not
    provide sufficient evidence to suggest that the Appellant's ex-wife was
    working at the time of their divorce and it was not suggested that  she
    was someone who had acquired a permanent right of residence by then.

13. For all of these reasons I am satisfied that there were material errors
    of law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  decision  and  findings  and
    that it should be set aside in its entirety. I am also satisfied  that,
    as there will need to be a complete re-hearing, this is a  proper  case
    for remission to the First-tier Tribunal.

 Conclusions:

    1.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision and findings did  include
       material errors of law.

    2. The decision should be set aside in its entirety.

    3. The appeal should be listed for a de novo hearing before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal.

 Directions

    1.   The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  de  novo
       hearing.

    2.   The appeal should not  be  re-listed  before  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Mrs Morris.



     Date 26th June l 2015
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
