
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22601/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 11 June 2015                               |On 26 June 2015               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               MR AHMED MONSUR
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Office
For the Respondent:    Non attendance


                                DETERMINATION

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.
    To avoid confusion we will use  Secretary  of  State  ('SSHD')  and  Mr
    Monsur throughout.

 2. Mr Monsur is a citizen of Bangladesh and his date of birth is  2  April
    1988.

Immigration History

 3. Mr Monsur was granted entry clearance as a Tier 4 (General) student  on
    2 December 2010. His leave was granted to 28 March 2014.  On  24  March
    2014 he applied for further leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    student and for a biometric residence permit. The SSHD, in  a  decision
    dated 28 April 2014, refused the application. The  reason  for  refusal
    was: 'You fail to meet the requirements of paragraph  245ZX(m)  as  you
    have  overstayed  in  the  United  Kingdom.  When  you  submitted  your
    application on 24 March 2014 your leave had expired  on  29  June  2012
    which was more than 28 days before the submission of your  application.
    As such you have overstayed in the United Kingdom... You therefore  did
    not have leave  to  enter/remain  at  the  time  of  your  application.
    Therefore there is no right of appeal against this decision'.


The First-tier Tribunal Judge's Decision

 4. Mr Monsur appealed under section 82 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration,
    and Asylum Act 2002 against the decision  of  the  SSHD.   He  did  not
    attend the hearing. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Cooper  ('the  judge'),
    being satisfied that notice of the hearing was properly served, decided
    that it was in the interests of justice to  proceed  to  determine  the
    appeal. On being informed that Mr Monsur had not attended the  hearing,
    the SSHD's representative said that she was content for the  appeal  to
    be heard in her absence.


 5. The judge allowed the appeal in a  decision  dated  25  February  2015,
    promulgated on 26 February 2015. The judge found, at paragraph 17, that
    'What the Appellant asserts in his Notice of Appeal  is  correct  [that
    the SSHD had made a mistake as to the date leave expired]. RB  contains
    a copy of  the  Appellant's  passport  which  is  endorsed  with  Entry
    Clearance which was issued at Dhaka on 2 December 2010  and  was  valid
    until 28 March 2014.'  At  paragraph  19  the  judge  found  that  'The
    Respondent...has  not  raised  any  other  ground  for   refusing   the
    application save for the mistaken belief that his leave to  remain  had
    already expired.'

Permission to Appeal

 6. The SSHD applied to the First-tier Tribunal for  permission  to  appeal
    against the judge's decision. Permission to appeal was granted by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Ransley. The grounds of appeal assert:
         'On the 22nd December 2011 the Appellants sponsor at the time, and
        who provided a  transcript  for  the  current  application  (London
        Capital College), surrendered their Tier 4 sponsor licence.
        The appellant's leave was curtailed with no right of  appeal  under
        paragraph 323A(a) of HC395 (as amended) so as  to  expire  on  29th
        June 2012 and  correspondence  to  that  effect  was  sent  to  the
        Appellant.
        Whilst the  narrative  above  was  not  before  the  Judge,  it  is
        respectfully submitted that the  Judge  arguably  errs  in  law  by
        referring to the Appellant's passport to establish the validity  of
        the  Appellant's  leave,  when  there  was  an  assertion  by   the
        Respondent that the Appellant's leave  had  expired  on  22nd  June
        2012.
        It is respectfully submit that if the Judge had any  doubts  as  to
        who was correct, the  guidance  in  Shen  (paper  appeals;  proving
        dishonesty) [2014] UKUT 236 (IAC) (20 May 2014)  should  have  been
        followed...'

Non-attendance at Upper Tribunal Hearing

 7. Mr Monsur did not attend the hearing nor  was  he  represented  at  the
    hearing. He sent a letter dated 8 June 2015 referring  to  the  hearing
    date of 11 June 2015. We are satisfied that due notice  of  the  appeal
    was served upon him at the address that was  given.  We  are  therefore
    satisfied that having been served notice of the hearing and having  not
    attended it was in the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing
    in his  absence  in  accordance  with  paragraph  38  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Discussion

 8. There are two issues to be  determined.  Firstly,  did  the  First-tier
    Tribunal err in law in the approach to deciding the validity  of  leave
    at the time Mr Monsur made his application and  secondly,  whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal had jurisdiction to entertain the appeal.


 9. At the hearing we heard submissions from Mr Bramble on  behalf  of  the
    SSHD. He handed up a copy of a letter from the Home Office  UKBA  dated
    30 April 2012 addressed to Mr Monsur at the address currently  recorded
    as his residence. This letter notified Mr Monsur  that  his  leave  had
    been varied so as to expire on 29 June 2012. The letter  set  out  that
    the decision to curtail his leave  was  as  a  result  of  the  sponsor
    licence for  London  Capital  College  having  been  surrendered.  This
    information was not before the judge and we have therefore not admitted
    this evidence.


Legal Framework

   10. At the relevant time section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration, and
       Asylum Act 2002 provided:
         82 Right of appeal: general

             (1) Where an immigration decision is made in respect of a
             person he may appeal to the Tribunal.

             (2) In this Part "immigration decision" means-

             (a)...




             (d) refusal to vary a person's leave to enter or remain in the
             United Kingdom if the result of the refusal is that the person
             has no leave to enter
















Error of Law

A. First issue - the approach to deciding the validity of leave
Decision on the Papers
   11. This case was decided on the papers by the First-tier Tribunal  with
       the concurrence of the SSHD. The context in which this  occurred  is
       of  importance.  As  far  as  we  can  ascertain  no  documents   or
       explanation to support the SSHD's assertion that leave  had  expired
       on 29 June 2012  were  submitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  An
       indexed bundle was submitted by the SSHD which included a copy of Mr
       Monsur's passport with the relevant entry clearance endorsed  on  it
       with an expiry date of 28 March 2014. This was the SSHD's bundle  of
       documents that was intended to be relied on at  the  hearing.  There
       was nothing contained in that bundle to gainsay the  assertion  that
       the date of 29 June 2012 was simply a mistake.


   12. The SSHD's representative, who attended at the commencement  of  the
       hearing, must have been aware that Mr Monsur  had  asserted  in  his
       grounds of appeal that:


         'they refused the application on the ground  that  the  appellant's
         leave to remain was expired on  29  June  2012.  It  seems  to  the
         appellant  that  the  immigration  officer  had  made   a   mistake
         and...assessed  the  application  on  the  basis  of  a   different
         applicant's documents and passport...the appellant has the right of
         appeal. Because he submitted the application before the  expire  of
         his leave...'


   13. The representative must have been aware that  Mr  Monsur's  passport
       had an expiry date of 28 March 2014 endorsed on the visa entry.  She
       must have been aware of  the  contents  of  the  SSHD's  bundle  (in
       particular that no evidence or explanation  had  been  submitted  to
       gainsay Mr Monsur's assertion with regard to a  mistake  as  to  the
       date) when she indicated that she was content for the matter  to  be
       decided in her absence on the documents before the judge. The SSHD's
       representative did not take the  jurisdiction  point  regarding  the
       right of appeal on the day.


The approach of the judge
   14. Mr Bramble submitted that the judge failed to take into account  the
       decision letter which clearly notes that Mr Monsur  failed  to  meet
       the  requirements  because  he  had  overstayed.  Mr  Bramble   drew
       attention to paragraph 17 in the judge's determination and  asserted
       that the judge had failed to engage at all with the issue  that  the
       SSHD had clearly stated that leave had expired in 2012. Paragraph 17
       of the judge's decision is inadequate  when  there  is  an  explicit
       statement in the SSHD's letter regarding the date leave expired.


   15. We consider that it is  clear  that  the  judge  was  aware  of  the
       evidence of the SSHD and considered that evidence. At  paragraph  11
       of the decision the judge records that the reason for refusal of the
       application was because leave to remain had expired on 29 June  2012
       and at paragraph 12 that the SSHD stated in the refusal letter  that
       because Mr Monsur did not have  leave  to  remain  at  the  time  of
       application that he had no right of appeal.


   16. Mr Bramble submitted that the judge  erred  in  law  in  failing  to
       engage with the conflict in the  dates.  We  do  not  agree.  It  is
       important to consider the SSHD's letter as it  sheds  light  on  the
       finding of the judge and the plausibility of Mr  Monsur's  assertion
       as to mistake. The reasons given in the letter (set out  at  para  3
       above) are exceptionally brief merely stating that leave had expired
       on 29 June 2012. No mention was made of the  SSHD  having  curtailed
       his leave on that date  or  the  reason  for  that  curtailment.  At
       paragraph 17 the judge made a finding that Mr Monsur's assertion  in
       his notice of appeal is correct  (that  there  was  a  mistake  with
       regard to the date that leave  expired).  The  judge  then  referred
       specifically to the SSHD's bundle  which  contained  a  copy  of  Mr
       Monsur's passport which is endorsed with entry clearance valid until
       March 2014. Mr Monsur's assertion  in  his  grounds  of  appeal  was
       entirely plausible (given the scant detail in the SSHD's letter)  on
       the evidence which was before the  judge.  In  the  absence  of  any
       explanation or evidence (which was readily available to the SSHD) to
       gainsay that assertion the judge was entitled to  make  the  finding
       that she did. The judge did not, in our view, need to engage in  any
       detailed analysis when reaching that finding which was quite  simply
       acceptance of the documentary  evidence,  namely  the  copy  of  his
       passport (included in the SSHD's bundle) coupled with an  acceptance
       of a plausible explanation by Mr Monsur. The SSHD failed  to  engage
       with Mr Monsur's explanation and made no attempt to gainsay what had
       been asserted despite submitting  a  bundle  of  documents  for  the
       appeal and having  attended  at  the  commencement  of  the  hearing
       specifically giving consent for the appeal proceed on the  basis  of
       the documents before the judge.




   17. In reliance on the case of Shen (paper appeals; proving  dishonesty)
       [2014] UKUT 236 (IAC) (20 May 2014)  ('Shen')  Mr  Bramble  asserted
       that if the judge had competing concerns with regard to  a  material
       issue  the  judge  should  have  asked  further  questions  and  not
       automatically accepted what Mr Monsur had said  in  his  grounds  of
       appeal.


   18. In the case of Shen the Upper Tribunal gave guidance on the approach
       to follow where there is a direct conflict of evidence at  paragraph
       27:


         27.     In our view if the  Judge  entertained  doubts  as  to  the
         Appellant's story, he should have sought to investigate further. He
         could have exercised the powers that he has pursuant  to  rules  45
         and/or 51 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules
         2005 to require, for example, the Appellant  to  adduce  supporting
         documentary evidence, or the SSHD to comment upon  the  Appellant's
         evidence  and  adduce  such  evidence  as   the   SSHD   considered
         appropriate to refute the Appellant's evidence.


   19. In our view there was no direct conflict of evidence and clearly the
       judge did not entertain doubts about Mr Monsur's 'story'. There were
       two contrary assertions made as to the correct date  that  leave  to
       remain was valid to. If that was all that was before the judge  then
       further enquiries in accordance with the guidance in Shen  might  be
       required. However, in this case there was both documentary  evidence
       (a copy of Mr Monsur's passport had been provided by the SSHD) and a
       plausible explanation for  the  contrary  assertion  in  the  SSHD's
       letter, 'the immigration officer had made a  mistake  and...assessed
       the application on the basis of a  different  applicant's  documents
       and passport.' In the absence  of  any  dispute  at  all  with  that
       explanation  and  in  the  particular  circumstances  of  this  case
       (regarding the SSHD's specific consent to proceeding on  the  papers
       in full knowledge of the grounds) the  judge  was  not  required  to
       undertake any further enquiries.


   20. We find that there is no error of law in the approach of  the  judge
       to the finding on the validity of leave at the time of  Mr  Monsur's
       application.


   B. The second issue - jurisdiction
   21. Mr Bramble was invited to make  submissions  on  the  position  with
       regard to the jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal  in  light  of
       the case of  Anwar  &  Anor  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2010] EWCA Civ 1275  if  we  were  against  him  on  the
       judge's decision in respect of the validity  of  leave.  Mr  Bramble
       acknowledged that he  was  in  some  difficulty  in  light  of  that
       judgment in maintaining that the judge did not have jurisdiction  to
       entertain the appeal.

   22. We have considered whether or not  the  judge  had  jurisdiction  to
       entertain the appeal and the position of this Tribunal in  light  of
       the evidence now provided that  might  demonstrate  that  leave  had
       expired in 2012 so that Mr Monsur may not, in fact, have had a right
       of appeal. We note that Mr Monsur has  not  been  provided,  in  the
       course of this appeal, with a copy of that letter  and  neither  has
       the SSHD provided  evidence  that  the  requisite  requirements  for
       service of that latter were complied with in 2012.


   23. We consider that this Tribunal is entitled to determine whether  the
       First-tier Tribunal had jurisdiction to entertain the appeal. In the
       case of Virk & Ors v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
       [2013] EWCA Civ 652 the court held at paragraph 10:

         '...The jurisdiction conferred by ss. 11 and 13 of the Tribunals,
         Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ("the 2007 Act") to determine any
         point of law arising from a decision of the lower tribunal must
         include the power to determine whether such a right of appeal
         exists at all.'

   24.  In Anwar v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA
       Civ 1275 a decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  entertain  an
       appeal was later reversed on re-consideration  on  the  ground  that
       there was no jurisdiction to hear an in-country appeal. The Court of
       Appeal  held  that  the   First-tier   Tribunal   had   adjudicative
       jurisdiction to entertain the appeal for  the  purpose  of  deciding
       whether the appellant had left the United Kingdom  by  the  relevant
       time and that until that issue was resolved against the appellant it
       could not be  said  that  it  lacked  jurisdiction.   Sedley  LJ  at
       paragraphs 19-21 said :


         '19. Was the AIT right in Ms Pengeyo's and Mr Anwar's cases to
         hold that the respective immigration judges had acted without
         jurisdiction? In my judgment they had jurisdiction to embark on
         the hearing notwithstanding that neither applicant had left the
         United Kingdom, but once the point was taken by the Home Office
         (and assuming it to be factually correct, since they might have
         been absent from the hearing) it operated in bar of the
         proceedings. Had the point not been taken in either case, the
         immigration judge would have been bound to proceed with the
         appeal.

         20. The reason for this ostensibly subtle distinction is one which
         matters. It is the distinction between constitutive and
         adjudicative jurisdiction which I sought to draw in a dissenting
         judgment in Carter v Ahsan (No 1) [2005] ICR 1817, paras 16-27,
         which secured approval on appeal [2008] 1 AC 696. The constitutive
         jurisdiction of a tribunal is the power to embark upon trying
         specified kinds of issue. Whether a foreign national has obtained
         leave to enter or remain by deception is, by common consent, such
         an issue. Its adjudicative jurisdiction may then depend on a
         number of factors, such as whether the appeal has been brought
         within time or-as here-whether the applicant has left the United
         Kingdom.

         21. This in turn may depend on several other things. First it must
         depend on whether the out-of-country rule applies at all, which is
         likely to be a mixed question of fact and law.  Immigration  Judge
         Callender-Smith concluded in Mr  Anwar's  case  that  it  did  not
         apply. Secondly it may depend on whether the applicant has in fact
         left the country: he or she may be absent  from  the  hearing  but
         not, or allegedly not, from the United Kingdom. This will then  be
         a triable issue.  Until  such  issues  have  been  decided  it  is
         impossible to say that the tribunal cannot hear the appeal.'

   25. Applying the approach set out above to this case the  judge  had  to
       decide whether or not Mr Monsur had valid leave  to  remain  at  the
       time he made his application in order to determine if he had a right
       of appeal. Having found that  he  had  valid  leave  the  judge  had
       jurisdiction to entertain and determine the appeal.

   26. However, in light of the assertions now made before this Tribunal it
       appears that Mr Monsur may not in fact have had valid leave  at  the
       time he made his application and consequently may  not  have  had  a
       right of appeal. The  issue  before  this  Tribunal,  therefore,  is
       whether that fact retrospectively has the effect  of  depriving  the
       First-tier Tribunal of its constitutive jurisdiction.


   27. In Ahsan v Watt (formerly Carter) (sued  on  behalf  of  the  Labour
       Party) [2007] UKHL 51, Lord Hoffmann at paragraphs 30 and 33 said:

             30 '... But when the tribunal has decided that it  does  have
             jurisdiction, the question of whether this decision is binding
             at a later stage of the  same  litigation,  or  in  subsequent
             litigation, involves, as Sedley LJ explained in his dissenting
             judgment, quite different issues about fairness and economy in
             the administration of justice...

             33 In my opinion, therefore,  the  decision  that  the  Labour
             Party was a qualifying body for the purposes of section 12 was
             made by a competent court and is therefore  binding  upon  the
             parties. It  does  not  matter  that  a  later  decision,  now
             approved by this House, has shown that  it  was  erroneous  in
             law: see In re Waring; Westminster Bank v Burton-Butler [1948]
             Ch 221. The whole point of an issue estoppel on a question  of
             law  is  that  the  parties  remain  bound  by  an   erroneous
             decision.'



   28. As we have found that there was no error of law in the  approach  of
       the judge when deciding that Mr Monsur had valid leave and therefore
       had jurisdiction to entertain the appeal, the fact that it  may  now
       be shown that the basis for that  decision  is  erroneous  does  not
       deprive the First-tier Tribunal subsequently of its jurisdiction.

   Conclusions
   29. The First-tier Tribunal had jurisdiction at the  time  it  made  its
       decision to entertain the  appeal.  It  has  not  subsequently  been
       deprived of that jurisdiction.


   30. There was no error of law such that the decision of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal is set aside.

   31. We have considered whether any parties require the protection of  an
       anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously.
       Having considered all the  circumstances  and  evidence  we  do  not
       consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


   Notice of Decision


   The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 23/6/15


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw













