

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22179/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  29th May 2014                             |On 3rd June 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HARRIES

                                   Between

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                 MR HAO XING
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:  Mr A Van As, of Visa Inn Immigration Specialist
For the Respondent:  Mr P Della, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



Details of the Parties and Proceedings


  1. The appellant in the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of State  for  the
     Home Department. The respondent, Mr Hao Xing, is referred to  hereafter
     as the applicant. He was born on 5th January 1982 and is a  citizen  of
     China.  He appealed before First-tier Tribunal Judge  N  M  K  Lawrence
     (the Judge) against the decision of the Secretary  of  State,  made  on
     26th September 2012, to refuse to vary  his  leave  to  remain  in  the
     United Kingdom as the dependant of a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work)  Migrant.
     The Judge dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  in  a
     determination promulgated on 3rd December 2012.


  2. Permission to appeal against the Judge's decision to the Upper Tribunal
     was granted to the applicant by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pooler  on
     20th December 2012. The matter was then determined without a hearing by
     Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  M  A  Hall  sitting  at  Sheldon  Court,
     Birmingham, on 12th June 2013. He found  that  the  Judge  had  made  a
     material error of law in the making of his decision, set it  aside  and
     remade it by  allowing  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  in
     accordance with  the  case  of  Khatel  and  others  (s85A;  effect  of
     continuing application) [2013] UKUT 00044 (IAC).


  3. On 2nd July 2013 the Secretary of State requested permission to  appeal
     to the Court of Appeal against the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in
     the light of the  subsequently  decided  case  of  Raju  and  others  v
     Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 754  holding
     that Khatel had been wrongly decided. On 23rd July 2013 Upper  Tribunal
     Judge Peter Lane  gave directions to the parties of the proposed use of
     Rules 45(1)(b) and 46 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
     2008 as follows in the light of the findings in Raju  with  a  view  to
     setting aside the Upper  Tribunal  determination  and  re-visiting  the
     appeal against the determination of the First-tier Tribunal:


           Upper Tribunal's consideration of application for permission to
           appeal


           45.   (1) On receiving an application for permission  to  appeal
           the Upper Tribunal may review the decision  in  accordance  with
           rule 46 (review of a decision), but may only do so if-


                 a) when making the decision the Upper Tribunal overlooked a
                    legislative provision or binding authority  which  could
                    have had a material effect on the decision; or


                 b) since the Upper Tribunal's decision, a court has made  a
                    decision which is binding  on  the  Upper  Tribunal  and
                    which, had it been  made  before  the  Upper  Tribunal's
                    decision, could  have  had  a  material  effect  on  the
                    decision.


  4. The Upper Tribunal decision accordingly came before me on 29th May 2014
     under Rules 45 and 46 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
     2008 for review.  For the purposes of this hearing Mr Van As  had  very
     helpfully set out the applicant's current position in a detailed letter
     dated 20th May 2014. For the purposes  of  this  determination  I  need
     record only the most salient of the  facts  set  out  in  that  letter,
     namely that the applicant has made a fresh application to the Secretary
     of State for leave to remain in the United Kingdom and Mr Della was  in
     agreement that he is entitled to, and will be granted, such  leave.  In
     the circumstances Mr Della did not wish to pursue either an  appeal  or
     review of the Upper Tribunal's decision allowing the applicant's appeal
     under the Immigration Rules.


  5. I was invited by both representatives to make  a  consent  order  under
     Rule 39 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  allowing
     the decision of the Upper Tribunal to  stand.  Rule  39(1)  allows  the
     Upper Tribunal, at the request of the parties, but only if it considers
     it appropriate, to make a consent order disposing  of  the  proceedings
     and making such other appropriate provision as the parties have agreed.




  6. I accordingly make a consent order in terms that the decision of Deputy
     Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall allowing the applicant's appeal under the
     Immigration Rules is reviewed by way of taking no action  so  that  the
     decision stands.  Under Rule 45(2) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
     Tribunal) Rules 2008 if the Upper Tribunal decides not  to  review  the
     decision, or reviews the decision and decides  to  take  no  action  in
     relation to the decision, the Upper Tribunal must consider  whether  to
     give permission to appeal in relation to the decision or that  part  of
     it. In the circumstances of the agreement between the parties  to  this
     course of action it is considered appropriate not to give permission to
     appeal the decision.


Summary of Decisions


  7. Under Rule 39(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008
     a consent order is made in terms that  the  decision  of  Deputy  Upper
     Tribunal Judge M A Hall  allowing  the  applicant's  appeal  under  the
     Immigration Rules is reviewed by way of taking no action  so  that  the
     decision stands.




Signed:

J M Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date:  3rd June 2014
