

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/22586/2014
                                                               IA/22588/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court    |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 3 February 2015                   |On 6 February 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                               faryal shaheen
                               NAEELA SHAHEEN
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Ansari, Duncan Lewis (Birmingham)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants, who are  mother  and  daughter,  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal against the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O  R
    Williams that was promulgated on 11  September  2014.   Judge  Williams
    dismissed their appeals against the immigration  decisions  of  13  May
    2014 to remove them to Pakistan because they had overstayed in  the  UK
    and their human rights claims had been refused.

 2. At the end of the hearing I  dismissed  the  appeals  but  reserved  my
    reasons.  The reasons for my decision are set out below.

 3. I begin by mentioning some general issues to put my other reasons  into
    context.  First, neither representative  referred  me  to  the  Supreme
    Court's judgment in Zoumbas v  SSHD  [2013]  UKSC  74  even  though  it
    clearly has implications in this appeal.  I was surprised that the case
    was not mentioned in Mr Ansari's skeleton argument since  he  discussed
    other jurisprudence on the issue of best interests of children and  the
    reasonableness of expecting a child who has resided in the UK to leave.
     Secondly, Mr Ansari, who had appeared before Judge Williams, explained
    that the lead appellant had instructed him not to make an asylum  claim
    but to pursue her  protection  issue  as  a  ground  of  appeal.   This
    resulted in  Judge  Williams  having  limited  evidence  regarding  her
    reasons for seeking asylum.

 4. The appellant relied on six grounds of appeal.  I take the  last  first
    as it is easiest to resolve.  The appellant argued that Judge  Williams
    failed to take account of relevant case law and failed to give  anxious
    scrutiny to the case.  As I have indicated, the case law relied  on  by
    the appellant did not completely reflect relevant jurisprudence.  There
    is nothing in the judge's conclusions that violates the principles  set
    out in Zoumbas.  The  Supreme  Court  recognised  that  although  there
    should always be an assessment of the best interests of a child  in  an
    appeal relying in full or in part on a decision that would lead to  the
    expulsion of a child, those best interests had to be  balanced  against
    relevant  public  interest  considerations.   Only  then  would  it  be
    possible to identify if  an  immigration  decision  was  reasonable  in
    expecting a child to leave the UK.

 5. As to the other argument in respect of  the  sixth  ground,  Mr  Ansari
    agreed the fact that the judge inverted the representatives'  names  on
    the front page of the determination was not evidence  of  any  lack  of
    anxious scrutiny.  I mentioned that  in  any  event  it  was  debatable
    whether the principle of anxious scrutiny extended to article 8  issues
    given that it stemmed from the approach  to  be  taken  in  respect  of
    asylum cases.  Because of Mr Ansari's concession I  need  not  consider
    the issue any further.

 6. The first ground of appeal argues that Judge Williams erred by  finding
    that the appellants would be able to live with the sister of the  first
    appellant.  Mr Ansari,  who  settled  the  grounds,  argued  that  this
    finding ignored the cultural context in which the appellants  would  be
    returned.  The sister of the lead appellant  lived  with  her  in-laws.
    The Home Office's own country  of  origin  information  indicated  that
    women could not live on their own in  Pakistan.   Taken  together,  the
    evidence had to indicate that it would be unduly harsh  to  expect  the
    appellants to relocate within Pakistan.

 7. Mr McVeety responded by saying that the first ground of appeal seeks to
    invert the burden of proof.  I agree.  The information at paragraph 2.4
    of the COIS Pakistan: Women  (published  on  14  July  2014)  does  not
    provide evidence that the appellants could not stay with the sister  of
    the lead appellant.  Although there may be cultural norms, there is  no
    indication that the appellants would be abandoned by their relative  or
    her  in-laws.   This  conclusion  also  resolves  the  linked  argument
    relating to article 8.  As I reminded Mr Ansari, the standard of  proof
    is higher in relation to article 8 and if the issue is  not  proven  to
    the lower standard of proof, then it cannot succeed in relation to  the
    submissions relating to private and family life rights.

 8. In addition, in relation to the protection issues, I reminded Mr Ansari
    that there had been no challenge to Judge  William's  conclusions  that
    the appellants did not have  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in
    Pakistan.  Therefore the issue of internal relocation was not relevant,
    it being a finding in the alternative.

 9. The second ground identified that Judge Williams made a factual mistake
    when considering  the  appellants'  immigration  history.   Mr  McVeety
    conceded that a mistake had been  made  but  argued  it  could  not  be
    material.  Mr Ansari agreed.  I need say no more about this ground.

10. The third, fourth and fifth grounds are interrelated  and  allege  that
    Judge Williams failed to have proper regard to the law  regarding  when
    it might be reasonable to expect a child to leave the UK.  The  grounds
    make reference to various decisions of  the  senior  courts  (but  omit
    Zoumbas) and to s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
    2009 regarding the duty to have regard to the welfare of children.  All
    these points fail when Zoumbas is considered.  The second appellant  is
    not a British citizen and has  no  right  to  education  or  any  other
    provision such as health care in the UK.  Judge Williams identified all
    the relevant evidence relating to the second appellant's best interests
    and weighed them against the statutory public interest  considerations.
    He made clear reference to s.55 in paragraph 46 of his determination.

11. Because I am satisfied that the appellants have failed to show that the
    determination contains an error on a point of law, I  find  the  appeal
    must fail.



Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed  because  there  is  no  legal
error in the determination of Judge Williams.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.






                               Signed   Date 06/02/2015


                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
