
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22991/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18 March 2016                         |On 13 July 2016                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

                      Mr Bimal Singh Alam Singh Chauhan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara, Counsel, instructed by A.H. Law Ltd.
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The  appellant  brings  a  challenge  to  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cameron sent on 24 August  2015  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the refusal by the respondent of his application for  leave  to
    remain as a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  under  the  points-based
    system.

2.   The written grounds of appeal were essentially twofold.  First  it  was
    argued that the decision of the respondent dated 27 May 2014 was not in
    accordance with the law because it was based on the  fact  that  Future
    Venture Capital is not regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority and
    Prudential Regulation Authority, whereas on 16 May 2014 he had sent  an
    application based on receipt of  support  from  a  different  financial
    institution - Philpott Reed Venture  Capital  Fund  -  which  was  duly
    registered.

3.   I can deal briefly with this ground because it is entirely  clear  from
    the judge's decision that he did not accept that the appellant had sent
    the additional documents to the  respondent  identifying  a  change  in
    circumstances.  The appellant fails to engage with the judge's  reasons
    for finding they had not been sent and in  any  event,  I  am  entirely
    satisfied that the judge's finding was  plainly  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence.  The appellant conceded that he could not succeed  under  the
    relevant Immigration Rules on the basis of the  original  documents  he
    submitted.  Accordingly he  could  not  succeed  under  the  Rules.   I
    observe that Mr Bellara did not pursue this ground at the  hearing  and
    he was wise not to do so, as it is devoid of merit.

4.   The second ground of appeal  contends  that  the  judge  erred  in  not
    dealing with the appellant's Article 8 case.  Mr Bellara submitted that
    this was a fundamental error of law on the part of  the  judge  and  he
    pointed to what the  appellant  had  written  in  his  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal wherein he made reference to
    having entered the UK in 2009 and so having an "established private and
    family life in the UK since my arrival ..." and to having  gained  many
    friendships through his life as a student and at his work place.

5.   I find that the second ground also fails.  I would note at  the  outset
    that I  queried  with  the  parties  whether  the  appellant  had  even
    demonstrated that he raised Article 8 in  his  grounds  of  appeal.   I
    pointed out that the appeal form made no mention of Article 8 and  left
    blank the question asked about ECHR rights.  It said  that  grounds  of
    appeal were "attached" but Mr Bellara was unable  to  show  that  there
    were any grounds attached or that if they were they raised  Article  8.
    Mr Bellara asked for time to produce the missing  grounds.   I  granted
    his request and am grateful for his action in ensuring they  were  sent
    to me the same day.  The documents sent include one headed "Grounds  of
    Appeal" which I am satisfied was sent with the appeal form.  At para  6
    of these grounds it  is  stated  that  the  respondent's  decision  was
    incompatible with the appellant's rights under the ECHR.  Accordingly I
    proceed on the basis that the appellant did raise human rights  in  his
    grounds of appeal.

6.   So far as concerns the evidence the appellant relied on to show he  had
    Article 8 grounds for remaining in the UK I  note  first  of  all  that
    despite being served with a s.120 notice he made no reply.  Second, his
    grounds of appeal did not particularise Article  8.   Third,  the  only
    matters he has ever identified as being  pertinent  to  his  Article  8
    claim are that he has been in the UK some six or so years; and that  he
    has established friendships through studying and work.  Not even in his
    grounds seeking permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal has he  seen
    fit to  particularise  any  of  the  relationships  involved  or  their
    contents.  He has not sought to make  a  specific  human  rights  claim
    based on Article 8.  Even taking his claim (so far as he  sees  fit  to
    outline it) as its highest, it simply had and has no realistic prospect
    of success.  Manifestly the appellant could not meet  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules dealing with  family  life  and  private  life
    claims.  To succeed outside the Rules he would have had  to  show  that
    his circumstances were compelling.  He has entirely failed to  show  as
    much.  I concur with Mr Tufan that the appellant's  case  is  precisely
    the type of case that Lord Carnwath had in mind in para 57 of  Patel  &
    Ors [2013] UKSC 72 when referring to persons who had been  studying  in
    the UK for some years.

         "However, such considerations do not by themselves provide  grounds
         of appeal under Article 8 ..."


7.   Hence even if I were to accept (1) that the appellant raised Article  8
    grounds of appeal; and (2) that  the  judge  erred  in  not  addressing
    these, any such  error  was  plainly  not  a  material  one  since  the
    appellant's Article 8  claim  as  put  had  no  realistic  prospect  of
    success.

8.   For the above reasons:

    The First-tier Tribunal did not materially err in law.


    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal must stand.





Signed                                  Date: 12 July 2016

              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

