
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/22371/2014
                                                               IA/22372/2014
                                                               IA/22373/2014
                                                               IA/22374/2014
                                                               IA/37423/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 May 2017                        |On 30 May 2017                       |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MR MNK
                                   MRS SN
                                   MISS AN
                                  MASTER DN
                                  MASTER IN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mrs S Akinbolu, Counsel, instructed by M&K
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   My task in this case is to re-make the decision on the  appeal  brought
    by the respondents (hereafter the claimants) against the decision  made
    by the appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State or SSHD) refusing to
    grant them leave to remain.  On 16 January 2016  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    (UTJ) Chalkley set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge S  J
    Clarke, finding he had materially erred  in  law  in  failing  to  give
    consideration  to  the  public  interest  when  assessing  whether  the
    claimants, who were appeal rights exhausted in 2009, should succeed  in
    their appeal on Article 8 grounds.  UTJ Chalkley  directed  that  their
    case be set down for a further hearing at which  there  might  be  five
    witnesses.  In the event, it did not prove necessary to hear  any  oral
    evidence because Mr Armstrong confirmed that the SSHD did  not  dispute
    any of the witness statements in which the claimants  gave  details  of
    their family circumstances.

2.   The decision  of  UTJ  Chalkley  provides  a  helpful  summary  of  the
    background to this case, which is suitably anonymise:

         "2.  The [claimants] are all nationals of Pakistan and  members  of
             the same family.  The first named  [claimant]  was  born  [in]
             1993.  His wife, the second named  respondent,  was  born  [in
             1997].  Their daughter, the third  named  appellant,  AN,  was
             born in [early] 2001, the fourth respondent, DN, was born  [in
             late 2003] and the fifth appellant,  IN,  was  born  [in  late
             2006].


         3.   The first [claimant] entered the  United  Kingdom  in  October
             2003 as a student and the second, third and fourth [claimants]
             entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  dependants  of  the   first
             [claimant] in July 2006.  The fifth [claimant] was born in the
             United Kingdom.


         4.   The [claimants'] leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  was
             lawful until 2009.  In May 2009 an  appeal  against  leave  to
             remain as a Tier 1 Migrant by the first named  [claimant]  and
             as his dependants by the remaining  [claimants]  was  refused.
             Thereafter, the first [claimant] made application for leave to
             remain  as  a  Tier  4  Migrant  and   his   dependants   made
             applications in line with his, as his  dependants,  but  those
             applications were refused with  no  right  of  appeal  by  the
             claimant in November 2009.  At that time the [claimants]  were
             appeal rights exhausted.   Since  2009  the  [claimants]  have
             remained in the United Kingdom, without leave.


         5.   The [claimants] lodged an  application  for  leave  to  remain
             outside the Rules in May 2013.  That application was  refused,
             initially  with  no  right  of  appeal,  but   following   the
             commencement of judicial review proceedings, the Secretary  of
             State agreed to reconsider  the  cases,  taking  into  account
             Section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
             2009 and the Immigration Rules.


         6.   The [SSHD] refused the application on 2nd May,  2014  for  the
             first, second, third and fourth [claimants].  The [SSHD] noted
             the [claimants'] immigration history and considered the parent
             route and EX.1 and Appendix FM(1) of  the  Immigration  Rules.
             It was acknowledged that the third and fourth  [claimant]  had
             lived in the United Kingdom continuously for more  than  seven
             years, but it was contended that it was not  unreasonable  for
             them to leave the United Kingdom as a family unit.


         7.   The [SSHD] refused the application for the fifth [claimant] on
             10th September, 2014 because the child no longer resided  with
             his adoptive parents and their application  for  adoption  was
             withdrawn.  The child lives with his biological  parents,  the
             first and second [claimant] and had done so  since  May  2014.
             The [SSHD] considered that the fifth [claimant]  could  return
             to Pakistan with his family members.


         8.   The [claimants] appealed and their appeal was heard at  Taylor
             House on 5th November, 2015 and again on 30th  June,  2016  by
             First-tier Tribunal Judge S J Clarke.  Judge Clarke noted that
             there was still in existence a family court  access  order  in
             respect of the fifth [claimant].  In fact by the time  of  the
             hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  the   fifth
             [claimant] was back living with his family."

3.   Mrs Akinbolu submitted that it would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    claimants to leave the  UK,  notwithstanding  that  they  had  remained
    without leave since 2009.  The fifth claimant was now a British citizen
    (since 7 March 2017) and his older sister and brother had both been  in
    the  UK  for  over  seven  years.   All  of  the  children  were  doing
    exceptionally well at school and the eldest was doing her  GCSEs.   All
    three children identified themselves as British.  The family had  clear
    ties with the community and their circle of friends included people  of
    different backgrounds.  They had close ties with  other  relatives  and
    their families in the UK.  They were not reliant on public funds.   For
    the fifth claimant to have to return to Pakistan with his family  would
    be particularly unreasonable because he had spent seven  years  of  his
    life being fostered by his relatives in Wolverhampton as  a  result  of
    the illness of the second claimant (his mother).  The  second  claimant
    was diagnosed in 2007 with a rare form of  aplastic  anaemia,  a  life-
    threatening condition.  Because of her illness a Family Court order had
    been taken out.  On 25 January 2016 the Family Court recorded that:

     "This court is  not  able  to  confirm  whether  [the  fifth  claimant]
         returned to the care of his parents, but if he has returned to live
         permanently with his parents the residence order no longer reflects
         the reality of the situation  and  the  court  could  entertain  an
         application to discharge the order."

     He was now back with his biological family permanently and he  was  now
    a British citizen so could not be removed anyway.

4.   Mrs  Akinbolu  stated  that  in  terms  of  the  likely  situation  the
    claimants would face on return to Pakistan, the family home in  Kashmir
    had been destroyed in the bombings.  There were no  family  members  in
    Pakistan able to assist them.  The children did not speak Urdu  to  the
    requisite level and do not write it; their only schooling has  been  in
    the UK.  Whilst the family had remained in the UK unlawfully since 2009
    their level of non-compliance was minimal as they had not attempted  to
    evade the authorities and had actively attempted  to  regularise  their
    status.

5.   Mr Armstrong submitted that the parents could  not  meet  the  relevant
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and neither could  the  children.
    The central issue in these appeals was whether  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect the children to return to Pakistan.  Although the fifth claimant
    was now a British citizen, the Court of  Appeal  in  MA  (Pakistan)  at
    paragraph 47 made clear that the  fact  that  a  child  was  a  British
    citizen was not determinative of the issue of whether it was reasonable
    to expect the family to  live  abroad.   There  were  important  public
    interest  considerations  in  this  case:  the  family   had   remained
    unlawfully in the UK since the end of  2009;  the  parents  had  always
    known  their  immigration  status  was  precarious;   they   were   not
    financially independent; their continued presence in the UK had been  a
    cost to the taxpayer, especially in relation to the  extensive  medical
    treatment given to the  second  claimant.   Whilst  the  SSHD  did  not
    dispute the account given in the witness  statements  of  the  family's
    circumstances in the UK, their own  subjective  impressions  that  they
    could not receive an adequate education in Pakistan was  not  supported
    by the objective evidence.  They still  had  family  in  Kashmir.   The
    religion of the family, Islam, was the official religion  of  Pakistan.
    The first two claimants spoke Urdu.  The first claimant had  worked  in
    Pakistan.  The children were highly intelligent and could adapt to life
    in the UK.  Whilst there was still a Family Court  residence  order  in
    place for the fifth claimant, that could be discharged.  There were  no
    continuing health needs.

My Assessment

6.   In deciding these appeals I have taken into  account  the  entirety  of
    the evidence including updated witness statements  from  the  claimants
    and the extended family members  in  Nottingham  and  Wolverhampton,  a
    number of school reports and a report by an independent social  worker,
    David Chapman dated 28 March 2017 which concludes that  the  family  is
    vulnerable and it would be strongly in the best interests of the  three
    children to be allowed to remain in the UK with their parents.

7.   In many respects the facts of this case illustrate  the  acute  dilemma
    posed for courts and Tribunals by changes made to the Immigration Rules
    and the statutory framework since the Human Rights Act 1998.  Were I to
    attempt  to  decide  the  case  purely  on  the  basis  of   Strasbourg
    jurisprudence on Article 8, I would find the case a finely balanced one
8.   On the one hand there are a significant number of factors  counting  in
    favour of the claimants.  Not only do they enjoy close ties  of  family
    life between themselves, but their ties with relatives  have  at  least
    two aspects that give them the character of family life ties within the
    meaning of Article 8.  The  family  is  supported  financially  by  the
    second claimant's brother who lives in Nottingham.  The fifth  claimant
    has enjoyed close family life ties with his uncle and  aunt  and  their
    family in Wolverhampton as a result of going  to  live  with  them  for
    eight years following the serious illness of the second claimant.   The
    claimants  have  significant  private  life  ties  within  their  local
    community and the eldest child has clearly begun  to  form  significant
    ties outside of the family.   The  decisions  refusing  them  leave  to
    remain outside the Immigration Rules clearly amounts to an interference
    with their right to respect of family and private life.   In  terms  of
    assessment of the proportionality of these decisions,  the  factors  in
    their favour include: the fact that they have now lived in the UK for a
    considerable period (the first claimant having been here since  October
    2003; the second, third and fourth claimants since July  2006  and  the
    fifth claimant having been born in the UK in December 2006); that  they
    all speak English; that they have actively involved themselves in their
    local community; that the children  are  all  performing  exceptionally
    well at school and are regarded as model pupils; that  they  have  very
    close ties with other relatives in  the  UK  who  have  become  British
    citizens; that these ties have gone beyond normal  emotional  ties,  by
    virtue of the decision of  close relatives to financially support  them
    and to take on the fostering of the fifth claimant; that they have been
    able to overcome the very significant challenges posed by  the  serious
    ill-health of the second claimant.

9.   On the other hand, there were a number of public interest factors  that
    weight against them in the balancing exercise.  They have  remained  in
    the UK unlawfully since 2009 and even when they resided here  lawfully,
    the first claimant was in the UK with limited leave as a student and he
    and his family have never had a legitimate expectation that they  would
    be permitted to remain in the  UK.   Whilst  the  family  has  not  had
    recourse to public funds, the serious health  problems  of  the  second
    claimant have been at the expense of the taxpayer.

10.  Application of the considerations set out  in  Section  117A-D  of  the
    NIAA 2002 reinforces the basis for counting  the  above  considerations
    against the claimants.  The family may not have had recourse to  public
    funds, but they are financially dependent on relatives,  they  are  not
    financially independent.  The family's private life ties in the UK have
    been formed whilst their immigration status has been precarious.

11.  In addition, leading cases have established that the Immigration  Rules
    strike a balance between the individual and the wider community  and  a
    failure to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules adds  to  the
    weight of public interest factors counting against applicants.

12.  However, the guidance given in  leading  cases  includes  the  guidance
    given in MA (Pakistan), a case  on  which  Mr  Armstrong  placed  great
    reliance.  It is true that that case emphasises that the assessment  of
    reasonableness must take into account  public  interest  considerations
    and that the best interests of the child, even if they for him  or  her
    to stay, do not determine the issue of  reasonableness.   At  the  same
    time, Elias LJ attached  particular  significance  to  the  SSHD's  own
    policy in respect of children who had resided in the UK for seven years
    or more.  At paragraph 46 he stated:

     "Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the fact that a  child
         has been here for seven years must be given significant weight when
         carrying out the proportionality exercise. Indeed, the Secretary of
         State published guidance in August 2015 in the form of  Immigration
         Directorate Instructions entitled 'Family Life  (as  a  partner  or
         parent) and Private Life: 10 Year Routes' in which it is  expressly
         stated  that  once  the  seven  years'  residence  requirement   is
         satisfied, there need to be 'strong  reasons'  for  refusing  leave
         (para. 11.2.4). These instructions were not in force when the cases
         now subject to appeal were determined, but in my view  they  merely
         confirm what is implicit in adopting a policy of this nature. After
         such a period of time the  child  will  have  put  down  roots  and
         developed social, cultural and educational links  in  the  UK  such
         that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the child is  required
         to leave the UK. That may be less so when  the  children  are  very
         young because the focus of their lives will be on  their  families,
         but  the  disruption  becomes  more  serious  as  they  get  older.
         Moreover, in these cases there must be a  very  strong  expectation
         that the child's best interests will be to remain in  the  UK  with
         his parents as part of a family unit,  and  that  must  rank  as  a
         primary consideration in the proportionality assessment."

13.  It is pertinent to examine further what the SSHD's own policy  guidance
    Appendix FM 1.0 Family Life (as a partner or parent) and Private  Life:
    10 Year Routes states, in particular in relation to children  who  have
    lived in the UK for a continuous  period  of  seven  years.   Paragraph
    11.2.4 provides:

     "11.2.4. Would it be  unreasonable  to  expect  a  non-British  Citizen
         child to leave the UK?

     The requirement that a non-British Citizen child has lived  in  the  UK
         for a continuous  period  of  at  least  the  7  years  immediately
         preceding the  date  of  application,  recognises  that  over  time
         children start to put down roots and integrate into life in the UK,
         to  the  extent  that  being  required  to  leave  the  UK  may  be
         unreasonable. The longer the child has resided in the UK, the  more
         the balance will begin to swing in terms of it  being  unreasonable
         to expect the child to leave the UK, and  strong  reasons  will  be
         required in order to refuse a case with continuous UK residence  of
         more than 7 years.

      The  decision  maker  must   consider   whether,   in   the   specific
         circumstances of the case, it would be  reasonable  to  expect  the
         child to live in another country.
     The decision maker must consider the facts relating to  each  child  in
         the UK in the family individually, and also consider all the  facts
         relating to the family as a whole. The decision maker  should  also
         engage with any specific issues explicitly raised by the family, by
         each child or on behalf of each child.

     Relevant considerations are likely to include:

         a.   Whether there would be  a  significant  risk  to  the  child's
             health
              For example, if there is evidence that the child is undergoing
             a course of  treatment  for  a  life  threatening  or  serious
             illness and treatment will not be available in the country  of
             return;


         b.   Whether the child would be leaving the UK with their parent(s)


              It is generally  the  case  that  it  is  in  a  child's  best
             interests to  remain  with  their  parent(s).  Unless  special
             factors apply, it will generally be  reasonable  to  expect  a
             child to leave the UK with their  parent(s),  particularly  if
             the parent(s) have no right to remain in the UK;


         c.   The extent of wider family ties in the UK
              The decision maker must consider the extent to which the child
             is dependent on or requires support from wider family  members
             in the UK in important areas of his or her life;


         d.   Whether the child  is  likely  to  be  able  to  (re)integrate
             readily  into  life  in  another  country.  Relevant   factors
             include:


             .    whether the parent(s) and/or child are a citizen  of  the
                  country and so able to enjoy the full rights  of  being  a
                  citizen in that country;


             .    whether the parent(s)  and/or  child  have  lived  in  or
                  visited the country before for periods of more than a  few
                  weeks. The question here is  whether,  having  visited  or
                  lived in the country before, the  child  would  be  better
                  able to adapt, and/or  the  parent(s)  would  be  able  to
                  support the child in adapting, to life in the country;


             .    whether the parent(s) and/or child have  existing  family
                  or social ties with the country. A person who has extended
                  family or a network of friends in the  country  should  be
                  able to rely on them for  support  to  help  (re)integrate
                  there;


             .    whether the parent(s) and/or child have relevant cultural
                  ties with the country. The caseworker  must  consider  any
                  evidence of exposure to, and the  level  of  understanding
                  of, the cultural norms of  the  country.  For  example,  a
                  period of time spent living mainly amongst a diaspora from
                  the country may give a child an awareness of  the  culture
                  of the country;


             .    whether the parents and/or  child  can  speak,  read  and
                  write in a language of that  country,  or  are  likely  to
                  achieve this within a reasonable time period.  Fluency  is
                  not required - an ability to communicate competently  with
                  sympathetic interlocutors would normally suffice;


             .    whether the child has attended school in that country.


         e.   Any country specific information, including  as  contained  in
             relevant country guidance


         f.   Other specific factors raised by or on behalf of the child.


         Parents or children may highlight the differences in the quality of
         education, health and wider  public  services  or  in  economic  or
         social opportunities between the UK and the country of  return  and
         argue that these would work against the best interests of the child
         if they had to leave the UK and live in that country. Other than in
         exceptional circumstances, this will not  normally  be  a  relevant
         consideration, particularly if the parent(s) or wider  family  have
         the means or resources to  support  the  child  on  return  or  the
         skills, education or  training  to  provide  for  their  family  on
         return, or if Assisted Voluntary Return support is available."

14.  Applying these considerations to the  third  and  fourth  claimants  in
    this case, there are no significant risks to their health (a); save  in
    one important respect, it appears reasonable on balance to expect  them
    to leave the UK with  their  parents  (b);  the  children,  like  their
    parents, are dependent financially on support from wider family members
    in the UK (c); whilst citizens of Pakistan, they have not  lived  there
    since they were 5 and 2� respectively and their  ability  to  adopt  to
    life in Pakistan would be hampered by the absence  of  a  family  or  a
    network of friends in Pakistan able to support them or to help them re-
    integrate there (d); they have cultural ties with Pakistan but they are
    not able to write Urdu and the language they have spoken at home and in
    school in the UK has been English (d);  they have never attended school
    in Pakistan (d); Pakistan has an adequate educational system  (e);  and
    the first claimant has  skills  relevant  to  obtaining  employment  in
    Pakistan(e).

15.  These considerations, some which evidently count  in  favour  of  these
    two claimants, some which evidently count against, lend support for the
    view that the assessment of their circumstances very much turns on  the
    guidance given in the first paragraph of 11.2.4: "The longer the  child
    has resided in the UK, the more the balance  will  begin  to  swing  in
    terms of it being unreasonable to expect the child to leave the UK, and
    strong reasons will  be  required  in  order  to  refuse  a  case  with
    continuous UK residence of more than  7  years".   In  this  regard,  I
    attach significant weight to the fact that the third claimant,  now  16
    is doing her GCSEs and has shown  unusual  initiative  in  exploring  a
    future career in law in this country. The  evidence  demonstrates  that
    the family espouses British values.

16.  Even so, had the family comprised just the first four claimants,  there
    would have still in my  view,  been  sufficiently  strong  reasons  for
    finding the decision refusing them leave proportionate.  But of  course
    there is the situation of the fifth claimant to be added into  the  mix
    and he is someone who, since the date  of  decision  and  the  date  of
    hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  become  a  British
    citizen.  Again, it is instructive to pay  regard  to  the  SSHD's  own
    guidance.  At paragraph 11.2.3 it is stated:

         "11.2.3.      Would it be unreasonable to expect a British  Citizen
                  child to leave the UK?


         Save in cases involving criminality, the decision  maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age  of
         that child. This reflects the European Court of Justice judgment in
         Zambrano.


         The  decision  maker  must  consult  the  following  guidance  when
         assessing cases involving criminality:


         .    Criminality Guidance in ECHR Cases (internal)
         .    Criminality Guidance in ECHR Cases (external)

         Where a decision to refuse the application would require  a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer.


         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to  the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in  the  UK  with
         the child, provided  that  there  is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship.


         It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where  the
         conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations
         of such weight  as  to  justify  separation,  if  the  child  could
         otherwise stay with another parent or alternative primary carer  in
         the UK or in the EU.


         The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:


         .    criminality falling below the thresholds set out in  paragraph
             398 of the Immigration Rules;
         .    a very poor immigration history, such as where the person  has
             repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules."

17.  The above is not the entirety of the guidance given on British  citizen
    children and further paragraphs make clear that if not  satisfied  that
    there are any exceptional circumstances that would warrant a  grant  of
    leave to remain  outside  the  Immigration  Rules,  the  case  must  be
    referred to the European Casework for review.  That is not  a  relevant
    step in this case because the fact of the child being a British citizen
    has only arisen in the course of  the  appeal  proceedings  and  it  is
    therefore a matter for me  to  determine.   Nevertheless  the  guidance
    makes very clear that where the  decision  to  refuse  the  application
    would require a parent or primary carer to return to a country  outside
    the EU, "the case must always be assessed on the basis that it would be
    unreasonable to expect a British Citizen child to  leave  the  EU  with
    that parent or primary carer".

18.  Two matters are of particular importance when applying the guidance  to
    the facts of the fifth claimant's case.  First, although there is still
    an extant Family Court residence order, it is accepted by Mr  Armstrong
    that the child has recommenced living with his own family and thus  his
    only primary carers are his two parents.  There has been no  suggestion
    that the child wishes to return to live with his relatives.   There  is
    no suggestion that this case involves  any  criminality  (indeed  apart
    from overstaying, the family appear to be a model family).

19.  I consider the SSHD's guidance is important in this  case  because,  as
    the Upper Tribunal said in SF  and  others  (Guidance,  post-2014  Act)
    Albania [2017] UKUT 00120(IAC) at paragraph 12:-

     "[w]here  there  is  clear  guidance  which  covers  a  case  where  an
         assessment  has  to  be  made,  and  where  the  guidance   clearly
         demonstrates what the outcome of the  assessment  would  have  been
         made by the Secretary of State, it would, we think, be  the  normal
         practice for the Tribunal to take such guidance into account and to
         apply it in assessing the same consideration in a  case  that  came
         before it."

20.   Manifestly,  the  decision  refusing  the  application  of  the  fifth
    claimant would require him to return  to  a  country  outside  the  UK.
    Hence it is unreasonable to  expect  him  to  leave  the  UK  with  his
    parents.

21.  That brings the case back to its starting  point,  which  both  parties
    agreed was whether or not the claimants  can  meet  the  reasonableness
    requirement.  In this connection it is important to again apply primary
    legislation, Section 117B(6) in particular which provides:

         "(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-


               (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and


              (b)      it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                  leave the United Kingdom."

22.  This provision provides a legal route to stay for parents that  is  not
    available to them under the Rules (unless suitability requirements  are
    met).

23.  It seems to me that  Section  117B(6)  has  particular  application  in
    these appeals since it is not in dispute  that  the  first  and  second
    claimants are in a genuine and subsisting relationship with  the  fifth
    claimant and, by application of the SSHD's own  policy,  it  cannot  be
    reasonable to expect him to leave the UK.

24.  Mr Armstrong sought to submit at one point that Section  117B(6)  could
    not assist the first two claimants because the fifth claimant  had  not
    for a considerable period since his birth had a  parental  relationship
    with his parents.  However, even leaving aside that the residence order
    did not appear to deprive the first two  claimants  of  their  parental
    rights, Mr Armstrong concedes that since the  end  of  2014  the  fifth
    claimant has been back with his own parents,  enjoying  a  genuine  and
    subsisting  relationship  with  them.   Section  117B(6)  contains   no
    requirement of historic duration of the parental relationship; it is in
    the present tense.

25.  My assessment of the claimant's  case,  including  the  five  claimants
    together,  is  that  the  decisions  made  against  them  amount  to  a
    disproportionate interference with their right to respect  for  private
    and  family  life.   The  fifth  claimant  is  no  longer  subject   to
    immigration  control  in  any  event.   Given  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the fifth claimant to leave the UK, the removal of
    his family (i.e. removal of the first four claimants) would prevent him
    from remaining in the UK. Against this background, I am also  satisfied
    that the third and fourth claimants meet the requirements of  paragraph
    276ADE(iv).  In short, I consider that applying  the  respondent's  own
    policy the conclusion of the reasonableness assessment in  relation  to
    all five claimants, must be that it would be unreasonable to expect any
    of them to leave the UK.

Notice of Decision

26.  For the above reasons:

     The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  has  already  been  set
    aside for material error by UTJ Chalkley.

     The decision I re-make is to allow the claimants' appeals on Article  8
    grounds.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date: 26 May 2017
            [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



