

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number: IA/22689/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 15 November 2017                           |On 16 November 2017          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     M N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Respondent:    Mr A Slatter, counsel
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. It is the Secretary of  State  who  pursues  this  appeal.  However,  I
    maintain the descriptions of the parties as they were in the First-tier
    Tribunal, for ease of reference, and refer to the Secretary of State as
    the respondent.

 2. The appellant is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  who  appealed  against  the
    respondent's decision to refuse the his application for leave to remain
    on human rights grounds.  His appeal against that refusal  was  allowed
    by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Easterman  ("the  FTTJ")  in  a
    decision promulgated on 20 February 2017.

 3. I maintain the anonymity direction which was  made  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 4. Permission to appeal was sought  on  the  grounds  that  the  FTTJ  had
    misdirected himself in law, having failed to  assess  the  evidence  in
    line with SM & Qadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) UTIAC 21  April
    2016 [sic]. It was  averred  the  FTTJ  had  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasoning as to why the respondent had not  met  the  legal  burden  of
    proving deception by the appellant.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lambert
    on 6 September 2017 on the grounds sought.

 6. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 7. Mr Clarke, for the  respondent,  accepted  that,  irrespective  of  the
    outcome of the challenge to the FTTJ's reasoning on whether or not  the
    appellant had used deception  in  an  earlier  application,  given  the
    absence of challenge by the respondent to the findings of the FTTJ with
    regard to the human rights  claim,  any  error  of  law  would  not  be
    material.  He  nonetheless  adopted  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  this
    tribunal.

 8. I agree with Mr Clarke.  Even if I were to find an error of law in  the
    FTTJ's decision that the appellant had not used deception in  obtaining
    an  English  Language  Test  Certificate  in  support  of  an   earlier
    application for leave to remain as a student, the findings of the  FTTJ
    on the human rights aspects of the appeal would remain undisturbed. The
    Article 8 findings and decision are not challenged by  the  respondent,
    even on the basis that, had a finding  of  deception  been  made,  this
    would have had a material  impact  on  the  proportionality  assessment
    pursuant to Article 8 jurisprudence.

 9. That being the case, I find there is no material error of  law  in  the
    decision of the FTTJ. I make this finding without having considered the
    merits of this appeal.

Decision

10. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

11. I do not set aside the decision.

12. This appeal is dismissed.



Signed           A M Black                   Dated 15 November 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black
