
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/22120/2014
      ia/22129/2014
      ia/22131/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 May 2015                                |On 9 June 2015                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                           The HON Mr JUSTICE EDIS
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                         Sharon Gabriel Egboigbe-Ade
                       Msr Emmanuel Francis Shanu-Abu
                    Miss Isabella Edowaye Toyin Shanu-Abu
                        (NO aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Cooray, instructed by the Joint Council for the
                    Welfare of Immigrants
For the Respondent:    Miss A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

 1. The appellants are mother and two children, born on 19 December 1967, 7
    September 2006 (the first child was 7 years old when  the  decision  of
    the SSHD which is the subject of this appeal was made) and 20  December
    2013 respectively and citizens of Nigeria.  They appealed  against  the
    respondent's decision made on 2 May 2014 refusing them leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom further to Article 8 of the  European  Convention
    on Human Rights.

 2. The first appellant entered the United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor  on  29
    October 2004 but overstayed when her visit  visa  expired  on  1  March
    2005.  Both the second and third appellants were  born  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The appellants'  applications  for  leave  were  made  on  21
    October 2013.  At the date of application the second appellant was over
    7 years old.

 3. On 24 December 2013 the first appellant's application was refused  with
    no right of appeal but on 8 April 2014 the respondent wrote to  request
    further information and then served the appellants with IS151A  notices
    prior to refusing their applications.  This gave  a  right  of  appeal,
    which the appellants exercised.

 4. The appellants' appeals came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Metzer on
    20th January 2015 and he proceeded to dismiss their  appeals  on  human
    rights grounds on 29th January 2015.

 5. Application for permission to appeal was made on  the  basis  that  the
    second appellant fell clearly  within  the  terms  of  the  Enforcement
    Instructions and Guidance: Chapter 53 - Extenuating Circumstances.  The
    introduction to this Guidance sets out the policy  which  it  seeks  to
    promote:-

    "It is the policy of the Home Office to remove  illegal  migrants  from
    the UK unless it would be a breach of the Refugee Convention  or  ECHR,
    or  there  are  exceptional  circumstances  for  not  doing  so  in  an
    individual case. Separate guidance exists on how to consider an  asylum
    claim or an application for leave to remain on the basis of  family  or
    private life. This guidance concerns further exceptional  circumstances
    claiming that removal would be inappropriate."

 6. It was submitted that although the First-tier Tribunal  judge  referred
    to having had  regard  to  Chapter  53  nothing  in  the  determination
    elucidated her reasoning and the judge fell into error in  omitting  to
    make any clear findings on the matter which was at  the  heart  of  the
    appeal as argued. Had Chapter  53  been  properly  considered,  it  was
    likely the outcome would have been in their favour.

 7. It was asserted that Chapter 53 stated that  exceptional  circumstances
    must be considered where raised, and that an application fee  was  paid
    for the second appellant with the result that Chapter  53  should  have
    been applied to the second appellant  separately.  The  respondent  was
    required to give due weight to the best interests of the  children  and
    the second appellant in particular because  of  his  longer  connection
    with the United Kingdom.  The factors to be considered under Chapter 53
    were that  the  second  appellant  had  nothing  standing  against  his
    character and he had not failed to comply with any requirement of  him,
    and although he had never had leave to remain this had  never  been  in
    his control.  He had accrued  seven  years'  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom and the delay was not attributable to him.

 8. Moreover more weight should be attached to the length of time  a  child
    has spent in the UK compared with an adult.   This  was  sufficient  to
    bring the second appellant within the terms of the policy.

 9. Further as the respondent had never applied the policy  to  the  second
    appellant the decision under Article 8 could not be in accordance  with
    the law as any interference could not be proportionate when the  second
    appellant clearly met the terms of the policy.

10. Curiously the grant of permission to appeal made by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Simpson, in response to the application, departed from the  terms
    set out above but stated that the appellant's grounds were that

    (a) the judge erred in failing  to  give  reasons  for  dismissing  the
    second appellant's appeal when the second appellant, a minor, had lived
    in the UK for more than seven years;

    (b) the  judge  failed  to  consider  whether  there  were  exceptional
    circumstances meriting a grant of leave to remain.

    Further, Judge Simpson found it was arguable that there was an error in
    law as the decision was silent as to EV (Philippines) &  Others  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 874 and there was only a cursory  examination  of  the  Razgar
    [2004] principles.   The  judge  did  not  appear  have  to  considered
    proportionality or the best  interests  of  the  children  despite  the
    guidelines in EA (Article 8 - best  interests  of  the  child)  Nigeria
    [2011] UKUT 315 (IAC).  There was no mention of paragraph 117A and B of
    the 2002 Act.

11. At the hearing before us Mr Cooray expanded on his  grounds  of  appeal
    and relied on those set out in writing. In essence it was wrong for the
    respondent not to consider the policy and it was wrong  for  the  judge
    not to have considered the validity of the decision of  the  respondent
    against her own published policy.

12. The Home Office Presenting Officer argued that the judge had taken into
    account the policy and even if there was an error by the respondent the
    judge had  taken  into  account  many  other  factors.   The  grant  of
    permission to appeal made no reference to  Chapter  53  but,  all  that
    taken into account, there  would  be  no  material  difference  to  the
    decision.

13. Ms Fijiwala submitted that the judge had not taken into account factors
    which would have been to the disadvantage of  the  appellants  such  as
    Section 117 and EV (Philippines).  With regard to Section  117B(6)  the
    judge had found that it  was  not  unreasonable  to  expect  the  child
    appellants to leave the United Kingdom and it was clear the  judge  had
    taken into account the relevant case law.  Even if the  respondent  had
    not considered the policy, the judge had.

14. Mr Cooray, in reply, argued that the  policy  applied  equally  to  the
    children as to the adult.  The  appellants  were  entitled  to  have  a
    decision applicable to each one of them and although  the  applications
    were made jointly there were three different sets of  facts  and  three
    different sets of fees paid. Mr Cooray asserted that there was  nothing
    in Chapter 53 which excluded consideration of the children. If a  child
    were an unaccompanied minor the policy would apply.

15. At the hearing, Mr Cooray centred his challenge to the decision, on his
    written grounds for application for appeal,  which  we  have  described
    above.   Nonetheless for completeness we also address the  contents  of
    the grant of permission which relates to  the  best  interests  of  the
    children.  The challenge relates primarily to the second appellant.

Conclusions

16. There is no merit in the assertion that the judge  failed  to  consider
    the Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 principles and  an  overall  reading  of  the
    decision makes clear that the judge considered the proportionality  and
    the best interests of the children.   At [17] the  judge  accepts  that
    the first and second appellants had established a right  to  a  private
    life in the United Kingdom on  the  basis  that  "the  first  appellant
    having been in the United  Kingdom  for  over  ten  years  and  on  the
    documentary evidence the second appellant's  schooling  in  the  United
    Kingdom".

17. The judge specifically referred to Razgar and set out the background to
    the appeal at  [18]. He took into account the  best  interests  of  the
    children and, in essence, gave consideration  to  their  welfare  as  a
    primary factor (ZH (Tanzania) (FC) (Appellant) v SSHD [2011]  UKSC  4).
    He noted that the family would be returned together and would travel to
    Nigeria together [19].  He identified the key question in  relation  to
    the second appellant, further to Section 117(6),  which  was  that  the
    second appellant was educated here had lived continuously in the UK for
    at least 7 years, but nonetheless he found it would  be  reasonable  to
    expect the second appellant to leave the  UK  for  Nigeria  albeit  the
    second appellant had no knowledge of Nigeria.  On an overall reading of
    the decision the  judge  made  his  reasoning  clear  that  the  second
    appellant could adapt to life in Nigeria.  The  judge  also  took  into
    account the sickle cell disorder of the third appellant and noted  that
    there was treatment in Nigeria.

18. Although, as First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson pointed out in  granting
    permission to appeal, the  judge  did  not  specifically  refer  to  EV
    (Philippines) he recorded that the second appellant  had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom  throughout  his  life  and  was  attending  school  but
    considered that he could adapt  to  a  different  country.   The  judge
    considered the claims of the first and second appellant in the light of
    the immigration history of the first appellant in that she had been  an
    overstayer in the United Kingdom  for  nearly  ten  years.   The  judge
    reasoned at paragraph 20:

      "Although  the  second  appellant  has  been  in  the  United  Kingdom
      throughout his life and is attending school, I find that he  is  young
      enough to be able  to  adapt  to  life  in  Nigeria  where  the  first
      appellant spent all her formative years.  Although I  am  prepared  to
      accept the medical  treatment  for  the  third  appellant  is  not  as
      advanced as it is  in  the  United  Kingdom,  I  find  that  there  is
      treatment available in Nigeria in  according  the  Country  of  Origin
      Information Report and although  the  third  appellant  has  benefited
      significantly from medical care received in the United  Kingdom,  that
      does not of itself provide a basis for which the NHS  should  continue
      to fund the treatment in circumstances where I find there is treatment
      available in Nigeria."



19. EV Philippines & Oths v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  874  does  not  in  fact
    assist the appellants.  It is hard to see how a  failure  to  apply  it
    could afford a ground of  appeal  on  the  facts  of  this  case.    At
    paragraphs 43-46 Christopher Clarke LJ, with whom the other members  of
    the court agreed said this:-
         "43 In the present case the FTT judge treated the best interests of
         the children as a primary consideration and  concluded  that  their
         best interests lay in remaining with their parents  and  continuing
         their education here.  He  then  considered  whether  the  need  to
         maintain immigration control outweighed that consideration.
         44 In carrying out this assessment he took into  account  the  fact
         (a) that the parents would be employable in  the  Philippines;  (b)
         that the family would not  be  homeless;  (c)  that  there  was  an
         extended family to which they  would  have  access;  (d)  that  the
         family had only been in the UK for a  limited  time  -  3  years  9
         months at the date of the FTT decision at which time  the  children
         were 11,10 and 8; (e)  that  the  children  would  not  be  without
         education in the Philippines. The fact that it would not be as good
         and that secondary education was not free was not determinative. In
         addition there  was  no  question  of  any  interference  with  the
         appellants' family life. Further, the  family  could  have  had  no
         assurance of a guaranteed  permanent  settlement.  The  judge  took
         account of the fact that EV had been underpaid by her employers and
         the chronology provided by the Appellants [13]  which  reveals  the
         delays attributable to the Respondent.
         45 His overall conclusion was that the need to maintain immigration
         control did outweigh the best interests of the children. In  effect
         he found that it was reasonable to expect the children to  live  in
         another country. The Appellants  submit  that  the  judge  did  not
         analyse the weight to be  given  in  this  case  to  the  need  for
         immigration control. But, as it seems to me,  in  setting  out  and
         examining the factors relating to the Appellants, he was performing
         that exercise.

         46 In my judgment he made no error of  law.  Nor  did  he  fail  to
         follow the correct approach in reaching his conclusions, which were
         open to him on the material that he had and the findings  which  he
         made. The UT was right so to hold."

20. At paragraph 60, Lewison LJ identified  the  decisive  factors  in  the
    balance in a way which seems to us to be applicable to a  large  number
    of similar cases, of which the present case is typical:-

         'In our case none of the family is a British citizen. None has  the
         right to remain in this country. If  the  mother  is  removed,  the
         father has no independent right  to  remain.  If  the  parents  are
         removed, then it is entirely reasonable to expect the  children  to
         go with them. As the immigration judge found  it  is  obviously  in
         their best interests to remain with their parents. Although it  is,
         of course a question of fact for the tribunal, I  cannot  see  that
         the desirability of being educated at public expense in the UK  can
         outweigh the benefit  to  the  children  of  remaining  with  their
         parents. Just as we cannot provide medical treatment for the world,
         so we cannot educate the world'.

21. The judge did not mention Section 117 of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002, but this omission was in fact to  the  appellants'
    advantage as consideration of the terms of the Act would have  required
    the judge to give little weight to  a  private  life  established  when
    unlawfully present in the  United  Kingdom  and  it  would  have  given
    statutory weight to the factors which affect the cost to the public  of
    the grant of LTR in a particular case.    The judge found at [21]

         "Given the ages of  the  second  and  third  appellants,  the  very
         limited extent of  the  appellants'  private  life  in  the  United
         Kingdom and the circumstances in which the first appellant  entered
         the United Kingdom and overstayed for  a  considerable  period  and
         taking  into  account  the  respondent's  legitimate  interest   in
         immigration control, I find it  would  not  be  a  disproportionate
         interference with the appellants' rights to private  life  for  the
         appellants to return as a family unit to Nigeria."

22. Section 117B(6) requires the court or tribunal to consider, in the case
    of a qualifying child, whether it would be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    child to leave the United Kingdom.  If not, then it the public interest
    does not require the removal of a parent in the position of  the  first
    appellant in this case.  The second appellant  is  a  qualifying  child
    because he has been in the United Kingdom for more than  7  years.   In
    paragraph 21 of his decision, the judge said

        "In reaching that decision I take into account  Chapter  53  of  the
        Enforcement Instructions and guidance in the  circumstances  I  find
        that it would not be unreasonable to expect the second appellant  to
        leave the United Kingdom despite having been present in  the  United
        Kingdom since birth."

23. It appears to us that the judge did make a decision which was  in  line
    with authority and the statutory provisions,  even  if  they  were  not
    specifically referred to.  He made the critical finding  of  fact  when
    holding that it would be "not unreasonable"  to  expect  the  child  to
    leave the United Kingdom in circumstances where his mother and  sibling
    were leaving.  We do not therefore allow the  appeals  on  the  grounds
    identified by First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson.

24. We  turn  to  the  consideration  of  Chapter  53  of  the  Enforcement
    Instructions in relation to the second appellant. It was contended that
    the respondent effectively applied Chapter 53 to the  circumstances  of
    the first appellant but did not apply them to the circumstances of  the
    other appellants. In Abdi (Dajui Saleban) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [1996] Imm AR 148, the Court of Appeal held that, if it
    can be shown  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  failed  to  act  in
    accordance with established principles of administrative or common law,
    for example, if he did not take account of or give effect  to  his  own
    published policy, that was "not in  accordance  with  the  law".  UR  &
    Others (Policy executive discretion remittal)  Nepal  [2010]  UKUT  480
    (IAC) and AG (Kosovo) & Others (Polices executive discretions, Tribunal
    powers) Kosovo [2007] UKAIT 82 re-affirmed the proposition that in  the
    generality of cases a finding  that  a  policy  has  not  been  applied
    properly or at all, will  render  the  decision  under  appeal  not  in
    accordance with the law and will result in a remittal to  the  original
    decision maker.

25. In the reasons for refusal letter from  the  Secretary  of  State,  the
    respondent made reference to and applied the  following  criteria  from
    the Guidance specifically to the first appellant:

      (i) character conduct and association including  any  criminal  record
    and the nature of any offence of which the migrant concerned  has  been
    convicted

      (ii) compliance with any conditions attached to any previous grant  of
    leave to  enter  or  remain  and  compliance  with  any  conditions  of
    temporary admission or immigration bail where applicable

      (ii) length of time spent in the  UK  spent  for  reasons  beyond  the
    migrant's control after the human  rights  or  asylum  claim  has  been
    submitted or refused

26. It was observed that the first appellant had no  criminal  record,  but
    had built up debts with the NHS, had used that service when she was not
    entitled to and cost the UK taxpayers money, failed to comply with  the
    conditions  of  her  initial  visit  visa  and  delayed  in  making  an
    application to regularise her stay.  It was concluded  that  there  had
    been no length of time spent in the UK for reasons beyond her  control.
    Her  circumstances  were  considered  in  the  round  but  there   were
    insufficient factors to justify allowing her to remain in the UK.

27. The judge at [21] of his decision made specific reference to Chapter 53
    in regard to the second appellant, saying

          "In reaching that decision I take into account Chapter 53  of  the
         Enforcement Instructions and guidance in the circumstances  I  find
         that it would not be unreasonable to expect the second appellant to
         leave the United Kingdom despite having been present in the  United
         Kingdom since birth."

28. Chapter 53.1 of the Enforcement Instructions and Guidance provides

         "Where exceptional circumstances raised amount to an asylum, family
         and private life claim and have already been fully considered under
         the relevant Rules and Guidance, officers  need  not  give  further
         consideration if all the factors have been fully addressed.   Where
         additional  factors  exist  that  have  not  been  considered,  for
         example, length of time spent in the  UK  for  reasons  beyond  the
         migrant's control, they must be considered in accordance  with  the
         factors outlined in paragraph 353B of the Immigration Rules."

29.  The  treatment  of  factors   which  are  said   to   be   exceptional
    circumstances is set out at 53.1.1  which says

         "When determining whether or not exceptional  circumstances  exist,
         that consideration of the relevant factors needs to be taken  as  a
         whole rather than individually. Discretion not  to  remove  on  the
         basis of exceptional circumstances must not  be  exercised  on  the
         basis of one factor alone."

30. Paragraph 53.1.1 of the Guidance identifies "Relevant  Factors".    The
    first two factors identified in the policy were  not  relevant  to  the
    second and third appellants  because  of  their  age.   The  character,
    conduct or associations of the children were  irrelevant  because  they
    did not have any criminal convictions as explained both in respondent's
    decision and that of the judge.    Secondly, the factor  of  compliance
    with  any  conditions  could  not  apply  to  or  indeed  assist  these
    appellants as they had  always  been  in  the  UK  without  leave.  The
    circumstances of the mother, the first appellant, had been specifically
    considered and the rules specifically  state  that  dependant  children
    should be considered in  the  light  of  the  adult.  The  Guidance  as
    identified above states

    'The consideration of relevant factors needs to be  taken  as  a  whole
    rather than individually'

    and further at (iii) of the Guidance adds

    'For the purposes of this guidance,  'family'  cases  means  parent  as
    defined in the Immigration Rules and children who are  emotionally  and
    financially dependent on the parent, and under the age  of  18  at  the
    date of the decision'.

31.  The  children  had  not  been  issued  with  any  leave  or  reporting
    conditions.   These two criteria to our  mind  were  not  relevant  and
    therefore it was not incumbent upon the officers to apply them.

32. The third criterion set out in  paragraph  53.1.1  of  the  Enforcement
    Instructions is entitled

    (iii) the length of time in the  UK  accrued  for  reasons  beyond  the
    migrant's control after their human rights or  asylum  claim  has  been
    submitted or refused.

33. The policy reads:

         "The length of residence in the UK is a  factor  to  be  considered
         where residence has been accrued by an unreasonable delay which  is
         not attributable to the migrant.  Periods of  residence  which  are
         built up by actions of non-compliance attributable to  the  migrant
         will not count in the  migrant's  favour.  More  weight  should  be
         attached to the length of time a child has spent in the UK compared
         to an adult.

         Provided that the factors outlined in 'character'  or  'compliance'
         do not mean that the claimant cannot benefit from  the  exceptional
         circumstances guidance then caseworker must also  consider  whether
         there has been   a  significant  delay  by  the  Home  Office,  not
         attributable to the migrant in deciding  a  valid  application  for
         leave to remain on asylum or human rights grounds or whether  there
         are reasons beyond the individual's  control  why  they  could  not
         leave the UK voluntarily after their application was refused.   For
         example.

         .  Family cases where delay by the Home Office  or  factors  beyond
             the control of the family which have prevented departure  have
             contributed to the significant period of residence.  (For  the
             purposes of this guidance, family  cases  means  a  parent  or
             parents as defined in the Immigration Rules and  children  who
             are  emotionally and financially dependent on the  parent  and
             under the age of 18 at the age  of  decision).   Following  an
             individual assessment of the prospect  of  enforcing  removal,
             and where the factors outlined in character and compliance  do
             not prevent  a  case  from  benefiting  from  the  exceptional
             circumstances  guidance,  family  cases  may   be   considered
             exceptionally on grounds of delay where  the  dependent  child
             has lived in the UK for more than three years or  more  whilst
             under the age of 18.

         .  Asylum other case where the length of delay by the  Home  Office
             in  deciding  the  application  where   there   were   factors
             preventing  departure  may  be  considered  exceptionally   on
             grounds of delay where a person has lived in UK for more  than
             six years."

34. This rule is framed in terms of delay by the Home  Office  and  factors
    preventing the 'family' from removing from the United Kingdom.   It  is
    not the case that the second appellant was subject to any delay by  the
    Home Office or that he was an unaccompanied minor whereby the  fact  of
    removal was beyond his control. Nor has the child lived in the  UK  for
    more than three years after the  application  was  made  (21st  October
    2013). As stated  in  UR  [14]  "policies...are  meant  to  be  applied
    flexibly, and to allow the sensible exercise of discretion".

35. In relation to the third  criterion  there  is  reference  to  'factors
    beyond the control of the family which have prevented departure'.   The
    instructions therefore consider the child within  the  context  of  the
    family and these factors were considered in the  respondent's  decision
    in full in relation to the first appellant.   This is not a case of  an
    unaccompanied minor whereby the factors would be considered without the
    setting of the family.  Specifically in relation to the first appellant
    and to criterion (iii), it  was  recorded  by  the  respondent  in  the
    reasons for refusal letter

    'it is not considered that there has been any length of time  spent  in
    the UK that have been for any reasons beyond your client's control'.

36. We make a further point.  The decision of the Secretary  of  State  set
    out clearly all the factors relevant to  the  first  appellant  and  at
    paragraphs 32- 42 the Secretary of State gave full consideration to the
    interests of the children, their age, the medical  conditions  and  the
    fact that the second appellant had lived in the UK since birth and that
    both his parents were Nigerian.

37. At the outset Chapter 53 states as set out above

    'Where exceptional circumstances raised amount to an asylum, family and
    private life claim and have already been  fully  considered  under  the
    relevant  Rules  and  Guidance,  officers   need   not   give   further
    consideration if all the factors  have  been  fully  addressed.   Where
    additional factors exist that have not been  considered,  for  example,
    length of time spent  in  the  UK  for  reasons  beyond  the  migrant's
    control'

38. The judge in a short but focussed decision specified that he took  into
    account Chapter 53 in the decision to which he came.  This  is  a  very
    oblique way of ruling on a submission that the Secretary of  State  had
    acted unlawfully because she failed to  apply  her  policy.  There  is,
    therefore, some merit in the submission made.  However,  there  was  no
    obligation on the judge to adhere to the policy, it was not directed at
    the Tribunal but at officers dealing with  enforcement  of  immigration
    decisions.  What he was being asked to decide was whether the  officers
    had demonstrably failed to have regard to it, and whether the Secretary
    of State in reaching her decision had failed to address it.

39. Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set  aside)  [2013]  UKUT  00085  (IAC)
    identifies that



       'Although there is a legal duty to give a brief  explanation  of  the
       conclusions on the central issue on which an  appeal  is  determined,
       those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as a whole  makes
       sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge'.

40. Paragraph 51 of AG, cited above, confirms

       'If (2) or (3) do not apply, and if the Secretary of  State  has  not
       yet considered the claim within the terms of his policy,  the  appeal
       should be allowed with a  direction  that  he  do  so.   But  if  the
       appellant fails to establish  the  terms  of  a  policy,  or  if  the
       Secretary of State has already properly considered the  claim  within
       the terms of any applicable policy, then (given that  none  of  these
       considerations apply at all unless the appellant's removal would  not
       breach his Convention rights) the appeal should be dismissed'.

41. The reasons, in this case, may properly be subject to criticism  as  we
    have indicated.  It may be that the judge regarded the  challenge  made
    on the basis of the policy as hopeless, which is why he dealt  with  it
    so elliptically.  If that is so, we agree  with  him.   After  all,  he
    carried out an Article 8 compliant assessment of the proportionality of
    the removal of the second appellant and specifically held that  it  was
    reasonable to expect him to leave the United Kingdom with  his  family.
    Any policy which required an officer to come to a different  conclusion
    on the same facts would appear to be unlawful, but this policy  clearly
    does not do that.

42.   In this case,  all  the  relevant  factors  which  might  assist  the
    appellant had either been considered by the Secretary of State  or  did
    not apply. Then, on appeal, the First-tier Tribunal considered them all
    again and came to the same conclusion.  In the circumstances, there was
    simply  no  scope  for  a  finding   that   there   were   "exceptional
    circumstances" as envisaged in the policy.  Everything had been weighed
    up and a decision reached.  Therefore the passage of the policy set out
    at paragraph 28 and repeated at paragraph  37  above  plainly  applied.
    The Article 8 rights of the appellants were considered by the Secretary
    of State.  That being so, the policy, on its terms, did not apply.   If
    the judge had held that the Secretary of State had decided  the  matter
    unlawfully, this was not a case for remission for a decision under  the
    policy by an official.  The better course would be  for  the  judge  to
    decide the issue, not under the policy, but according to the law.  This
    is what he did.

43. Accordingly, although we consider that the  reasons  suggest  that  the
    judge did not address the point under discussion directly this  is  not
    an error of law which should vitiate his decision.  There is  no  merit
    at all in the appellants' case on the policy  which  could  never  have
    succeeded.  The submission that the second appellant had a strong  case
    under the policy is unarguable and although we have heard  argument  on
    it and decided the issue, we would not have granted permission to raise
    the question on appeal.

44. We find no error of law, which is material, and  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                             Date 5th June 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington




