

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/22837/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal|         Decision & Reasons         |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|on 11 May 2017                         |         on 16 May 2017             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON


                                   Between

                               GURNAM MATHARU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Ms C Alfred instructed by Bhavsar Patel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Colyer ('the Judge'), promulgated on 4 August 2016,  in  which  the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal under the immigration  rules
        and on human rights  grounds  (ECHR)  against  the  refusal  of  an
        application for leave to remain.



Error of law


     2. The appellant is a national of India born on 25 November 1975.
     3. In a lengthy but detailed decision, the Judge examines the evidence
        put before him from all sources before setting out his findings  of
        fact at [24] to [91] of the decision.
     4. The decision-maker considered the application pursuant to  Appendix
        FM of the Immigration Rules  under  the  'Partner  Route'.   Having
        considered the definition of a "partner", as defined  in  GEN  1.2,
        the decision-maker concluded:


        "It is noted that you claim to have been  residing  together  since
        January  2013,  but  sufficient  evidence  of  this  has  not  been
        provided, and therefore you have not  been  living  together  in  a
        relationship akin to marriage for at least two years. You therefore
        do not meet the definition of partner, as defined in GEN 1.2.,  and
        cannot meet the requirement of R-LTRP. You failed  to  qualify  for
        leave by virtue of E-LTRP 1.2. as you are not considered to have  a
        partner in the UK in accordance with Appendix FM."


     5. Gen 1.2 defines a partner as (i) the applicant's spouse;  (ii)  the
        applicant's civil partner; (iii)  the  applicant's  fianc�  (e)  or
        proposed civil partner; or  (iv)  a  person  who  has  been  living
        together with the applicant in a relationship akin to  marriage  or
        civil partnership for at least two  years  prior  to  the  date  of
        application. The appellant  claimed  he  is  able  to  satisfy  Gen
        1.2(iv).
     6. The decision-maker concluded  that  as  the  application  has  been
        refused under  the  eligibility  requirements  of  the  Immigration
        Rules, the appellant was unable to benefit from  the  criteria  set
        out in EX.1. which was therefore not considered  by  the  decision-
        maker.
     7. The Judge considered the evidence regarding the relationship before
        finding at [43] and [44]:


         43.  I find that the Appellant has  failed  to  provide  sufficient
             independent evidence with his application to demonstrate  that
             he has been living together with his partner in a relationship
             akin to marriage from the date  of  their  religious  ceremony
             which was 5 January 2013. The date of decision is  put  at  28
             May 2015 which is more than two years from  the  date  of  the
             ceremony and therefore if there was evidence  he  should  have
             been able to provide that.


         44.  I do have his word that there was cohabitation but in view  of
             my doubts as to his credibility I am not  prepared  to  accept
             that as sufficient proof. There is however  the  word  of  his
             partner and I am prepared to accept her evidence that she  and
             the appellant lived together from 5 January 2013,  however  on
             the date of the respondent's decision the respondent  did  not
             have the advantage of hearing  the  appellant's  sponsor  give
             evidence.


     8. The Judge noted the appellant had no status in the  United  Kingdom
        and that the decision-maker had stated that the appellant failed to
        meet the eligibility requirements of the Immigration Rules.
     9. It was not made out before us that a person's immigration  history,
        of the nature of that applicable to this appellant, means they will
        fail to meet the eligibility requirements of the Immigration  Rules
        such that they are prevented from relying upon the exception to the
        rule found in paragraph EX.1. The only basis on which the decision-
        maker appears not to have considered that paragraph is the  finding
        the appellant had not proved the required two  year's  cohabitation
        akin to husband-and-wife, which was rejected by the Judge in [44].
    10. The grounds seek permission to appeal, made on the  basis  that  in
        light of the finding at [44] the Judge  was  required  to  consider
        paragraph EX.1, has arguable merit and we find that legal error  is
        made out on this basis. This was not  challenged  by  Mr  Bates  on
        behalf the Secretary of State.
    11. We do not at this stage find such error is material to the decision
        to dismiss the appeal. It is necessary to consider the test set out
        in EX.1.  and  the  findings  made  by  the  Judge.  If  the  Judge
        considered the test,  albeit  in  a  different  context,  and  made
        sustainable findings then any error made may not be material to the
        decision to dismiss the appeal.
    12. The advocates were therefore invited to  make  submissions  to  the
        Upper Tribunal in relation to the question of  the  materiality  of
        the error.



Materiality - Discussion



    13. The relevant part of paragraph EX.1. is EX.1.(2)(b) which reads:


        The applicant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
        partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen, settled  in  the
        UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection,  and
        there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
        continuing outside the UK.


    14. The term "insurmountable obstacles" is defined in  paragraph  EX.2.
        as:


         For the purposes of paragraph EX.1. (b) "insurmountable  obstacles"
         means the very significant difficulties which would be faced by the
         applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
         outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail very
         serious hardship for the applicant or their partner.


    15. The Judge noted at [35] that "his principal argument now appears to
        be he should remain because of his wife's medical treatment  and  I
        will refer to that later." The Judge was therefore clearly aware of
        the core issue in the appeal.
    16. The Judge made several relevant findings in relation to this matter
        which are set out as follows:


        51.  The  reference  to  children  is  somewhat  erroneous  as  the
             appellant does not have  any  children  of  his  own  and  his
             wife/partner has children from her first marriage but they are
             now adults and are capable of living independent lives.


        52.  The Respondent makes a conclusion which I find is supported by
             the  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  that  being   that   the
             Appellant's wife could settle back  into  Indian  society  and
             that he would not have to be separated from his  wife  if  she
             returned to his country of nationality with  him.  I  consider
             that the Appellant and his wife could both return to India  as
             a couple.


        53.  I accept that throughout his stay in the  United  Kingdom  the
             Appellant's circumstances have always been precarious. I  also
             find that it is most  probable  that  the  appellants  partner
             would have been aware of his precarious immigration status  at
             an early stage in their relationship.


        Return to India


        54.  I find that the Appellant has failed to establish  that  there
             would be significant obstacles to his integration into  India.
             For example, I note that he spent his formative years and part
             of his adult life in India and I find  that  his  period  away
             from his country of nationality has not  been  so  significant
             that he could not adapt to the lifestyle and culture of  India
             on his return.  I  find  that  the  appellant  has  spent  the
             majority of his life in India. Moreover he spent the formative
             years of his life in that country. I find that  the  Appellant
             will be aware of the culture, customs and  traditions  of  his
             home country on account of  having  lived  in  India  for  his
             formative and adolescent years.


        55.  I find that there is no evidence that  the  Appellant  suffers
             from any significant medical ailments  or  from  any  physical
             infirmity which would prevent him from being able to  relocate
             or adapt to life in India.


        56.   No  objective  evidence  has  been   provided   which   would
             corroborate that the Appellant would be incapable of obtaining
             employment or accommodation in his home country. I  find  that
             any claims based on poor living conditions, high  unemployment
             or lack of accommodation for an  appellant  in  India  do  not
             ordinarily engage Article 3 of the ECHR. The fact that  living
             standards in the home country  of  an  appellant  may  not  be
             comparable to those currently enjoyed by the Appellant in  the
             United Kingdom is not sufficient to engage Article 3. I  refer
             to the Court of Appeal  case  of  Q  and  Others,  R  (on  the
             application of) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
             [2003] EWCA Civ 365. I would also refer  to  the  case  of  MA
             (Proved destitution) Jamaica [2005] UKAIT 00013.


        57.  The Appellant's family are from India and there may be  family
             and friends to whom the Appellant may have access  to  on  his
             relocation to his country of nationality.


        58.  I note that the appellant's wife and her family are originally
             from India and that therefore she too will  be  aware  of  the
             culture, customs and traditions of India. I find that it would
             not be unreasonable to expect the appellant to return to India
             and for his wife to accompany him there if she wishes.


        59.  In her statement  the  appellant's  wife  refers  to  recently
             undergoing  a  bypass  operation  from  which  she  is   still
             recovering. She has referred to  having  regular  appointments
             with the cardiac team at Glenfield Hospital in Leicester.


        60.  Her operation was obviously successful. The  appointments  are
             check-ups rather than  for  treatment.  There  is  no  medical
             evidence before me to show that she  is  unfit  to  travel  to
             India  should  she  so  wish.  There  are  medical  facilities
             available in  India  should  she  relocate  to  her  husband's
             country of origin/nationality.


        61.  If she did not wish to relocate to  India  permanently  it  is
             open to her to accompany the  appellant  whilst  he  makes  an
             application for legal entry to the UK; or  (more  likely)  she
             can remain in the United Kingdom from where  she  can  support
             his application  to  rejoin  her,  but  this  time  under  the
             provisions of the immigration rules.


    17. In relation to the proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR,
        the Judge found  that  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  the
        application did not prejudice the family and private  life  of  the
        appellant in a manner sufficiently serious to amount to a breach of
        a fundamental right protected by article 8, and that  it  was  just
        and proportionate to require the appellant to return  to  his  home
        country and that there was  nothing  sufficiently  serious  in  the
        family or private life circumstances that could  possibly  outweigh
        the need for immigration controls to be enforced in this case [90].
    18. It was submitted on the appellant's behalf that since  the  hearing
        before the Judge the appellant's wife had experienced complications
        but these are post hearing  matters  which,  if  they  warrant  the
        appellant being permitted to remain in the United Kingdom  if  this
        appeal does not succeed, can be the subject of a fresh application.
        The main point that arises is that these were matters of which  the
        Judge had no knowledge as they were matters that had not come  into
        existence at the date of the hearing.
    19. It was  submitted  on  the  appellant's  behalf  that  the  Judge's
        conclusions regarding availability of medical  treatment  in  India
        were flawed especially as the appellant was  unable  to  afford  to
        meet the costs of such treatment. The Judge made  a  clear  finding
        that medical treatment for cardiac problems is available in  India,
        which is in accordance with the country information, and it has not
        been shown to be a finding infected by  arguable  legal  error.  In
        relation to the ability to afford the cost of  such  treatment,  it
        was submitted the appellants will be  destitute  as  they  have  no
        accommodation, no housing, and no employment, but the Judge clearly
        found that there is likely to be family in India and that there was
        no evidence to  corroborate  the  claims  that  the  appellant  was
        incapable of obtaining employment or accommodation. The  claim  the
        appellant will be unable to  afford  any  treatment  his  wife  may
        require is therefore not arguably made out, sufficient to establish
        material legal error.
    20. In relation to the appellant's wife, it was not shown that she is a
        seriously ill person for whom substantial grounds had been made out
        showing that she, although not at imminent  risk  of  dying,  would
        face a  real  risk,  on  account  of  the  absence  of  appropriate
        treatment in India or the lack of  access  to  such  treatment,  of
        being exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline  in  her
        state of health resulting in intense suffering or to a  significant
        reduction in life expectancy.
    21. It is important to remember, however, that the core finding of  the
        Judge is that the appellant's wife  was  receiving  monitoring  and
        check-ups with no evidence of ongoing treatment being required. The
        finding that article 3 was not engaged is a finding reasonably open
        to the Judge on the evidence.
    22. The submission the Judge had elevated himself to a  medical  expert
        when referring to the  appointments  being  for  check-ups  has  no
        arguable merit. There is only one letter before the Judge referring
        to a post-operative appointment where the appellant's wife may  see
        the Consultant or another member of the medical team. It was  fully
        open  to  the  Judge  to  conclude  this   was   a   post-operative
        review/check-up appointment and he was not acting in  the  capacity
        of medical expert in coming to such a conclusion.
    23. In relation to the  Judges  suggestion  that  the  appellant  could
        return to India to make an application for entry clearance, it  was
        submitted that this was not feasible as the  appellant's  wife  had
        held down two jobs which enabled her to earn the  requisite  income
        threshold but, following her surgery, it  was  unlikely  she  could
        return to such a level of work meaning that she would be unable  to
        satisfy the minimum income threshold required for a foreign  spouse
        to enter the United Kingdom.
    24. Mr Bates referred to an  exception  within  the  immigration  rules
        relating to the minimum  income  requirement  if  a  person  is  in
        receipt of State Benefits. The appellant's representative  informed
        the  Upper  Tribunal  at  the  outset  of  the  hearing  that   the
        appellant's wife was in the process of making  an  application  for
        State Benefits, probably Disability Living Allowance. This  is  one
        of the benefits that would allow her to seek an exception from  the
        minimum maintenance requirement.
    25. Whilst we appreciate that such an application may take time, and if
        the appellant was returned with his wife remaining  in  the  United
        Kingdom during that time there may be a period  of  separation,  it
        was not made out before the Judge that any such period will be such
        as to make separation disproportionate  in  all  the  circumstances
        where there was no evidence before the Judge of the  need  for  the
        appellant to remain in the United Kingdom.
    26. The appellant's immigration history is very poor  and  there  is  a
        strong public interest in maintaining immigration control  in  such
        situations as that in which the appellant finds himself.
    27. The arguments put forward on the appellant's behalf in relation  to
        the existence of insurmountable obstacles has not  been  made  out.
        Indeed, the Judge considered whether there  were  very  significant
        obstacles relating to reintegration  into  India  when  considering
        276ADE(1)(vi)  and  carefully  considered  the  question   of   the
        possibility of family life with the appellant's partner  continuing
        outside the UK.
    28. We do not find it has been made out that  the  error  made  by  the
        Judge  is  material  for,  had  the  Judge  applied  his  mind   to
        EX.1.(2)(b) and the insurmountable  obstacle  test  as  defined  in
        EX.2, he would have arrived at the same  conclusion  and  dismissed
        the appeal.
    29. We do not find the finding in relation  to  circumstances  for  the
        family unit back in  India  have  been  shown  to  be  infected  by
        arguable material legal error, nor do we find the  conclusion  that
        it is proportionate for the  appellant  to  return  to  the  United
        Kingdom to make an application to return with valid entry clearance
        infected by arguable legal error either.
    30.  As  stated  above,  if  there  has  been  a  material  change   in
        circumstances since the matter was considered by the  Judge  it  is
        open to the appellant to make a fresh application, although he must
        appreciate the need to support  such  an  application  with  cogent
        medical and other evidence establishing a need for him to remain in
        the United Kingdom.
    31. The appeal is dismissed.


Decision

    32. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    33. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          We make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure           (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

Signed.......................................................

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
          Dated the 11th of May 2017


