
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/22001/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On August 24, 2015                   |On August 26, 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MS ABISOLA KISMOT FAHM
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Ms Brocklesby-Weller (Home Office Presenting Officer)
Respondent  Mr Ojukotola, Counsel, instructed by SLA Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The appellant is a national  of  Nigeria.   On  January  24,  2014  she
    applied as a spouse of an EEA national for a residence card  confirming
    her right of residence in the United Kingdom but this  was  refused  on
    March 16, 2014 by the respondent on the grounds that the  marriage  was
    not recognised and that it was a marriage of convenience.

 3. The  appellant  appealed  this  refusal  under  section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and Regulation 26  of  the
    2006 Regulations.

 4. The matter came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cooper on March
    11, 2015 and in a decision promulgated on April 20, 2015  the  Tribunal
    allowed her appeal to the extent that  it  was  remitted  back  to  the
    respondent for lawful decision to be made.

 5. The respondent applied for permission  to  appeal  on  April  23,  2015
    submitting the Tribunal had erred by not  following  the  decisions  in
    Kareem (Proxy marriages-EU law)  [2014]  UKUT  24  and  TA  and  others
    (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316. Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Fisher on June 10, 2015.

 6. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I see no reason to make an order now.

PRELIMINARY ISSUE

 7. Mr Ojukotola submitted that evidence that the marriage  was  recognised
    in Portugal had been submitted to the First-tier Tribunal and  that  by
    agreement the representatives had submitted to that Tribunal  that  the
    case be remitted back to the respondent for  a  fresh  decision  to  be
    made. The Tribunal had agreed with this approach.

 8. I reviewed the court file but could not  find  the  relevant  documents
    confirming the Portuguese authorities recognised the marriage but as Mr
    Ojukotola was present at the original hearing  I  accepted  that  these
    documents had been handed in as the record of proceedings  referred  to
    additional documents having been submitted.

 9. Clearly the respondent must consider whether the  marriage  is  legally
    valid in Portugal as a starting point and as the Tribunal  has  already
    remitted the matter back to the respondent for a decision to be made  I
    suggested to Ms Brocklesby-Weller that this seemed the most appropriate
    way to deal with the matter.

10. Ms Brocklesby-Weller did not disagree with this approach and  in  those
    circumstances I found there was no error of law.

DECISION

11. There was no material error.  I uphold the original decision.

Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award payable.

Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
