
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: IA/22470/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision sent to parties on          |
|On 23 February 2016                  |On 24 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                 hamdi frih
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                     NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL OR ABANDONMENT
                        pursuant to paragraph 17A of
             The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
                                (as amended)

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Tunisia, appealed with  permission  to  the
    Upper Tribunal against the First-tier Tribunal determination dismissing
    his appeal against the respondent's refusal to grant him limited  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom as a parent.

 2.  The  provisions  for  treating  an  appeal  as  abandoned  or  finally
    determined are set out in section1 appeal may be treated  as  abandoned
    or finally determined for the reasons set out in  section  104  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).  So  far  as
    relevant to this appeal, section 104 (4A)-(4C) provide a mechanism  for
    automatic abandonment of an appeal, subject  to  a  mechanism  for  the
    appellant to indicate that  he  wishes,  nevertheless,  to  pursue  the
    appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

         "104 Pending appeal

         This section has no associated Explanatory Notes

         ...

         (4A) An appeal under section 82(1) brought by a person while he  is
         in the  United  Kingdom  shall  be  treated  as  abandoned  if  the
         appellant is granted leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
         (subject to subsections (4B) and (4C)).

         (4B) Subsection (4A) shall not apply to an appeal in so far  as  it
         is brought  on  the  ground  relating  to  the  Refugee  Convention
         specified in section 84(1)(g) where the appellant-

               a) is granted leave to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom
                  for a period exceeding 12 months, and

               b) gives notice, in accordance with any  relevant  procedural
                  rules (which may include provision about timing), that  he
                  wishes to pursue the appeal in so far as it is brought  on
                  that ground. ...."

 3. Paragraph 17A(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008
    requires a party to an asylum or immigration case to notify  the  Upper
    Tribunal where the appellant has been granted leave to remain,  and  in
    certain other circumstances not  relevant  to  this  appeal.  Paragraph
    17A(2) then requires the Upper Tribunal to send to the parties a notice
    that the appeal is being treated as  abandoned,  unless  the  appellant
    sends to the Upper Tribunal within 30 days of the  grant  of  leave  to
    remain a notice stating that he wishes to pursue his appeal.

 4. On 16 December 2016, the respondent granted this appellant a period  of
    30 months' limited leave to remain on the  5-year  Parent  Route  under
    paragraph D-LTRPT1.2 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules HC395  (as
    amended).

 5. The appellant failed to notify the Upper  Tribunal  of  that  grant  of
    leave.  Today, with the hearing listed for tomorrow in Bradford,  Reiss
    Solicitors wrote to the Upper Tribunal querying why a hearing had  been
    listed, disclosing the grant of leave, and indicating that  they  would
    not be attending as they were without instructions.  I have seen a copy
    of the grant of leave.

 6. No paragraph 17A(2) notice has been received.

 7. The Upper Tribunal therefore treats this appeal as abandoned.


|                                   |Judith AJC Gleeson                 |
|Date:  20 December 2016      |Signed:            Upper Tribunal Judge   |
|                             |Gleeson                                   |

