
[pic]


                               UPPER TRIBUNAL

                       IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

                                                                Promulgated
on 21 Aug. 13
                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

                                   Between

                          Pirashanth Sriskandaraja
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


I have already issued two  Preliminary  Decisions  and  Directions  in  this
matter. As the second dated 22 July 2013 contained the substantive  part  of
the first dated 26 February 2013, I include  here  only  the  second,  which
stated as follows:

    1. I made a preliminary decision and direction  in  this  matter  on  26
       February 2013 which stated as follows:


       1. The appellant applied on 3 April 2012 for further leave to  remain
          as a Tier 1 Post Study Work  Migrant.  On  15  June  2012  he  was
          awarded a BSc in Computing by the University of East London.   His
          application was refused on  27  September  2012.  His  substantive
          appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge C J Lloyd  in  a
          determination dated 17  December  2012.  It  was  found  that  the
          appellant had not obtained his degree within the 12  months  prior
          of the date of his application.


       2. This appeal is on all fours with the case  of  Khatel  and  others
          (s85A; effect of continuing application) [2013] UKUT 00044  (IAC).
          It is the preliminary view of the Tribunal that  the  decision  of
          the First-tier Tribunal on the substantive variation of  leave  to
          remain appeal discloses an error on a point of law should  be  set
          aside and remade as allowed.


       3. The First-tier Tribunal was correct to find the Section 47 removal
          decision not in accordance with the  law  and  that  part  of  the
          decision should stand.

       4. If either party objects to the preliminary decision  on  error  of
          law and the variation  of  leave  appeal  being  allowed,  written
          reasons should be provided within 14 days of the date of issue  of
          this direction.

       5. Where there is no response this will be deemed to be acceptance of
          the appeal being allowed on the substantive grounds of appeal  for
          the reasons set out above.


    2. Neither party responded to  that  direction  but  the  file  was  not
       brought back to me in order for the preliminary decision to  be  made
       into a final determination. It  was  somehow  listed  for  a  hearing
       before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Coates in Stoke on  29  May  2013.
       He, sensibly, sent the matter back to Field  House,  having  seen  my
       preliminary decision of 26 February 2013.

    3. Since my first preliminary decision of 26 February 2013, the Court of
       Appeal has issued the case  of  SSHD  v  Raju  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  754
       overturning Khatel. The reasoning was, as stated at [17], that:

           "Paragraph 34G precludes the concept of a continuing application
           which starts when it is first submitted  and  concludes  at  the
           date of the decision, either of the Secretary of  State  or,  on
           appeal, of a tribunal."

       The date of application in this matter is the date that the appellant
       sent  in  his  application  form.  He  did  not   have   his   degree
       qualification on that  date.  This  was  always  the  sole  issue  of
       contention in this matter.

    4. This leads me to make a second preliminary finding, that there can be
       no error of law in the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  and
       that the appeal to the Upper Tribunal must be dismissed.


    5. I consider it important,  if  possible,  to  deal  with  this  matter
       without a hearing in order to avoid  the  appellant  incurring  costs
       when he cannot succeed. Therefore, if either  party  objects  to  the
       preliminary decision that the error of law appeal must be  dismissed,
       written reasons should be provided within 14  days  of  the  date  of
       issue of this direction.

    6. Where there is no response this will be deemed to  be  acceptance  of
       the appeal being dismissed for the reasons set out above.


Following that Second Preliminary  Decision  and  Direction,  the  appellant
wrote to the Tribunal on 7 August 2013. He maintained that it was  not  fair
that administrative failures at the Tribunal had led  to  the  appeal  being
listed for hearing before Judge Coates in Stoke. This had prevented me  from
acting upon the first Preliminary Decision  which  would  have  led  to  his
appeal being allowed where the respondent had  not  replied.  He  maintained
that I should still allow the appeal  as  if  it  had  been  brought  to  me
promptly after the first Preliminary Decision had been issued.  He  did  not
request an oral hearing of the matter.

Whilst having some sympathy with the appellant, I do not consider that I  am
in a position to put the clock back as he would wish. The appeal  is  before
me now and the case of Khatel is no longer good law.  The  Court  of  Appeal
has indicated that it was misconceived and has given  correct  approach  for
dealing with appeals such as this in SSHD v Raju.

Notwithstanding the appellant's response of 7 August 2013, I do not find  an
error of law in the determination of the First-tier Tribunal. The  appellant
did not have his degree on the date on which he  submitted  his  application
to the respondent so did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
Rules.  I dismiss the appeal.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain an error on a  point
of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. I  do  not  continue
that order (with reference to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008). Nothing before me suggests that serious harm  to  any
person will arise from full disclosure.


Signed:                                 Date: 19 August 2013

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
