
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/22201/2015
                                                IA/22210/2015, IA/22214/2015
                                                               IA/22218/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th November 2016                |On 18th January 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                           V R p (First Appellant)
                          K J p (Second Appellant)
                            p p (Third Appellant)
                           v p (Fourth Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms A Jones (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Whitwell (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are citizens of India.  The first arrived in the  United
    Kingdom in early January 2001 on a  visit  visa  and  overstayed.   The
    second, his wife, arrived here  on  a  visit  visa  in  May  2007  and,
    similarly, remained unlawfully beyond expiry of her  visa.   The  third
    and fourth appellants are their children, born in the  United  Kingdom.
    Their appeals against decisions to refuse  their  human  rights  claims
    were dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keith ("the  judge")  in  a
    decision promulgated on 14th June 2016.  The judge found that the facts
    were almost entirely uncontested  and  concluded  that  the  appellants
    could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules ("the rules").
     He  considered  whether  there  were  circumstances  showing  that  an
    assessment under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention, outside  the
    rules, was required and concluded that there were none.  At the end  of
    the decision, he found that it  was  reasonable  to  expect  the  third
    appellant, present in the United Kingdom since birth on  13th  February
    2009, to leave the United Kingdom with all her family members and  went
    on to make a similar finding in relation to  the  fourth  appellant,  a
    younger child.

2.   In grounds in support of an application for permission  to  appeal,  it
    was contended that the judge erred in failing to  expressly  take  into
    account section 117A to D of the 2002 Act.  The judge was  required  to
    consider  the  public  interest  considerations  set  out  even  if  he
    concluded that the appellants did not qualify  under  the  rules.   The
    judge was  required  to  make  an  Article  8  assessment  and  so  the
    particular considerations contained in section 117B, including those in
    sub-sections (1) and (6) fell to be applied.  In failing  to  expressly
    take them into account, the judge erred in law.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted in October 2016  and  directions  were
    then sent to the parties by the Upper Tribunal on 3 November 2016.

4.   In a rule 24 response prepared on 17 November 2016,  the  Secretary  of
    State opposed the appeal.  The judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that
    there were no compelling circumstances which required an assessment  of
    the  appellants'  cases  outside  the  rules.   He   directed   himself
    appropriately.  Moreover, the judge did refer to  section  117  of  the
    2002 Act in paragraphs 13 and 25 of  the  decision.   So  far  as  sub-
    section (6) is concerned, the fact that the third appellant  had  lived
    in the United Kingdom for seven years had to be taken into  account  in
    the context of the reasonableness of expecting her to leave the  United
    Kingdom.  The judge took into account all  the  evidence,  including  a
    report from a doctor and gave sound reasons for his conclusion that  it
    was reasonable for her to leave.

Submissions on Error of Law

5.   Ms Jones said that the judge set out the law and noted that  the  facts
    were almost uncontested.  It was perhaps unfortunate that the Secretary
    of State was not represented before the First-tier Tribunal.  The judge
    concluded that there were  no  compelling  circumstances  requiring  an
    Article 8 assessment outside the rules.  However, section 117A to D  of
    the 2002 Act was not properly  considered  and  there  was  no  express
    consideration of sub-section (6), which concerned the reasonableness of
    expecting the third appellant to leave  the  United  Kingdom.   It  was
    clear from MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 that these factors had  to
    be considered explicitly.  Paragraph 33 of the decision, in  which  the
    judge appeared to reach a conclusion that it  was  reasonable  for  the
    child to leave, was  not  sufficient.   Paragraph  32  appeared  to  be
    concerned with the best interests assessment in relation to  the  third
    appellant,  but  paragraph  33  was  clearly  different.   In  all  the
    circumstances, the failure  to  expressly  apply  the  public  interest
    considerations amounted to a  material  error  of  law.   Reliance  was
    placed on the written grounds in support of the application.

6.   Mr Whitwell said that the appeal was  opposed.   Paragraph  31  of  the
    decision contained the judge's findings of fact and it was  clear  that
    he made an assessment regarding the requirements  of  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE.  He concluded that those requirements  were  not  met
    and that the rules assessment was sufficient.  The grounds  in  support
    of the application appeared not to challenge that finding in which case
    the apparent failure to consider section 117B of the 2002  Act  was  no
    failure at all.  In any event, for the avoidance of  doubt,  the  judge
    made a finding that it was reasonable for the third appellant to leave,
    with her family members.

7.   Looking at section 117A to D in entirety, save for  the  considerations
    set out in sub-paragraph (6), all the other factors  appeared  to  show
    the strength of the Secretary of State's case.  Important  guidance  in
    this context was given by the Court of Appeal in Rhuppiah  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 803.  There was a precariousness regarding the family life ties.

8.   Nothing  relevant  was  omitted  from  the  judge's  analysis  and  the
    assessment of the best interests of the third  appellant  was  properly
    reasoned.  There was no material error  of  law.   If  the  failure  to
    expressly refer to section 117B(6) did  amount  to  an  error,  it  was
    plainly not material.

9.   In a brief reply, Ms Jones said that the  legislation  set  out  public
    interest considerations which were required to  be  considered  in  all
    cases.  The judge had not applied the relevant factors.

Conclusion on Error of Law

10.  The judge included a careful summary of the evidence  in  the  decision
    and made a careful note of the closing submissions made  on  behalf  of
    the appellants.  In so doing, he expressly noted in  paragraph  24  his
    acceptance of the submission that the effect of section 117B(6) of  the
    2002 Act is that if it were not reasonable  to  expect  the  third  and
    fourth appellants to leave the United Kingdom then the public  interest
    did not require the removal of their parents.  He referred to the Upper
    Tribunal decision in PD and Others (Article 8: conjoined family claims)
    Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 108 (IAC) (17 March 2016).  Since then, important
    guidance has been given in  MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  and
    several other cases,  including  Rhuppiah  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  803.   He
    referred to section 117A of the 2002 Act in the following paragraph and
    stated that he had considered the considerations set out there.

11.  Shortly before that, in paragraph 21, the judge referred to SS  (Congo)
    & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387, in directing himself that in a case where  a
    person cannot meet the requirements of the rules, it  is  necessary  to
    consider  whether  there  are  compelling  circumstances  requiring  an
    assessment of that person's case outside  the  rules,  in  relation  to
    private or family life ties.

12.  It is clear from paragraphs 31 and 32 of the decision  that  the  judge
    found that there were no such compelling  circumstances  and  that,  in
    effect, the assessment of the family's circumstances  under  the  rules
    provided the answer in the appeal.  As Edis J held in Sunnassee  [2015]
    EWHC 1604 (Admin) (12 June 2015), where the rules provide an answer  in
    this way, it is sufficient to say so.  In the present appeal,  however,
    the judge did not simply stop at the rules assessment.  He went  on  to
    make an alternative assessment in paragraph 33 of the decision that  if
    an assessment were required outside the rules, the balance to be struck
    between the competing  interests  fell  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    favour.  The salient finding in this context was his conclusion that it
    was reasonable for the third appellant, and  her  younger  sibling,  to
    leave the United Kingdom with their  parents  and  for  the  family  to
    return to India.  In reaching this conclusion, it  is  clear  from  the
    decision that the judge also had in mind as a material factor  of  some
    weight the very poor immigration histories  of  the  first  and  second
    appellants and the absence, in the light of the report from  Dr  Halari
    (a psychologist), of special circumstances affecting  the  children  of
    the family.  So far as the third appellant was concerned,  there  would
    inevitably  be  disruption  to  her  education  and  friendship  groups
    following the family's removal to India,  but  nothing  graver.   These
    findings  clearly  relate,  particularly  in  paragraph  32,   to   the
    assessment the judge made of the best interests of the children.

13.  It is apparent, therefore, that the decision  contains  self-directions
    in relation to the law, including section 117A to D of the 2002 Act,  a
    best interests assessment of the  children,  an  assessment  under  the
    rules and a conclusion, obviously made in relation to  section  117B(6)
    of the 2002 Act, that it was reasonable to expect the children to leave
    the United Kingdom.  I observe that in relation to this  last  finding,
    in giving weight to the  poor  immigration  histories  of  the  parents
    (paragraph 31) the judge has acted entirely consistently with  guidance
    given in MA (Pakistan).  In a deportation case, NA (Pakistan),  Jackson
    LJ considered whether the law requires the  relevant  matters  in  this
    complicated field of law to be considered in any particular order.   He
    concluded that the law does not require this, although it will  usually
    be sensible to begin with the rules.   Overall,  the  decision  in  the
    present appeal is cogently reasoned and there is nothing to  show  that
    the judge left out any relevant matter.  As the Upper Tribunal held  in
    Dube [2015] UKUT 90, it is substance rather than form that matters  and
    the decision shows that the judge has, in fact, considered  the  public
    interest considerations contained in section 117A to D in substance. He
    had clearly  in  mind  the  extent  of  the  ties  established  by  the
    appellants in the United Kingdom,  in  relation  to  private  life  and
    family life and the precariousness of the position  of  the  first  and
    second appellants, who have been overstayers for a considerable  period
    of time.  He took into account all the evidence  before  him  regarding
    the parental  relationships  and  drew  on  his  findings  of  fact  in
    resolving, at paragraph 33 of the decision, the question arising in the
    light of section 117B(6)(b) of the 2002 Act.

14.  My primary finding is that  the  absence  of  any  express  mention  of
    section 117A to D of the 2002 Act in the concluding paragraphs does not
    amount to an error of law, in the light of the findings  and  reasoning
    earlier in the decision.   The  substantive  conclusions  reached  were
    plainly open to the  judge,  including  the  conclusion  regarding  the
    reasonableness of expecting the  third  appellant  to  leave  with  her
    sibling and her parents.  I do not accept the submission that paragraph
    33 of the decision, which contains this  conclusion,  is  insufficient.
    That paragraph has to be read with the rest of the decision and  if  it
    is, the overall reasoning is  plainly  coherent.   Even  if  more  were
    required, by way of the express reintroduction of the  public  interest
    considerations towards the end of the decision, any error would not  be
    material.

15.  For these reasons, I conclude that the grounds of appeal have not  been
    made out and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



ANONYMITY

The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  an   anonymity   direction,   having
considered the  position  of  the  third  and  fourth  appellants  as  young
children.   There  has  been  no  application  to  vary  or  discharge  that
direction and it shall continue in force until varied  or  discharged  by  a
Tribunal or court.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

