
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/22383/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                        |Determination Promulgated   |
|On: 28th May 2015                            |On 30th June 2015           |
|                                             |                            |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                             MR OLEKSANDRA PADIY
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Watterson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Witwell, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of State for
       the Home Department and the respondent is a citizen  of  the  Ukraine
       born on 30 April 1962.  However, for the sake of convenience, I shall
       continue to refer to  the  latter  as  the  "appellant"  and  to  the
       Secretary  of  the  State  as  the  "respondent",   which   are   the
       designations they  had  in  the  proceedings  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.

    2. The appellant's appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  was  against  the
       decision of the respondent to refuse his application dated 2 May 2014
       for leave to remain pursuant to Article 8 of the European  Convention
       on Human Rights.

    3. A Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, KSH Miller  allowed  his  appeal.
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher in a decision  dated  1  April  2015
       granted the respondent permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, it
       being found to be arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed
       to consider whether the Immigration Rules had been  adequately  taken
       into account in respect of the appellant's circumstances. In R (Aliyu
       & Anor) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWHC 3919
       (Admin) the court held that such consideration  would  condition  the
       nature and extent of the consideration required  in  respect  of  the
       claim under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules. At Paragraph  29
       the Judge concludes that there would  be  an  interference  with  the
       appellant's private life, but he has not  identified  the  nature  of
       that private life, having regard to the decision in Nasim and  Others
       (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025  (IAC)  nor  does  he  appear  to  have
       considered that a private life was established when the appellant was
       in the United Kingdom unlawfully for 10 years.

    4. Thus the appeal came before me.

  First-tier Tribunal's Findings

    5. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the  appellant's  appeal,  concluding
       that. :

           "[25] this is an unusual case, in as much as, if  the  appellant
           had requested, in 2003, that she be added to her husband's claim
           as his dependent, it is difficult to see that she would not have
           been granted leave with him and her son. Quite why her solicitor
           told her to wait is not  apparent,  but  it  is  not  altogether
           surprisingly, given the poor advice that appellants often appear
           to receive.

           ...

           [27] Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 outlines the  public
           interest considerations applied in all article 8  cases.  It  is
           stated that the maintenance of effective immigration control  is
           in the public interest and that persons who seek  to  remain  in
           the United Kingdom are able to speak English  because  they  are
           less likely to be burden on the taxpayer and are better able  to
           integrate into society. In this regard I am satisfied  that  all
           that the appellant's spoke Russian during most of her  evidence,
           which was understandable that she was extremely nervous, she can
           speak a degree of English and furthermore, I am  satisfied  that
           she would try to obtain employment. In  any  event  however  her
           husband  was  clearly  hard-working,  holding  two   jobs,   has
           maintained her and her sons in the past and would continue to do
           so in the future.

           [28] finally, whereas section 117B states that "little weight to
           be given to the relationship formed with  a  qualified  partner,
           that is established by a person at the time when the  person  is
           in the United Kingdom unlawfully" is clearly not the case  here,
           the appellant and her British national husband have been married
           for 27 years.

           [29] having regard to the  five  stage  test  in  Razgar,  I  am
           satisfied that the appellant's removal would be an  interference
           with her right to family and private life in the UK, such as  to
           engage Article  8.  I  am  also  satisfied,  however,  that  the
           respondent's decision is in accordance with  the  law.  However,
           having regard to what I have stated above,  I  do  not  consider
           that  it  is  necessary  for  the   maintenance   of   effective
           immigration control, since she would have  obtained  status  had
           she made an application in line with that of her husband."

           [30] With regard to whether her removal would be  proportionate,
           I find that, in light of all that I have stated above, it  would
           not be so. The effect would be to break up a marriage  that  has
           endured for a very long period of time, as  well  as  separating
           the appellant from her two sons who have status  here.  It  also
           place a real difficulty with  regard  to  accommodation  in  the
           Ukraine, even if her husband were to remain in the UK  and  sent
           money to her.

           [31] In the light of all that I have stated, therefore, I do not
           find that it would be unduly harsh for her to  return  and  that
           the circumstances are sufficiently exceptional to justify her be
           granted leave to remain."

    6. Therefore the appeal involves two steps, the first being to determine
       whether there is an error of law in the determination of  the  first-
       tier Tribunal and the second, if I find there was an error,  to  hear
       evidence or submissions to enable me to remake the decision.

  The grounds of appeal

    7. The respondent in her grounds of appeal states the following which  I
       summarise. The Tribunal has erred in  law  in  its  approach  to  the
       Article 8 assessment in the following ways.  It  was  made  clear  in
       Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) that the Article 8  assessment  shall
       only be carried out where  there  are  compelling  circumstances  not
       recognised by the Immigration Rules. In this case  the  Tribunal  has
       failed to identify why the appellant circumstances are so  compelling
       that they amount to exceptional circumstances outside the Immigration
       Rules.

    8. The Tribunal's assessment of s117B of the  Immigration  Act  2014  is
       incorrect. At paragraph 28, the Tribunal has found that the appellant
       and her husband established their relationship prior to coming to the
       United Kingdom they have not established their relationship when  she
       is here unlawfully. This is illogical, whilst the appellant  and  her
       husband may have established their relationship prior coming  to  the
       UK, they have established their relationship together in the UK  when
       the appellant has overstayed  her  permitted  leave.  Thus  her  stay
       during their relationship in the UK was unlawful and therefore little
       weight should be given to it which the Tribunal has failed to do.

    9. The second ground of appeal states that the Judge has failed to  give
       reasons or adequate reasons for  finding  on  material  matters.  The
       Tribunal  has  failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons  for  why   the
       appellant's circumstances are either compelling or  exceptional.  The
       appellant  and  her  husband  were  fully  aware   throughout   their
       relationship  here  that  the  appellant's  immigration  status   was
       unlawful and that they may not be able to continue their relationship
       together in this country. Whilst the Tribunal found at  paragraph  25
       and 27 that had the appellant sought to be included as a dependent of
       her husband's application, she would have been granted leave. This is
       pure speculation on the Tribunal's behalf. The Tribunal  ignored  the
       fact that the appellant did not seek to be included as a dependent of
       her husband and failed to seek to regularise her stay  for  almost  a
       decade after her leave expired and approximately  three  years  after
       her husband had been granted leave. No  reasonable  explanations  for
       these delays have been given and the appellant should  not  be  given
       credit for actions which she did not take. Article 8  does  not  give
       the appellant the right to choose where  she  exercises  that  family
       life.

   10. There are no is insurmountable obstacles to the  appellant's  husband
       returning to Ukraine where they have bought  lived  the  majority  of
       their lives, including their youth, formative  years  and  education,
       speak the language and may have family and friends there. Whilst  the
       Tribunal found at paragraph 26 that they would be  unable  to  obtain
       employment in Ukraine due to their ages, the Tribunal has  not  based
       these findings on any independent evidence and it is therefore merely
       speculation. It is submitted that there is no evidence. The appellant
       and her husband would be in a position no different to  that  of  any
       other persons their age in Ukraine.

   11. They both have savings and family in Ukraine who can help  them  with
       seeking employment and accommodation. It remains the  choice  of  the
       appellant's husband as to whether he relocates to Ukraine or not  and
       it is a decision he and the appellant must make and not the  Tribunal
       on their behalf. If the husband  chooses  to  remain  in  the  United
       Kingdom,  they  can  maintain   contact   via   modern   methods   of
       communication and visits. It is proportionate to remove the appellant
       given her blatant disregard for immigration law of this  country  and
       given there is no evidence nor consideration by the  Tribunal  as  to
       whether she would even meet the requirements of entry clearance.

   12. Whilst the Tribunal has found that the appellant  has  established  a
       private life in the UK, the Judge has failed to direct himself to the
       case of Nasim and Others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025  (IAC),  where
       it was found that the use of Article  8  had  very  limited  use  for
       private  life  cases  which  did  not  interfere  with  the  person's
       personal, moral and physical integrity. The Supreme  Court  in  Patel
       and others v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  UKSC
       72 serves to refocus attention on the nature and purpose of Article 8
       of the ECHR and, in particular, to recognise that article 8's limited
       utility  in  private  life  cases  that  are  far  removed  from  the
       protection of an  individual's  moral  and  physical  integrity.  The
       Tribunal made no reference to  the  appellant's  moral  and  physical
       integrity, and it is submitted that the appellant's circumstances  in
       the United Kingdom and are not sufficient for her to allege that  her
       removal would breach her moral and physical integrity. There are  not
       very significant obstacles to  the  appellant's  re-integration  into
       Ukraine and there is nothing in the appellant's  private  life  which
       cannot be continued in Ukraine.

   13. With regard to paragraph  117B  of  the  Immigration  Act  2014,  the
       decision to remove her is proportionate. The appellant  stay  in  the
       United Kingdom has been unlawful since her leave expired  in  October
       2003, therefore little weight should be given to a  private  life  in
       those circumstances and the Tribunal has failed to  do  so.  Secondly
       whilst the Tribunal has found at paragraph 27, that the appellant can
       speak English  and  can  obtain  employment,  the  evidence  suggests
       otherwise. The appellant used a Russian interpreter  at  the  hearing
       which does not suggest that her English is sufficient to  either  for
       her to integrate or prevent her becoming a burden on public resources
       or able to obtain employment and become financially independent.

  The hearing

   14. I heard submissions from both parties as to whether there is an error
       of law in the determination of the first-tier Tribunal.

  Decision on the error of law

   15. Having considered the determination as a whole, I  find  the  judge's
       consideration of the appellant's appeal in respect of  Article  8  is
       materially flawed. The appellant did not apply for further  leave  to
       remain in this country pursuant to  the  Immigration  Rules  but  her
       application was pursuant to Article 8 of the European  Convention  on
       Human Rights in respect of her family life with  her  husband  of  27
       years.

   16. The exceptional circumstances found to exist in this appeal were,  as
       the Judge  found,  that  had  the  appellant  added  herself  to  her
       husband's claim as his dependent in his application in  2003,  it  is
       difficult to see why she would have been granted leave to  remain  as
       his dependent. The Judge accepted the  appellant's  explanation  that
       her solicitor told her to wait. The Judge went on to say that it does
       not surprise him given the poor advice that  appellant  is  often  do
       appear to receive. In making this finding the Judge did not  consider
       that the appellant remained in this country unlawfully for  10  years
       and speculated that the appellant did not apply because of bad advice
       given to her.

   17. The Judge took into account section  117B  and  stated  that  "little
       weight should be given to a relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying
       partner that is established by a person at a time when the person  is
       in the United Kingdom unlawfully". The  Judge  stated  that  this  is
       clearly not the case here as the appellant and her  British  national
       husband having been married for 27 years.

   18. The Judge did not take into account that most  of  this  relationship
       was established outside Ukraine and the family life  that  they  have
       enjoyed in the United Kingdom was at the time when the appellant  was
       in this country unlawfully and had made  no  attempts  whatsoever  to
       regularise her stay for over 10 years.

   19. The Judge also stated that the appellant speaks English  even  though
       she gave evidence through a Russian  interpreter.  The  Judge  stated
       that the appellant was extremely nervous and "she can speak a  degree
       of English". The Judge erred in  his  finding  that  given  that  the
       appellant has demonstrated that she speaks English to a  degree,  she
       should be granted leave to remain. Furthermore, on the evidence  this
       is a perverse  finding  that  nervousness  precludes  a  person  from
       speaking English.

   20. The Judge found  that  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
       appellant and her husband  continuing  family  life  in  the  Ukraine
       because both of them would not be able to  find  jobs  due  to  their
       ages. The Judge did not base this finding on any  objective  evidence
       that people over 50 cannot obtain jobs  in  the  Ukraine.  The  Judge
       thereby fell into material error.

   21. Having considered the determination as a whole I  conclude  that  the
       Judge erred in law  in  his  evaluation  of  the  appellant's  appeal
       pursuant to Article 8 and I therefore set aside the decision  in  its
       entirety and remake the decision.

   22. I find that if the appellant's husband can  support  the  appellant's
       application to join him as his spouse, she can  make  an  application
       from her home country. The Judge said that  the  appellant's  husband
       has been able to support her and her two sons and there is no  reason
       to suggest that he  cannot  continue  to  do  so.  This  should  have
       suggested to the Judge that if the appellant's  husband  is  able  to
       fulfil the maintenance and  other  requirements  of  the  Immigration
       Rules there is no reason for why  she  should  not  apply  for  entry
       clearance as a spouse from her home country.

   23. I have taken into account the case of Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 (where
       the issue for determination was framed thus):

           'In determining an appeal under section 65  of  the  Immigration
           and Asylum Act 1999 (the 1999 Act) (now sections 82  and  84  of
           the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (2002  Act))
           against the Secretary of State's refusal of leave to  remain  on
           the  ground  that  to  remove  the  appellant  would   interfere
           disproportionately with his article 8 right to respect  for  his
           family life, when, if ever, is it  appropriate  to  dismiss  the
           appeal on the basis that the appellant  should  be  required  to
           leave the  country  and  seek  leave  to  enter  from  an  entry
           clearance officer abroad?'

   24. In that case the appeal was allowed and it was said that:

           "I am far from suggesting that the  Secretary  of  State  should
           routinely apply  this  policy  in  all  but  exceptional  cases.
           Rather it seems to me that only comparatively rarely,  certainly
           in family cases involving children, should an article  8  appeal
           be dismissed on the basis that it  would  be  proportionate  and
           more appropriate for the  appellant  to  apply  for  leave  from
           abroad."

   25. The effect of this passage in Chikwamba was  subsequently  considered
       by the Court of Appeal in TG (Central African Republic)  v  Secretary
       of State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 997.  In that  case,
       Keene LJ said that:

           "These  are  fact-sensitive  issues  and  inevitably  there  are
           factual differences between this case and Chikwamba, not all  to
           this appellant's  advantage.  For  example,  just  to  take  two
           matters, Mrs Chikwamba had married at a time  when  removals  to
           Zimbabwe were suspended. This appellant, during some of the time
           when he has been living with his partner in this country,  seems
           to have disappeared from the official radar screen for a  period
           of something around two years. Such matters as  the  immigration
           history of an appellant are  clearly  relevant,  as  Lord  Brown
           indicated himself at paragraph 42. Then Mrs  Chikwamba,  it  was
           accepted, could not realistically  leave  her  child  behind  in
           order to seek entry clearance from Zimbabwe,  so  in  that  case
           there would have been an impact on the child who had a right  to
           remain in the United Kingdom."

   26. Buxton LJ added that:

           "... it is quite clear  that  a  very  strong  consideration  in
           Chikwamba was the fact that it  was  the  wife  who  was  to  be
           removed from the country, inevitably in the companionship of her
           four-year-old child.  That  is  made  absolutely  plain  as  the
           determining factor in paragraph 8 of the speech of Baroness Hale
           of Richmond."

   27. Chikwamba was again considered in R (Forrester) v Secretary of  State
       for the Home Department [2008] EWHC 2307 (Admin) in which Sullivan  J
       said at paragraphs 13-14:

           "... what is the purpose  of  requiring  the  claimant  and  her
           daughter to return to Jamaica? I readily accept that there is  a
           general need to maintain a fair and firm immigration system  and
           to deter those, who do not have entry clearance, from coming  to
           this country without entry clearance and, as it were, jumping or
           bypassing the queue.  However,  there  is  no  question  of  the
           claimant jumping the queue in the  present  case.  There  is  no
           question of her coming to this country when  she  did  not  have
           entry clearance. She came to this country entirely lawfully. She
           was in this country lawfully for a number of years and the  only
           reason why her continued presence was not lawful  was  the  fact
           that a cheque [sent with her application for  further  leave  to
           remain as the spouse of someone who was present and  settled  in
           the United Kingdom] was not honoured by  her  bank.  It  is  one
           thing to say that one should have a fair  and  firm  immigration
           policy, it is quite another to  say  that  one  should  have  an
           immigration policy which is utterly  inflexible  and  rigid  and
           pays not the slightest regard to the particular circumstances of
           the individual case."

   28. In paragraph 41 of the speech of Lord Brown [in Chikwamba]  he  asked
       whether the real rationale for the policy was:

           "... perhaps the rather different one of deterring  people  from
           coming to  this  country  in  the  first  place  without  having
           obtained entry clearance and to do so by subjecting those who do
           come to the very substantial disruption of their lives  involved
           in returning them abroad?"

   29. The case of Chikwamba does not exempt the appellant  from  satisfying
       the requirements to obtain an entry clearance from her home  country.
       I do not understand Chikwamba to say that an appellant can circumvent
       the requirements of the Immigration Rules if she is  already  in  the
       country and therefore should not be required to return  to  her  home
       country to make an application in the appropriate category. Chikwamba
       states that only  in  exceptional  cases  and  cases  which  normally
       involve  children  that  it  would  not  be  proportionate  and  more
       appropriate for the appellant to apply for leave from abroad.

   30. I find that there are no exceptional circumstances in this  case  for
       why the appellant should not apply for entry clearance from  Ukraine.
       I find that the appellant has been in this country illegally  for  10
       years and therefore should return to  Ukraine  and  apply  for  entry
       clearance.

  DECISION

  For the reasons given above, the determination of the First-tier Tribunal
  is set aside.

  I remake the  decision  on  appeal  and  dismiss  the  appellants  appeal
  pursuant to Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.



Signed by

Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                   The 26th day of June 2015
