
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22690/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 April 2017                              |On 4 May 2017                 |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SOO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Representative


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will  refer  to  the
    original appellant, a citizen of Nigeria born  on  [  ]  1975,  as  the
    appellant herein.  He appeals the decision of the Secretary of State on
    28 May 2015 to refuse his application for  leave  to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds.

2.   The Secretary of State  records  that  the  appellant  claims  to  have
    arrived in this country on 18 March 1999 as  a  visitor.   Applications
    made in October 2008 and 2012 were refused.   However,  an  application
    made on 29 November 2013 on human rights grounds  was  allowed  to  the
    extent it was remitted to the Secretary of State on 11 December 2014 by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lindsley.  The reason for this  was  that  in
    the view of the judge the Secretary of State had not made  findings  in
    accordance with Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration
    Act 2009 in relation to the appellant's two sons, whom I shall refer to
    as D and H.

3.   D was born in Nigeria on 15 June 2003.  He had stayed with  his  mother
    in Nigeria until he was 6 or 7.  While the appellant had played no part
    in D's care, D had spent holidays with the  appellant's  brother.   The
    appellant had sent money for schooling and clothes to his brother.

4.   Judge Lindsley records that D had arrived in the UK on 9  January  2014
    following a call from D's mother to the appellant about  his  impending
    arrival.  The appellant had collected D, who had then lived  with  him.
    However, in  May  2014  following  an  allegation  of  assault  by  the
    appellant against D, D was taken into care.  H was born on 29 June 2009
    and has lived in the UK all his life although it appears  that  neither
    child has status in the UK.  The appellant himself has never had  leave
    to remain here.

5.    At  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Judge  the  appellant  gave
    evidence.  He stated he was still in a relationship with H's mother but
    they did not live together.

6.   The judge found that the appellant could not succeed under Appendix  FM
    and concluded his determination as follows:

         "15. In respect of EX.1, EX.2 and 276 ADE of the Immigration  Rules
             I make the following findings.  The appellant has lived in the
             UK for in excess of 17 years.  He has two  minor  children  in
             the UK.  For reasons, I will  set  out  below,  I  accept  the
             appellant has a strong family life with his children including
             D who is currently in care.  Social Services in Courage  [sic]
             the reinforcement of the relationship  between  the  appellant
             and D and have considered the increase in contact between them
             and allowed the appellant unsupervised contact with D for  his
             birthday.  The appellant was not prosecuted for assault.   The
             appellant has an ongoing relationship with his  younger  son's
             mother.   The  appellant's  removal  would   therefore   cause
             interference with his rights to a family life and those of his
             children and partner.  The appellant  has  lived,  worked  and
             socialised with friends and  family  members  in  the  UK.   I
             accept that the appellant has a private life in the  UK.   The
             appellant's removal would cause interference to his rights  to
             a private life.   I  must  consider  whether  the  appellant's
             removal from the UK would cause disproportionate  interference
             to the appellant's rights to a private life.


         16.  The appellant has lived in the UK for 16 years.   He  has  not
             left.  He has formed a strong family life in the UK.   I  find
             that the appellant  has  extremely  limited  connections  with
             Nigeria where he has not returned for 41 years.  The appellant
             has lived in the UK for 17  years  during  which  he  has  had
             numerous relationships, fathered  children  and  formed  long-
             lasting relationships.  He  has  worked  in  the  UK  and  has
             integrated into UK life.


         17.  The appellant has two children born in the  UK,  to  different
             mothers.  The appellant's children are qualifying children.  I
             have evidence  from  H's  mother  concerning  the  appellant's
             contact and emotional and financial support with him.  I  have
             received detailed, entirely consistent and compelling evidence
             from the appellant  concerning  the  extent  of  his  contact.
             Furthermore, there  is  official  documentation  from  Hackney
             Social Services and the court in respect  of  the  appellant's
             level of contact with D.  The appellant's evidence in relation
             to his sons indicated that he was not seeking to  bolster  his
             evidence of all.   He  added  compelling  evidence  before  me
             indicating that he would take H  on  contact  visits  with  D.
             Hackney Social Services support the appellant  having  greater
             contact  with  D  and  the  court  is  considering   long-term
             strategies, which include  returning  him  to  the  appellant.
             Having regard to my findings  herein,  I  found  the  evidence
             before me to be compelling and credible and  accept  that  the
             appellant has strong contact with his children in the UK.  The
             appellant's removal would cause significant interference  both
             to the appellant's rights to a family life with his children I
             was particularly impressed that the appellant  indicated  that
             the main reason that he wanted to stay in the UK was the  love
             of his children and the children's own rights.  In respect  of
             S55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009  I
             find that it is in the appellant's children's  best  interests
             for the appellant to remain in the UK where  he  can  continue
             frequent contact with them and provide them with the necessary
             emotional and financial support that they  require  throughout
             their childhood.

         18.  The appellant has no criminal convictions.  I have  regard  to
             the public interest noting section 117B (6) of the Immigration
             Rules in particular.  I note the case law  of  MA  (Pakistan).
             The judgment indicates that  the  appropriate  test  tribunals
             should ask are the following:


             1.   Is the applicant liable for deportation...
             2.   Does the applicant have a genuine and subsisting parental
                  relationship with the child?
             3.   Is the child a qualifying child  as  defined  in  section
                  117D?
             4.   Is it unreasonable to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the
                  United Kingdom?


             It is stated that if the answer to the first  question  is  no
             and to the other three questions is yes, the  conclusion  must
             be that Article 8 is infringed.  The focus of the paragraph is
             purely on the interests of the child.  No justification  could
             be seen from reading the concept of reasonableness  so  as  to
             include the consideration of the conduct  immigration  history
             of the parents as part of an overall analysis  of  the  public
             interest.


         19.  I find that in this case the appellant clearly has  a  genuine
             and subsisting relationship with his sons and find that it  is
             unreasonable for the children to leave the UK where they  have
             lived all of their lives and in excess of seven years and have
             relationships with other family members.  In the light of  the
             totality of my findings above, I  find  that  the  appellant's
             relationship with his sons fulfils the requirements of section
             117B (6).  I find that the  appellant's  children's  interests
             outweigh the public interest in this case.


         20.  I further note that the appellant has a partner in the UK  who
             supports his appeal.  Finally, I note that there  has  been  a
             delay in the present  case  over  the  past  3  years  without
             explanation and find that the appellant has developed a strong
             family life over the course of that delay at no fault  of  his
             own (EB (Kosovo).


         21.  In conclusion, in the light  of  the  appellant's  significant
             family life in the UK and the best interests of  his  children
             and his exceptional circumstances, I find that the appellant's
             deportation is disproportionate in all the circumstances."


7.   Accordingly the judge allowed the appellant's appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

8.   The respondent applied for permission to appeal pointing out  that  the
    appellant's children had no status in the United Kingdom.  In ground  1
    it was submitted that the appellant's  supervised  visits  appeared  to
    entail little more than "face to face contact" and the judge's decision
    that there existed  a  strong  family  life  with  D  was  inadequately
    reasoned.  The appellant had not lived with D for over two and  a  half
    years and the visits to D were largely supervised and limited to once a
    month.   It  was  unclear  how  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
    relationship for the purposes of Section 117B(6)  could  be  made  out.
    D's welfare  was  looked  after  by  Social  Services  and  fundamental
    decisions regarding control and direction were not  the  responsibility
    of the appellant.

9.   In ground 2 it was submitted that the judge had not clearly  identified
    where the best interests of the children lay.  The judge had  erred  at
    paragraph  19  of  the  decision  in  considering   the   question   of
    reasonableness.  It did not appear that the  appellant's  partner  (who
    had an outstanding  appeal)  gave  evidence  and  there  was  not  much
    documentation relating to the welfare of the children  and  ability  to
    integrate in Nigeria.  The judge had failed to consider why  a  private
    life  "to  the  standards  of  the  returning  country  could  not   be
    established."  The judge had treated the reasonableness assessment  "as
    one relating solely to  the  private  life  of  the  children  with  no
    reference to a wider family assessment."  The educational ties were not
    placed in a "real world setting"  -  neither  of  the  parents  of  the
    children had any basis to remain in the UK and had no future  right  to
    education.  It would not  be  unreasonable  for  H  or  D  (should  the
    appellant assume parental responsibility) to return to Nigeria with the
    support of their parents.

10.  It was submitted in paragraph 7 of  the  grounds  that  the  judge  had
    failed to undertake the relevant balancing exercise and only considered
    those factors which fell in the appellant's favour without  having  any
    regard to the wider public interests and  immigration  history  of  the
    parents contrary to the decision in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

11.  In paragraph 8 of the grounds it  was  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    erred in adopting a freestanding Article 8 assessment when  considering
    the appellant's private life and had not considered whether there would
    be very significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's  integration  into
    Nigeria.  Compelling circumstances were not identified  and  the  judge
    had not referred to the public  interest  provisions  in  Section  117B
    apart from Section 117B(6).  Little  weight  should  be  given  to  the
    private life of the appellant built up when he had been in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully.  It was not apparent from  the  decision  that  the
    public interest considerations had been afforded the correct weight  in
    the proportionality exercise.  Any delay in the decision-making process
    was  not  inordinate  and  the  appellant  had  not  been  in  any  way
    prejudiced.  Any delay should be seen in  the  context  of  the  public
    interest provisions set out in Section 117B.

12.  Permission to appeal was granted on 28 February 2017  by  a  First-tier
    Judge who found it arguable that the judge had erred in not considering
    the  entirety  of  Section  117B  and  whether  there  would  be   very
    significant obstacles to the appellant's  integration  and  to  Section
    117B(4) - the appellant's status  being  precarious.   It  was  further
    arguable that the judge had erred in considering  the  children's  best
    interests as none of the children had any right to reside in the UK and
    that supervision was required for the appellant to meet D, who  was  in
    care.  H and his mother had no status in the UK and  had  been  refused
    leave to remain although an appeal was pending.

13.  At the hearing before  me  the  appellant  was  unrepresented  and  the
    procedures and the grounds of appeal were explained and  Mr  Nath  went
    through the points slowly and clearly.  It was submitted there  was  no
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship and  Social  Services  had
    made the fundamental decisions.  Reference had been made in the grounds
    to MA (Pakistan) and it was submitted that the judge had  not  properly
    directed himself in paragraph 18 of his decision.

14.  The appellant submitted that he had a relationship with  the  children,
    whom he saw regularly.  There was  a  plan  to  introduce  him  to  the
    children and give him unsupervised access  but  this  depended  on  him
    getting immigration status in the UK.  D had special educational  needs
    and H had been in the UK for eight years.  D would not  be  welcome  on
    return to Nigeria and the family there did  not  want  him  back.   The
    appellant said he would not wish to leave D in the UK with no father or
    mother.  He accepted  that  as  had  been  found  by  First-tier  Judge
    Lindsley that he did admit that he had assaulted D.

15.  As  regards  what  should  happen  if  a  material  error  of  law  was
    identified Mr Nath submitted that in  the  light  of  the  fact-finding
    required there would need to be a fresh hearing.  The appellant pointed
    out that there had already been considerable delay.

16.  At the conclusion of the hearing I  reserved  my  decision.   I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with the determination of  the  First-
    tier Judge if it was materially flawed in law.

17.  There do appear to be considerable difficulties in this decision.   The
    judge does not appear to have weighed in the balance the fact that  the
    appellant has never had leave to remain in the United Kingdom  and  his
    status was nothing if not precarious.

18.  The judge  does  not  appear  to  have  directed  himself  properly  in
    paragraph  16  in  considering  the  appellant's   "extremely   limited
    connections" with Nigeria as the  respondent  submits  in  the  grounds
    (there are plainly typographical problems  in  this  paragraph  as  the
    appellant has certainly not been away been away  from  Nigeria  for  41
    years as the judge wrote).

19.  The judge's approach to what is said in MA (Pakistan) in  paragraph  18
    of his decision does appear to be flawed.

20.  It appears to be based on what is said in paragraphs 19 and  20  of  MA
    (Pakistan) and while it is a correct reflection of that decision  until
    the words "Article 8 is infringed" from what follows  it  appears  that
    the judge has taken what is said in MA (Pakistan) out of  context.   It
    is clear that while the Court of  Appeal  had  reservations  about  the
    arguments advanced on behalf of the Secretary of State in the light  of
    MM (Uganda) v Secretary of State [2016] EWCA Civ 450 it concluded  that
    it should not depart from what was held in that  decision.   While  the
    case of MM (Uganda) was concerned with foreign criminals

         "... the critical point is that Section 117C(5) is in  substance  a
         free-standing provision in the same way  as  Section  117B(6),  and
         even so the court in MM (Uganda) held that  wider  public  interest
         considerations must be taken into account when applying the 'unduly
         harsh' criterion.  It seems to me that it must be equally  so  with
         respect to the reasonableness criterion  in  Section  117B(6).   It
         would not  be  appropriate  to  distinguish  that  decision  simply
         because I have reservations whether it is correct.  Accordingly, in
         line with the approach in that case, I will analyse the appeals  on
         the basis that the Secretary of State's submission on this point is
         correct and that the only significance of Section 117B(6)  is  that
         where the seven year Rule is satisfied, it  is  a  factor  of  some
         weight leaning in favour of leave to  remain  being  granted."  (at
         paragraph 45 per Elias LJ).


21.  It is worthwhile  observing  in  paragraph  47  that  even  applying  a
    "narrow reasonableness test" the court rejected the submission that the
    best interests assessment  automatically  resolved  the  reasonableness
    question.

         "Even where the child's best interests are to stay, it may still be
         not unreasonable to require the child to leave.  That  will  depend
         upon a careful analysis of the nature and extent of  the  links  in
         the UK and in the country where it is proposed  he  should  return.
         What could not be considered, however, would  be  the  conduct  and
         immigration history of the parents."

    The judge may have misread the decision by taking paragraphs 19 and  20
    out of context  or  in  misinterpreting  paragraph  47.   For  whatever
    reason, the judge appears to have misunderstood the decision.

22.  This is an unusual case in that the appellant has limited access  to  D
    and does not live with either child.  As stated  above,  neither  child
    has any right to reside in the UK.  The complaint made in  the  grounds
    that there had not been a proper balancing exercise in the light of the
    decision in MA (Pakistan) is made out.  The  grounds  identify  various
    failings in the decision.  Although the judge refers to delay  in  this
    case - and I appreciate the appellant's position that he  is  reluctant
    to encounter further delay - the circumstances of this case are unusual
    and complex.  I note that on 23 December 2014 the  Secretary  of  State
    provided the appellant with forms  in  which  to  give  any  additional
    grounds for consideration and the appellant responded  on  29  December
    2014 and 20 March 2014 with  such  grounds.   The  Secretary  of  State
    states in paragraph 7 of her decision that she had considered  all  the
    evidence and information including the evidence from  Hackney  Children
    and Young People Services and the appellant's Statement  of  Additional
    Grounds.  Her decision was arrived at on 28  May  2015.   The  decision
    itself is some fourteen pages long.  I do not find that the delay could
    be characterised as inordinate or that prejudice has been caused.

23.  The determination is clearly materially flawed in law for  the  various
    reasons advanced by Mr Nath.  He submitted that given the  difficulties
    a fresh hearing was likely to be required and I  agree.   I  appreciate
    the appellant wants this matter resolved but the judge appears to  have
    cut short the fact-finding required because of the misinterpretation of
    MA (Pakistan) and in the light of that and the other difficulties  with
    the decision I agree with Mr Nath that a fresh hearing is required.  As
    the respondent points out in the grounds, it does not appear there  was
    much documentation relating to the ties of the children, their  welfare
    and ability to integrate in Nigeria.   In  the  circumstances  a  fresh
    hearing de novo is required.



Notice of Decision

For the reasons I have given the determination of the  First-tier  Judge  is
materially flawed in law.  The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.

I direct a fresh hearing before the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard  by  a
different First-tier Judge.

Anonymity Direction

It is appropriate to continue the anonymity direction  made  by  the  First-
tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.



Signed                                  Date 26 April 2017


G. Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal

