

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/22449/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Field House               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 12th February 2015               |On: 21st April 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                 Mr Chao Li
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Revill, Counsel instructed by Astor Visas
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of China date of birth 9th  June  1982.  He
    appeals with permission[1]  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge T. Jones) to dismiss his appeal against a  decision  to
    refuse to vary his leave and to remove them  from  the  United  Kingdom
    pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999[2].


 2. The Appellant came to the United Kingdom in February 2002 as a  student
    and had remained here ever since. The  application  that  prompted  the
    Respondent's  decisions  had  been  for  indefinite  leave  to   remain
    following ten years' continuous  lawful  residence,  but  it  had  been
    conceded before the First-tier Tribunal that there had been a break  in
    his lawful leave between 2009 and 2011 and that the  appeal  could  not
    succeed with reference to the Immigration Rules. The case had proceeded
    on Article 8 grounds alone.


 3. The basis of the Appellant's case was his established private  life  in
    the UK but also what he considered to be his family life:  he is  in  a
    long-term relationship with a Ms Wu,  a Chinese woman who had  recently
    acquired British nationality. Although they did not live together  this
    was a committed relationship and they hoped to marry in the future.


 4. The First-tier Tribunal did not accept that the relationship with Ms Wu
    fell under the rubric of 'family life' [paragraph 12].  Although it was
    accepted that they are "boyfriend and girlfriend"  it  was  found  that
    there was  no  intention  to  live  together  other  than  when  it  is
    financially expedient to do so.  The Judge found Ms  Wu  to  be  "cool"
    about the prospect of living  with  the  Appellant.  Having  made  that
    finding the Tribunal went on to consider proportionality "as if  family
    life in the United Kingdom had been established on their claim  at  its
    height".  The claim fell outwith the Rules.   Although there was an on-
    going relationship there was no intention for it to  develop.  If  that
    changed in the future she could go  to  China  with  him  or  it  could
    continue by "modern means of  communication".  They  both  have  family
    members in China to whom they could return.  The Appellant has been  in
    the UK for a long time but he has never  had  settled  status  and  has
    known that throughout the time that he has spent with Ms Wu.  He  would
    not have any difficulty in re-establishing his private life  in  China.
    The determination concludes that in all the circumstances  his  removal
    could not be said to be disproportionate.


 5. The grounds of appeal are that the determination contains the following
    errors of law:


        i) Failure to  properly  assess  the  substantive  quality  of  the
           relationship. It was (implicitly) accepted that  they  had  been
           together since 2002. The Judge failed to give  consideration  to
           relevant authority on whether there can be a family life in  the
           absence of co-habitation: see Kroon v The Netherlands (1995)  19
           EHRR 263.


       ii) In finding that any family life could be replicated in China the
           Tribunal erred in failing to consider whether Ms Wu  would  want
           to relocate or whether she could in fact  relocate,  she  having
           acquired British nationality needing  a visa for China.  Overall
           there was a failure to consider the "reasonableness"  of  Ms  Wu
           relocating.


      iii) The finding that the relationship  could  continue  via  "modern
           means of communication" was irrational given the  evidence  that
           the couple visited each other (from their respective  cities  of
           residence, Leeds and Birmingham) on a regular basis.


 6. The Respondent submits that the decision could not have been otherwise.
    Even taken at its highest this is a couple who live apart in the UK. If
    their relationship reaches a point where they demonstrate commitment to
    each other by, for instance, marriage or co-habitation, an  application
    can be made for entry clearance under the Immigration Rules.


    No Error of Law


 7. The primary focus of  Ms  Revill's  submission  was  that  insufficient
    attention had been paid to the quality of the relationship.  Article  8
    requires decision-makers to look beyond form at substance, and, it  was
    submitted, this was a relationship of duration and quality akin to that
    discussed in Kroon.


 8. The facts  of  Kroon  were  very  different.  The  case  was  primarily
    concerned with the  discriminatory  practice  in  Dutch  civil  law  of
    mandating that a child's father be recorded as the man who  is  married
    to his mother, whether or not that was the true biological  father.  Ms
    Kroon had four children to a man to whom she was not  married  yet  the
    Registrar of Births insisted that their father be  named  as  her  long
    estranged husband, whom she had not  seen  for  years.   The  principle
    which Ms Revill relies upon is the - apparently uncontentious  -  point
    that the court accepted that the children in the case had a family life
    with their biological father even though he was not married to, or even
    living with, their mother. The court recognised that 'family life' is a
    matter of substance rather than formality. For example, family life can
    exist between a couple  who  are  engaged  but  not  yet  married,  the
    engagement sufficing as a demonstration of their commitment.


 9. The determination does not refer to Kroon nor is it clear  whether  the
    Tribunal had been referred to  it.  I  cannot  however  see  where  the
    Tribunal had failed to apply the  principle  for  which  this  case  is
    cited. It is  clear  from  the  determination  that  the  Tribunal  was
    concerned with the substantive quality of the relationship.  Particular
    emphasis is placed on  a) the fact that these  two  young  people  have
    chosen not to live together except when it was financially expedient to
    do so and b) that there are no apparent plans  to  do  in  the  future.
    The Tribunal was entitled to take into account, for instance, the  fact
    that Ms Wu was "cool' about the prospect of living with the  Appellant.
    That was relevant to the Tribunal's assessment of the  quality  of  the
    relationship and the level of commitment between the two.   In her oral
    submissions Ms Revill criticised the Tribunal's  failure  to  expressly
    accept that they had been boyfriend and  girlfriend  for  12  years.  I
    would agree with the grounds [at 6] that the Tribunal does not  dispute
    the evidence that this was the case. I cannot  find  any  justification
    for thinking that the First-tier Tribunal ignored the  length  of  this
    relationship. It is apparent from the determination that the Judge  was
    aware that they claimed to have got together in 2002 [see for  instance
    paragraphs 4 and 6].  I do not  find  any  error  in  approach  to  the
    question of 'family life'.


10. The  remaining  grounds  are  concerned  with  the  approach  taken  to
    proportionality. Since I have upheld the Tribunal's findings on whether
    this relationship amounted to a 'family life' I  can  deal  with  these
    briefly. It may be that the references to Ms Wu being able to accompany
    the Appellant to China were insufficiently reasoned  in  light  of  her
    British nationality [see Sanade [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC)] and  the  fact
    that her right to enter China may have been affected by the acquisition
    of that status.   I agree that  references  to  the  "modern  means  of
    communication" are very often unfortunate and poorly reasoned.  In this
    case however the evidence was  that  this  couple  lived  in  different
    cities and that at the date of the appeal were only seeing  each  other
    every couple of months[3]. Their relationship was, unusually, conducted
    primarily  by  "modern  means  of  communication"  such  as   "chatting
    applications". The point the Judge  was  making  was  that  this  could
    continue. The interference amounted to not being able to see each other
    every  couple  of  months.  I  find  it  difficult  to   envisage   the
    circumstance  where  that  could  be  said  to  be  a  disproportionate
    interference with family life.  As  Mr  Avery  rightly  notes,  if  the
    relationship develops to the point where the parties become engaged  or
    get married, it will be open  to  the  Appellant  to  apply  for  entry
    clearance as Ms Wu's partner.


11. For those reasons, and despite Ms Revill's very well made  submissions,
    I find that the decision contains no error of law.

    Decisions


12. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law
    and it is upheld.


13. I was not asked to make any direction for anonymity and I see no reason
    on the facts why one should be made.



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             10th April 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Ransley 16th October 2014
[2] Decisions dated 30th April 2014
[3] See for instance Ms Wu's witness statement dated 19th December 2013,
confirmed in Ms Revill's submissions

