
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22381/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 12th April 2017                    |On 5th May 2017                       |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                TUAN HUU PHAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Barnfield (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Phull, promulgated on 1st  June  2016,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham, Sheldon Court on 17th May 2016.  In the determination,  the
    judge allowed the appeal of the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Respondent
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Vietnam, who  was  born  on  15th
    November  1994.   He  appealed  against  the  refusal  of  asylum   and
    humanitarian protection under paragraph 336 of HC 395 (as amended) in a
    decision dated 9th June 2015 by the Respondent.  The relevant facts and
    documentary material are set out in the determination of IJ Phull under
    appeal as is the legal framework that is applicable here.  In  essence,
    the Appellant's claim is that he was an orphaned child  on  arrival  in
    the UK in 2011 and he had no contact with  any  individuals  or  family
    members in Vietnam.  This is accepted in the refusal letter of 4th  May
    2012.  The Respondent also accepts that there is a considerable problem
    in Vietnam of trafficking and that the system  of  protection  is  very
    limited and therefore effective protection does not  exist  in  Vietnam
    (see paragraph 30 of the determination).  The Appellant's claim  before
    the Tribunal was that the Appellant should  qualify  for  asylum  as  a
    member of a particular social group because of his particular  personal
    characteristic, a vulnerable childlike character, which would  put  the
    Appellant at risk of trafficking.  He also qualified  for  humanitarian
    protection (see paragraph 31).

 3. The judge observed that the Respondent had accepted in the 2012 refusal
    letter  that  there  was  a  considerable  problem  in   Vietnam   from
    trafficking and in particular trafficking for labour.   The  Respondent
    had also accepted the availability of the system of protection was very
    limited and therefore effective protection did  not  exist  in  Vietnam
    (see paragraph 41).  The appeal was allowed.

 4. The Grounds of Appeal state that the judge had incorrectly recorded the
    Respondent as conceding that there was a lack of sufficient  protection
    for victims of trafficking in Vietnam.  What was said by the  judge  at
    paragraphs 30 and 41 of the decision was not quite the position of  the
    Respondent Secretary of State.  Given this mistake, this  coloured  the
    view of the background country information  which  the  judge  apprised
    herself of and did not support her findings eventually made.

 5. On 19th September 2016, permission to appeal was granted on this basis.
     Permission was not granted on the basis  that  what  was  said  by  Mr
    Howard Christopher, the Appellant's foster parent, was  unsupported  by
    any evidence from professionals who were involved in the case.

The Hearing

 6. At the hearing before me on 12th  April  2017,  Ms  Aboni,  the  Senior
    Presenting Officer, on behalf of the Respondent relied upon the Grounds
    of Appeal.  First, that the judge erred in stating that  there  was  no
    sufficiency of protection available to the Appellant  in  Vietnam  (see
    paragraph 47) and this was the accepted  position  of  the  Respondent.
    What the refusal letter of 8th May 2012 had stated was that sufficiency
    of protection existed to the level referred to in  Horvath  in  Vietnam
    and as such protection would extend to the Appellant  to  mitigate  any
    future risk of becoming a victim of  human  trafficking.   Second,  the
    judge failed to give adequate reasons to  depart  from  the  wealth  of
    background information relied upon by the Respondent to  demonstrate  a
    sufficiency of protection in Vietnam which existed (see  paragraphs  26
    to 39 of the refusal letter).  Third, the judge failed to give adequate
    reasons, because the judge held that the Appellant was vulnerable,  and
    although this was the view of the  Appellant's  foster  carer,  it  was
    unsupported by any evidence  from  the  medical  professionals,  Social
    Services, or Route 21 who were involved in this case for  the  care  of
    the Appellant (see paragraph 20 of the Appellant's bundle).

 7. For his part, Mr Barnfield submitted that this was nothing more than  a
    disagreement with  the  decision  of  the  judge.   He  relied  on  the
    following reasons.  First, the Secretary of State had actually accepted
    in the refusal letter of 4th May 2012 that  there  was  a  considerable
    problem in Vietnam from trafficking (see paragraphs 28 to 32)  and  the
    Appellant would not be eligible for state support on return.  He  would
    be without resources.  He did even know the whole village that he  came
    from.  In fact, at paragraph 33 of the refusal letter acknowledged that
    young people in rural areas are most likely to be  targeted  for  human
    trafficking.  Secondly, at paragraph 38 of the refusal letter  admitted
    that the availability of the system of protection is very limited,  and
    therefore effective protection did not exist.  The willingness  on  the
    part of the state authorities to provide protection was not the same as
    an ability to do so, and this was well-established as the principle  of
    protection in the case law.

 8. In reply, Ms Aboni submitted that the background evidence was extremely
    clear that there were "a number of state  shortcomings  in  seeking  to
    tackle the problem of trafficking" (see paragraph 36).  However, whilst
    these shortcomings were acknowledged,  it  was  also  made  clear  (see
    paragraph 38) that, "with regard to the current situation  in  Vietnam,
    it is evident from the objective information above, that the Vietnamese
    state is certainly willing to afford protection to its citizens."   The
    Appellant  was  not  a  person  who  had  previously  been  trafficked.
    Moreover,  he  was  now  being  returned  as  an   adult.    In   these
    circumstances, the refusal letter was clear that "a sufficient level of
    state protection to the standard  referred  to  in  Horvath  exists  in
    Vietnam and as such protection would extend  to  you  to  mitigate  any
    future risk of becoming a victim of trafficking"  (paragraph  39).   In
    any event, the option of relocation was open to the Appellant.

No Error of Law

 9. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

10. First, the judge expressly took into account the 2012  refusal  letter,
    and noted that it  was  acknowledged  that  there  was  a  considerable
    problem in Vietnam from trafficking, and in particular trafficking  for
    labour, such that the Respondent accepted that the availability of  the
    system of protection was very limited (see paragraph  41).   The  judge
    came to this conclusion on the basis of the Respondent's own  reference
    to the United Nations Inter-Agency Project on  Human  Trafficking  (see
    paragraph 30 of the refusal letter).  The judge  actually  quoted  from
    this report that, "human trafficking affects women, men and children in
    Vietnam ..." (see paragraph 42).  If one then has  regard  to  what  is
    said at paragraph 28 of the refusal letter, it is quite clear  that  it
    is recognised in that paragraph that, "there is a  failure  to  provide
    evidence of increasing efforts to combat severe forms of trafficking in
    persons from the previous year".  Not only, therefore,  did  the  judge
    have regard to what was stated in the refusal  letter,  but  the  judge
    reached a decision  on  this  matter  which  cannot  be  deemed  to  be
    unreasonable on the evidence before the judge.

11. Second, the judge had regard  to  the  "Vietnam  Human  Rights  Network
    (Annual Report 2011)" which recognises the efforts being  made  by  the
    authorities in Vietnam but  concludes  that,  "nonetheless,  the  human
    trafficking problem in  Vietnam  kept  becoming  increasingly  serious,
    instead of being ameliorated" (see paragraph 29 of the refusal letter).



12. The judge was not oblivious to the fact that significant  efforts  were
    being made to tackle the problem (see particularly paragraph 43 of  the
    decision), but concluded that,

         "Having considered  this  evidence,  I  find  the  Appellant  is  a
         vulnerable young man.  He has no family to whom he can return to in
         Vietnam or support.  Although he speaks the national  language  the
         evidence is that  he  does  not  know  which  village  or  town  he
         originates from.  I accept he has  no  contact  with  his  father."
         (paragraph 44).

13. Finally, the judge considered the Appellant's vulnerability,  the  fact
    that he has trust  issues,  and  could  be  very  easily  exploited  in
    Vietnam, "where trafficking and labour exploitation is a  problem"  and
    he has "no-one to support him" (paragraph 45).  In these circumstances,
    the decision reached by the judge with respect to  this  Appellant  was
    one that was open to her.

14. There is no error of law.

Notice of Decision

15. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

16. No anonymity order is made.

17. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 3rd May 2017
