
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/22937/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11 March 2016                   |On 11 April 2016                   |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL
                                   Between
                                PAPIA SULTANA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr C Timson counsel instructed by Maya Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr A Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Simpson promulgated on 28 January 2014 which dismissed the
   Appellant's appeal against a decision to remove her from the UK following
   a refusal of leave to remain on the basis of long residence  and  outside
   the Rules on all grounds .
Background
4. The Appellant was born on 27 April 1994 and is a national of Bangladesh.
5. On 22 June 2006 the Appellant was  issued  with  entry  clearance  as  an
   accompanied child for  a  family  visit  valid  until  22  December  2006
   arriving in the UK on 4 July 2006 aged 12. On 31 July 2012 the  Appellant
   applied for indefinite leave to remain on the  basis  of  10  years  long
   residence.
6.  On  4  June  2013  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the   Appellant's
   application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:
   a) The Appellant had lived in the UK for 6 years and 11 months and only 5
      months of that period was lawful.
   b) The Appellant could not meet any of the requirements of Appendix FM as
      she had no partner or child in the UK.
   c) In relation to paragraph 276ADE(1) (vi) the only  provision  that  the
      Appellant  could  conceivably  meet  it  was  not  accepted  that  the
      Appellant had lost all ties with Bangladesh  given  that  she  was  19
      years old and had lived the majority of her life in Bangladesh.
   d) The Appellants claim that she had been abandoned  in  the  UK  by  her
      parents and that her sponsor Yaris Ali and his family had brought  her
      up  was  considered  but  it  was  not  accepted   that   there   were
      circumstances that warranted a grant outside the Rules.


The Judge's Decision
7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Simpson ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's
   decision. The Judge :
   a) Heard evidence from the Appellant and her Sponsor Yaris Ali.
   b) Considered the documents which  she  listed  at  paragraph  3  of  the
      decision.
   c) She found that the Appellant had not lived in the UK for more than  10
      years  lawfully  and  therefore  could  not  succeed  under  the  long
      residence provisions of the Rules.
   d) She did not accept that the Appellants cousin was unable  to  discover
      where the Appellants parents were living in Bangladesh.
   e) She did not accept that the Appellants aunt did  not  know  where  her
      brother, the Appellants father was living in Bangladesh.
   f) She could not understand why Mr Ali and his family had not reported to
      Social Services that the Appellant had been abandoned in the UK by her
      parents as they claimed.
   g) She found that the family had made a 'deliberate and cynical  decision
      to facilitate the Appellant remaining in  the  UK  until  she  reached
      adulthood, presumably in the hope that she would then be  entitled  to
      remain.'
   h) She did not  accept  the  Appellant  or  Sponsor  had  given  truthful
      evidence and did not accept that the Appellant  had  broken  all  ties
      with her family in Bangladesh or that her parents had disappeared.
   i) She was satisfied that the Appellant had family in Bangladesh.
8. Grounds of appeal were lodged  arguing  that  the  Judge  had  failed  to
   engage with the guidance given in Ogundimu (Article 8-new Rules)  Nigeria
   [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC) as to what constituted 'no ties'  having  had  no
   direct or indirect contact with family there and therefore any  ties  she
   had to Bangladesh were remote and she would be at  risk  returning  as  a
   lone woman.
9. Permission was refused on 3 April 2014 and the  application  was  renewed
   and refused again on 1 May 2014 by Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic  who  found
   that the grounds did nothing more than disagree with the findings of  the
   Judge and the outcome of the appeal and no  arguable  error  of  law  was
   identified.
10. The application was renewed and  permission  was  granted  by  the  High
   Court. On 8 October 2015 the Vice President of the Upper Tribunal C  M  G
   Ockleton stated 'The parties are reminded that the Upper Tribunal's  task
   is that set out in s12 of the 2007 Act.'

11.  At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr  Timson  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that :

   (a)The High Court  can  only  grant  permission  if  he  finds  that  the
   decisions of the First-tier and the Upper Tribunal are wrong in law.

   (b)Section 12 of the 2007 Act required the Tribunal to find whether there
   had been an error of law.

   (c)The  Judge  did  not  engage  with  Ogundimu  and  her  findings  were
   insufficient.

12. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Mc Vitie submitted that :

   a) The Judge found that  the  evidence  given  was  all  a  lies  to  her
      circumstances.

   b) The Judge found that she had immediate family in Bangladesh  therefore
      it was irrational to suggest that she had no ties.

   c) The decision of the High Court made no reference to the findings  made
      by the Judge none of which were challenged.

   d) How could Ogundimu possibly assist the Appellant?

13. In reply Mr Timson on behalf of the Appellant submitted:

   a) The Judge was confusing being abandoned with having no ties.

   b) The Judge needed to make other findings on the other issues not simply
      whether she was abandoned.

Legal Framework

14. In Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013]  UKUT  60  (IAC)  the
   Tribunal said that the natural and ordinary meaning of the word 'ties' in
   paragraph 399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  (HC194)  imports  a  concept
   involving something more than merely remote  or  abstract  links  to  the
   country of proposed deportation or removal. It  involves  there  being  a
   connection to life in that country. Consideration of whether a person has
   'no ties' to such a country must involve a rounded assessment of  all  of
   the relevant circumstances and is not to be limited to 'social,  cultural
   and family' circumstances.

15. In R (on the application of Akpan) [2015] EWCA  Civ  1266  it  was  held
   that in refusing to grant leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE  of  the
   Immigration Rules to a Nigerian national who had come to the UK 12  years
   ago as a 14 year old, the SSHD had been entitled  to  conclude  that  the
   applicant had failed to show an absence of ties to Nigeria.  In  carrying
   out the rounded assessment that was required when considering  the  issue
   of ties, the Secretary of State rightly had regard to the fact  that  the
   applicant had lived in Nigeria until the age of 14 and hence  would  have
   acquired familiarity with the customs there.

Finding on Material Error

16. Having heard those  submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

17. This Appellant's case that she was entitled to succeed  under  paragraph
   276ADE(1)(vi) was underpinned by her assertion and  that  of  her  cousin
   Yaris Ali that not only was she abandoned in the UK by her parents in the
   course of a family visit to the UK after a family  dispute  in  2006  but
   that thereafter the family of which the Appellant was a part  in  the  UK
   had lost all contact with  the  Appellants  parents  and  indeed  had  no
   knowledge of where they lived.

18. I am satisfied that given this presentation of  the  Appellants  history
   was the foundation of her case and the explanation for  why  she  had  no
   contacts in Bangladesh it was open to the Judge to  examine  whether  she
   accepted that the Appellant and Mr Ali had given a  truthful  account  of
   how the Appellant came to live and remain illegally in the UK.

19. The Judge gave a number of clear and sustainable  reasons  why  she  did
   not find the account given by Mr Ali and indeed his mother was a truthful
   one in paragraphs 21-23 of the decision. She made clear  that  she  found
   the whole family had deliberately facilitated the Appellants remaining in
   the UK and that  she  did  not  accept  the  claim  of  abandonment.  The
   Appellant was just over 18 at the time she gave  her  evidence  and  gave
   evidence in line with that of Mr Ali and the Judge made  a  finding  that
   against this background she did not find either of them  to  be  credible
   witnesses and it must follow that she did not accept that  the  Appellant
   herself had been truthful about having no contact with  her  parents  and
   had been a party to this deception.

20. The Judge did not indeed refer  to  Ogundimu  in  deciding  whether  the
   Appellant had lost all ties to Bangladesh but I am satisfied that even if
   she had it would have made no material difference to her decision in  the
   particular circumstances of this case where she had wholly  rejected  the
   basis of the Appellants case. The undisputed factual basis of  this  case
   was that the Appellant had lived in Bangladesh until she was 12 which  is
   still therefore the greater part of her life; she would have been exposed
   to the life and culture of that society; she speaks the language and  the
   Judge found as a  fact  that  her  closest  family  members,  not  remote
   relatives, would be present in Bangladesh to provide her with support and
   help in reintegrating into Bangladeshi society. The suggestion  that  she
   would be at risk as a lone woman  in  Bangladesh  is  therefore  entirely
   without merit.

21. The Judges assessment under Article  8  at  25-26  of  the  decision  is
   concise but given this was  against  the  background  of  the  Appellants
   failure to meet the requirements of the Rules the Judge was  entitled  to
   conclude that the removal in this case was proportionate.

22. I remind myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons:  set
   aside) Afghanistan  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
   sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1) :  "Although
   there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the  conclusions  on
   the central issue on which an appeal is determined,  those  reasons  need
   not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to
   the material accepted by the judge."

23. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning. The Appellant cannot be in any doubt about
   why the appeal was dismissed because the basis of her claim to have  lost
   contact with her parents was rejected in its entirety.

CONCLUSION

24. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

25. The appeal is dismissed.
Signed                                                              Date
25.3.2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
