


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/22021/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |         Decision & Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 27th June 2017                     |         On 28th June 2017           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                                     B M
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner, Direct Access Barrister, Imperium
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



    1. The appellant is a citizen of Uganda born in July 1976.  He  arrived
       in the UK on 15th October 2009 with a visit visa, and overstayed. He
       was encountered working  illegally  in  October  2013  and  made  an
       Article 8 ECHR application on 1st November 2013. On 4th January 2014
       he married Mrs L M, a British citizen, and  on  19th  December  2014
       applied to remain as the spouse of a settled  person.  On  27th  May
       2015 this application was refused  by  the  respondent.  His  appeal
       against this decision was dismissed on  all  grounds  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Turquet in a determination promulgated  on  the  14th
       November 2016.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Page in a decision dated 8th May 2017  on  the  basis  that  it  was
       arguable that the First-tier judge had erred  in  law  in  requiring
       corroboration of documents where this was no required and in holding
       against the appellant matters  which  had  not  been  drawn  to  his
       attention either in  the  refusal  decision  or  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal  in  relation  to  discrepancies  relating  to  his  former
       marriage.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. In the grounds of appeal Mr Turner argues at  paragraph  34  of  the
       decision that the First-tier Tribunal relies upon a contention  that
       the appellant had submitted false information by not giving  details
       of his former marriage  on  the  application  form,  and  that  this
       finding was not in line with the case of AA (Nigeria) v SSHD  [2010]
       EWCA Civ 773 or the respondent's guidance in the IDI of July 2009 on
       paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules as these  Rules  are  not
       designed to catch those who make innocent  mistakes  on  application
       forms. The forms had been  completed  by  the  appellant's  previous
       solicitors; the box that  he  or  his  spouse  had  been  previously
       married had been ticked and the details  of  his  previous  marriage
       simply  not  entered.  The  appellant's  previous  spouse  had  died
       sometime previously so there was no possibility that  that  marriage
       was subsisting. This previous marriage had  been  disclosed  in  the
       previous application to the respondent so there was  no  attempt  to
       conceal it.

    5. It is further argued that the First-tier Tribunal  errs  in  law  by
       requiring  at  paragraph  34  of  the  decision   corroboration   of
       documentation in the form of the identity  documents  for  his  late
       wife, however he is not in a position to have these  documents,  and
       so this is not lawful, see TK (Burundi) v SSHD  [2009] EWCA Civ 40.

    6. In addition, the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  put  these  issues
       relating to the appellant's former marriage to him at the hearing so
       that the  hearing  was  procedurally  unfair,  and  also  failed  to
       complete the reasoning for the decision at paragraph 35 in  which  a
       sentence reads: "The appellant did not provide any documentation  to
       identify that the".

    7. There was also a failure to have regard to material  evidence  about
       administrative errors which explained the difference in age  on  the
       marriage certificate for  the  appellant  at  paragraph  37  of  the
       decision. Further if it was contended  this  was  a  false  marriage
       certificate (which is not accepted) then it would not  be  necessary
       to have shown the marriage was at an end in any case.

    8. Further it was perverse to find at paragraph 41 of the decision that
       the appellant and  his  wife  had  deliberately  misinterpreted  the
       immigration law given that neither the appellant nor  his  wife  are
       lawyers, and that finding did not  pay  regard  to  the  appellant's
       wife's oral evidence on this issue.

    9. At paragraph 43 it  is  argued  that  the  decision  the  First-tier
       Tribunal failed to have regard  to  relevant  information  that  the
       appellant's wife had promoted the rights of transsexuals  through  a
       musical play which  was  crucial  evidence  in  the  case.  In  oral
       submissions Mr Turner identified evidence regarding this  issue  was
       before the First-tier Tribunal. Mrs LM had put details  about  being
       the writer and director of a musical play about being the wife of  a
       transsexual in her statement,  and  further  there  were  copies  of
       material from the internet which promoted  this  play  and  included
       interviews with the appellant's wife, and there was witness evidence
       that it had been  seen  by  people  in  the  Uganda  community.  The
       respondent's Operational Guidance Note for Uganda dated 8th December
       2013 was also before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  featured  at
       paragraph 3.18.9 details about a  British  theatre  producer,  David
       Edwards Cecil, staging a play which it was contended by the  Ugandan
       authorities promoted homosexuality which led to him being  arrested,
       charged and then deported to the UK as  an  undesirable  person.  Mr
       Turner argued that this was therefore an important  issue  that  the
       First-tier  Tribunal  had  failed  to  place  in  the  balance  when
       considering whether  there  would  be  insurmountable  obstacles  to
       family life in Uganda.

   10. At paragraphs 44 to 45 it is said the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal failed to consider that there  were  special  circumstances
       which mean that appeal should have been considered  outside  of  the
       Immigration Rules.

   11. In a Rule 24 notice the respondent argues  that  the  judge  made  a
       comprehensive assessment of the evidence. The  application  made  by
       the appellant had failed  to  disclose  his  previous  marriage  and
       documents later presented to  show  the  appellant  was  single  had
       significant discrepancies. The appellant was  aware  of  all  issues
       from the refusal letter, he prepared a  witness  statement  and  was
       represented at the hearing. The  judge  properly  resolved  the  key
       conflicts of fact.

   12. In oral submissions Mr Nath accepted that the issue of the play  had
       not been dealt with but argued that otherwise it was a good decision
       which dealt fairly and lawfully with all issues.

   13. I told the parties that I found that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
       erred by failing to look at the issue of the play and  the  problems
       for family life which might arise in Uganda due to  Mrs  LM's  play,
       for the reasons set out below. Mr Turner wanted the matter  remitted
       to the First-tier Tribunal for remaking, and said he was  not  ready
       to proceed with remaking as he intended to obtain  further  evidence
       regarding the applicant's wife's ill-health, the issue of the  play,
       and possibly the validity of documentation regarding the appellant's
       first marriage and death of his first wife. He said the  papers  had
       previously be poorly prepared and he wanted  to  put  them  in  good
       order and make sure they were up to date on all issues  relevant  to
       Article 8 ECHR. Mr Nath was happy to adjourn the remaking  in  light
       of this new evidence but argued that the matter could remain in  the
       Upper Tribunal. In the light of the extent of the  factual  remaking
       required however I decided that it  would  be  appropriate  for  the
       matter to return to the First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusions - Error of Law

   14.  The  appellant  was  undoubtedly  on  notice  that  the  respondent
       considered the marriage certificate and death certificates submitted
       by the appellant relating to his first marriage were  false  as  the
       dates on the documents did not tally and because the  appellant  did
       not mention his first marriage on his  application  and  because  he
       said he was single on his current marriage  certificate,  and  as  a
       result the respondent found he could not meet the suitability  rules
       at S-LTR 2.2. It was open to the appellant to produce  any  argument
       or evidence to meet this contention before the First-tier  Tribunal.
       There is no procedural unfairness in the decision of the  First-tier
       Tribunal.

   15. The appellant might have  met  these  allegations  by  obtaining  an
       opinion from a Ugandan lawyer or other official with standing as  to
       the validity of the documentation  some  of  which  undoubtedly  has
       inconsistent ages, and also exhibited oddities such as two customary
       marriage certificates issued on the same day with different ages for
       the parties.  On the material before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
       judge was entitled to conclude on the balance of probabilities  that
       the documents were forgeries and further that he was  not  convinced
       that  the  appellant's  previous  relationship   had   broken   down
       permanently, as is needed by E-LTRP  1.9,  and  that  therefore  the
       appellant could not meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
       at Appendix FM.

   16. Consideration  of  the  appeal  outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules
       undoubtedly takes place in the decision at paragraph 40 where  there
       is a discussion of "insurmountable obstacles "as a  factor  to  take
       into account in  "a  wider  Article  8  assessment  outside  of  the
       Immigration Rules", and this is reiterated again at paragraphs 45 to
       50 in a Razgar analysis. It  is  accepted  that  the  appellant  has
       family  life  with  his  wife  at  paragraph  45  of  the  decision.
       Consideration is given to the history that the couple  believed  the
       appellant could remain lawfully in the UK under EU law but  reasons,
       which are not irrational, are given as to  why  this  is  not  found
       credible at paragraph 41. The history  of  the  appellant's  current
       wife's ex-partner's transsexuality  is  considered  along  with  her
       language skills, her employment and family in the UK but this is not
       found to be mean that his removal  is  disproportionate  given  that
       family life  was  established  whilst  the  appellant  was  unlawful
       present in the UK. Regard is also had to all of  the  provisions  of
       s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

   17. However, I find that the proportionality analysis  under  Article  8
       ECHR was flawed by a failure  to  consider  important  and  material
       evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  regarding  the  appellant's
       wife writing and  directing  a  play  about  being  the  wife  of  a
       transgender person, and consideration that this play had  been  seen
       by people in the Uganda community in the UK and that material  about
       the play including interviews with the appellant's wife  existed  on
       the internet. This history combined with what is set out in  country
       of origin materials, including the respondent's Operational Guidance
       Note, about societal intolerance and legal action against people who
       write drama about such issues, means that  this  factor  could  well
       cause difficulties for the appellant's wife in Uganda and thus ought
       to have been considered by the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  connection
       with whether the appellant would face  insurmountable  obstacles  to
       family life in Uganda. This, I find, was therefore a material  error
       of law.

          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision in its entirety.

   3. I remit the hearing to the First-tier Tribunal for remaking de novo.



   Anonymity

   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the  original
   appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others,  all  parties.  Any
   failure to comply with this direction could  give  rise  to  contempt  of
   court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid a likelihood of serious harm
   arising to the appellant or his wife or their families.




Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date: 27th June 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley







