
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/22118/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |        Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th June 2017                      |        On 15th June 2017             |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             mrs georgina yeboah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Al-Rashid Counsel instructed by David A Grand
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a citizen of Ghana, appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 1st June  2015  to
    refuse her application for a residence card as confirmation of a  right
    to reside in the UK as the spouse  of  Mr  William  Amankwah,  a  Dutch
    national (the Sponsor).  First-tier Tribunal Judge Seelhoff allowed the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 26th September 2016.  The Secretary
    of State appeals against that decision with permission granted by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on 19th April 2017.

 3. The background to this appeal is that  the  Appellant  claims  to  have
    entered the UK in September 2001 on a  visit  visa  valid  until  March
    2002.  She was  arrested  on  27th  March  2008  working  illegally  in
    reliance on a forged Home Office letter.  Following her arrest she  was
    sentenced to eight months' imprisonment. She informed the  Home  Office
    that she had married  a  Dutch  national  and  she  was  released  from
    detention and was ultimately granted a residence card on the  basis  of
    her marriage on 18th February 2010.

 4. On 10th December 2014 an application was made on the Appellant's behalf
    for a further residence card.  In that application it was claimed  that
    the Appellant was still married to her husband but they had not resided
    together over the previous eighteen months.  In these circumstances the
    Appellant was invited for an interview on 13th March 2015.  She did not
    attend.  Her representative advised the Home Office  that  because  she
    and her husband were separated she would not attend  an  interview.   A
    second interview was arranged for 2nd April 2015 and the Appellant  did
    not attend this either, apparently on legal advice.  The  Secretary  of
    State considered the application and referred to Regulation 20B of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 (the 2006 Regulations)  noting  that
    where an Appellant, inter alia, failed to attend  an  interview  on  at
    least two occasions the Secretary  of  State  could  draw  any  factual
    inferences about the Appellant's entitlement to a right  to  reside  as
    appear appropriate in the circumstances.   As  the  Appellant  had  not
    attended two interviews the Secretary of  State  relied  on  Regulation
    20B(4) and (5) concluded that, as the Appellant had failed to attend an
    interview and provide up-to-date evidence supporting  her  application,
    it was deemed appropriate to draw the inference that the Appellant  was
    not a qualified person. The application was refused with  reference  to
    Regulation 2 and 20B(5) of the 2006 Regulations.

 5. At the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal the judge suggested  that  as
    the marriage in this case had been conducted by proxy the  decision  of
    Kareem (proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT  00024  (IAC)  and  TA  &
    Others (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316 (IAC) would appear to
    be relevant to the case.  The judge heard submissions and made a number
    of findings from paragraphs 20 to 26.  At paragraph 20 the judge  noted
    that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the  Appellant's  proxy  marriage
    conducted in Ghana would be recognised by the authorities in  Ghana  or
    the authorities in Netherlands and concluded that it was  not  open  to
    him to allow the appeal under Regulation 7 as  there  was  insufficient
    evidence to establish that the  Appellant  is  married  to  a  European
    national.  The judge went on to find at paragraph 21 that there  is  no
    evidence to find that the Appellant's husband is  currently  exercising
    treaty rights in the UK and no evidence of him working at all from 2014
    and therefore found that the appeal would have to be dismissed pursuant
    to Regulation 7.  The judge noted that there was insufficient  evidence
    as to the Sponsor's long-term work history  to  conclude  that  he  was
    entitled to permanent residence.   The  judge  considered  whether  the
    marriage was one of convenience and concluded  that  he  was  satisfied
    that the Secretary of State had good reason to question the  legitimacy
    of the relationship and to draw adverse inferences from the Appellant's
    failure to attend interviews.  The judge said, "Having  considered  all
    the evidence before me I remain concerned about the  marriage  in  this
    case".  The judge said, "Whilst the Respondent may have turned a  blind
    eye to the Appellant's immigration history on the previous application,
    given the quick end to the marriage I find that it was  reasonable  for
    the Respondent to re-visit the immigration history". [23]

 6. At paragraph 24 the judge said:

         "I do not agree with Counsel's argument that the Home Office is  in
         some way estopped from  arguing  that  a  relationship  is  one  of
         convenience simply because they have previously issued a  residence
         card. On the contrary if new information comes to light it must  be
         incumbent on the Respondent to act on that information."

 7. The judge noted at paragraph 25 that there was  virtually  no  evidence
    before the Tribunal at all in relation to the Appellant's marriage  and
    found that the Appellant had failed to prove that this  was  a  genuine
    marriage.

 8. Having made all of the findings set out above the judge went on,  under
    the heading 'Notice of Decision' to find "The appeal is  allowed  under
    the EEA Regulations".

 9. The Secretary of State appealed against that decision on the basis that
    the decision to allow the appeal appears to be  inconsistent  with  the
    judge's findings of fact.  It is submitted that the decision  to  allow
    the appeal seems therefore to be a slip of  the  pen  and  amenable  to
    amendment pursuant to  the  slip  Rule  in  Rule  31  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules 2014.  Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Saffer on the basis that it  is  clear  that  the  judge
    intended to dismiss the appeal.

10. At the hearing before me both Mr Al-Rashid and Mr Tufan agreed that  it
    is obvious that  the  judge  intended  to  dismiss  the  appeal.   Both
    representatives also agreed, with reference  to  the  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal in Kathsonga ("slip rule"; FtT's general powers)  [2016]
    UKUT 228 (IAC), that Rule 31 of the 2014 Procedure Rules could  not  be
    used to reverse the effect of the decision.  I agree that  Rule  31  is
    not the proper way to deal with the apparent error in this case.

11. It is equally apparent to me,  based  on  the  judge's  reasoning  from
    paragraph 20 onwards, that First-tier Tribunal Judge Seelhoff  intended
    to dismiss the appeal and that his decision to allow the appeal is  not
    consistent with the reasoning in paragraphs 20 to 25.

12. At the hearing before me Mr Al-Rashid referred to  the  fact  that  the
    case law in relation to proxy marriages has moved on since the date  of
    the decision.  He pointed out  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision was promulgated on 22nd September  2016  at  which  point  the
    relevant authorities in relation to proxy marriage were those in Kareem
    and TA and he accepted that the judge relied on those properly at  that
    time.  However he pointed out that since then the Court of Appeal  have
    issued the decision in Awuku v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 178.  He  submitted
    that if I were to remake the decision  the  findings  at  paragraph  20
    cannot  stand.  In  these  circumstances  he  suggested  that  it   was
    appropriate to set the decision of the First-tier Tribunal aside and to
    remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal  to  look  at  the  whole
    issue again.

13. In terms of the other findings Mr Al-Rashid submitted that at paragraph
    24 the judge had failed to identify any new information which had  come
    to light which enabled  the  Home  Office  to  raise  the  marriage  of
    convenience issue despite having previously issued  a  residence  card.
    He submitted that the decision in Rosa v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2016] EWCAS Civ 15  says  that  it  is  clear  that  a
    marriage of convenience is  to  be  determined  at  the  point  of  the
    marriage.  He further submitted that the judge's finding  at  paragraph
    25 that the marriage is not  genuine  cannot  stand  in  light  of  his
    erroneous conclusions that the marriage  is  not  legally  valid;  that
    there was a quick end to the marriage; his failure to identify what new
    information  had  come  to  light  to  credibly  cast  doubt   on   the
    relationship; and his failure to give due recognition to the  Secretary
    of State's conclusion in 2010 that this is  a  genuine  marriage.   The
    Rule 24 response  further  contends  that  the  judge  failed  to  deal
    specifically with the erroneous point in the reasons for refusal letter
    that the adverse inference drawn by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Appellant's failure to attend the  interview  is  that  she  is  not  a
    qualified person.  It is submitted that this is perverse as only an EEA
    national can be a qualified person and the  Appellant  is  not  an  EEA
    national.

14. Mr Tufan pointed to paragraph 21 where the judge also found that  there
    is no evidence to  show  that  the  Appellant's  husband  is  currently
    exercising treaty rights  in  the  UK  therefore  concluding  that  the
    Appellant's husband is not a qualified person.  He  submitted  that  on
    that basis alone the appeal  must  fail.   Mr  Tufan  referred  to  the
    decision in the case of EG and NG (UT  Rule  17;  withdrawal  Rule  24:
    Scope) Ethiopia [2013] UKUT 143.  He  relied  on  paragraph  3  of  the
    headnote and contended that raising an issue in the Rule 24  notice  is
    not sufficient to bring it before the Upper Tribunal.  He accepted  the
    point made about the proxy marriage but pointed out that the  issue  of
    the validity of the marriage had not been raised  in  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter but this was something that  the  judge  raised  at  the
    hearing.

Error of Law

15. It is clear, as accepted by both parties,  that  the  decision  by  the
    judge that the appeal should be allowed under the  EEA  Regulations  is
    clearly a mistake in light  of  his  findings  in  paragraphs20-25.   I
    consider that this is a material error because the judge has  therefore
    given insufficient reasons for his conclusion that the appeal should be
    allowed.  In these circumstances I set  aside  the  decision  that  the
    appeal should be allowed and remake it.

16. In re-making the decision Mr  Al-Rashid  asked  me  to  go  behind  the
    findings made by the judge in paragraphs 20 to 25.  However there is no
    challenge to those findings in the appeal before me. The Appellant  did
    not cross-appeal the decision.   Mr  Al-Rashid  pointed  out  that  the
    Appellant could not appeal given that the appeal was allowed.   However
    there was nothing to prevent the  Appellant  cross-appealing  when  the
    Secretary  of  State  appealed  against  the  decision.   There  is  no
    challenge at all before me as to the findings made by the judge.

17. I acknowledge that the decision in Awuku advocates a different approach
    to proxy marriages. However the judge's approach was not wrong  at  the
    time the decision was made. However, it was not in dispute that,  given
    the change to the guidance in relation to proxy marriages under EU law,
    in remaking the decision I must find that the findings at paragraph  20
    cannot stand.  However I note in this context that  Mr  Tufan  accepted
    that the validity of the marriage  was  not  an  issue  raised  by  the
    Secretary of State in the reasons for refusal letter.

18. However the judge made a significant number of other findings  that  go
    to the heart of this matter. As pointed out above, there  has  been  no
    challenge to those findings.

19. The judge found at paragraph 21 that there was no evidence to show that
    the Appellant's husband is exercising treaty  rights  and  no  evidence
    that he has been working since  2014.   This  finding,  which  was  not
    challenged, means that the appeal would have had to be dismissed in any
    event.

20. Further, the  judge  made  alternative  findings  in  relation  to  the
    marriage  at  paragraph  23  where  he  went  on  to  consider  in  the
    alternative whether the marriage was one of convenience.  Mr  Al-Rashid
    did not point to where in the decision in Rosa,  the  Court  of  Appeal
    said anything contrary to the judge's assessment at paragraph  24  that
    the Home Office cannot be stopped from arguing that a  relationship  is
    one of convenience simply because a residence card had previously  been
    issued.

21. In considering this matter the judge  took  into  account  the  adverse
    inference which the Secretary of State had drawn under  Regulation  20B
    and concluded that the Appellant  had  not  given  a  good  reason  for
    refusing to attend the interview and that the Respondent  was  entitled
    to draw adverse  inferences.   The  judge  agreed  with  those  adverse
    inferences. The judge considered it reasonable to take into account the
    Appellant's immigration history in  light  of  the  quick  end  to  the
    marriage, despite the fact that the Secretary of State  had  previously
    issued the Appellant with a residence card. Contrary to Mr  Al-Rashid's
    submission in my view it is clear that the fact that the Appellant  and
    Sponsor are no longer living together is new  information  which  could
    suggest that a marriage is not one of convenience.

22. The judge concluded that the Appellant had not put forward evidence  to
    substantiate her claim that the  marriage  had  been  genuine  and  the
    judge, as was open to him, concluded that the Appellant had  failed  to
    prove that this was a genuine marriage.   In  these  circumstances  and
    given all of the additional findings made by the judge, the conclusions
    at paragraph 20 in  relation  to  proxy  marriage  do  not  infect  the
    remaining unchallenged findings made by the judge at paragraphs  21  to
    25.

23. In these circumstances the findings at paragraphs 21 to 25 shall stand.
     I therefore remake the decision based on those findings.

24. I dismiss the appeal for the reasons set out at paragraphs 21 to 25  of
    the First-tier Tribunal decision.

Notice of Decision

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law.  I set aside that decision and remake it by dismissing the  appeal
    on all grounds.

26. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 14 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal is dismissed there is no fee award.

Signed                              Date: 14 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




