
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/22349/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House without a  |Decision an Reasons Promulgated      |
|hearing                              |On 14 December 2015                  |
|On 3 December 2015                   |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                          OLUWALOLA ABOSEDE AGBAJE
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent appealed with permission against  the  determination  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Callender-Smith,  promulgated  on  21
    October 2014 in which he allowed the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent on human rights grounds.   For  the  reasons
    given in my decision of 17 March 2015, a copy of which is  attached  at
    Annex A, I was satisfied that the decision did involve the making of an
    error of law.

 2. Owing to the appellant's subsequent claim for  asylum  (now  withdrawn)
    and a pending application for  her  daughter  to  be  registered  as  a
    British Citizen (now granted), it has not been possible to  proceed  to
    remake the case.

 3. The appellant's daughter has now acquired British Citizenship. That  is
    a significant change in circumstances, and accordingly  on  4  November
    2015, I made the following directions:

          1. It appears that the appellant's asylum  application  has  been
             withdrawn as her daughter has now been registered as a British
             Citizen.

          2. Given the acceptance in the refusal letter of 2 May 2014  that
             the suitability requirements under Appendix FM have been  met,
             and given the appellant's child falls within EX.1  as  she  is
             now a British Citizen (albeit she  was  not  at  the  date  of
             decision which was the basis of refusal under the  Immigration
             Rules), it is my preliminary view that the sole issue  in  any
             appeal under the Immigration Rules would appear to be  whether
             it is reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave  the  United
             Kingdom.   Given the  preserved  findings  of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal with regard to the relationship between the  daughter
             and  the  father  who  is  not  in  a  relationship  with  the
             appellant, but with a woman with whom he lives  and  who  have
             children together, and in the light of the respondent's policy
             as set out in "Appendix FM 1.0 Family Life (as  a  partner  or
             parent) and Private Life:  10  year  routes  August  2015"  at
             section 11.2.3, as well as the length of time the  appellant's
             daughter has spent in the United Kingdom, it is my preliminary
             view that all the requirement of paragraph EX.1 are  met,  and
             that the appeal should be allowed under the Immigration Rules.



          3. In the circumstances, I intend to remake the decision on  that
             basis, allowing the appeal, without a further  hearing  unless
             the parties object to that course of action within  5  working
             days of the issue of these directions.

 4. There has been no response  to  these  directions.  Accordingly,  I  am
    satisfied that neither party objects to  the  matter  being  determined
    without a hearing and has nothing further to say.

 5. While I accept that there was no cross-appeal by the appellant  against
    the decision to refuse the application under the Immigration Rules, any
    consideration of article 8 outside the rules, the basis  on  which  the
    appeal remains to be  remade,  would  inevitably  have  to  lead  to  a
    consideration of whether, as at the date of hearing, the provisions  of
    the Immigration  Rules  are  met.  Further,  the  particular  rules  in
    question  have  been  adopted  to  give  effect  to  article   8,   and
    accordingly, it would be artificial and contrary to  the  interests  of
    justice not to exercise the power under section 12  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act  2007  and  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 to remake  the  decision  as  a  whole,  including
    remaking the decision in respect of the Immigration Rules.  I also vary
    the direction made for the remaking  of  this  appeal,  so  far  as  is
    necessary to permit this.

 6. For the reasons set out above, I am satisfied that the appellant  meets
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules and I  allow  her  appeal  on
    that basis. It follows also that her removal would be  disproportionate
    and in breach of article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

Summary of conclusions

 1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of
    an error and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the decision by allowing  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.


Signed      Date: 3 December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
                       ANNEX A - ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/22349/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 January 2015                   |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                         OLUWALOLOLA ABOSEDE AGBAJE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     in person
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals   with   permission   against   the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Callender-Smith  promulgated
    on 21 October 2014 in which he allowed the appeal of  Miss  Agbaje  (to
    whom I refer as the claimant) against the decision  by  the  respondent
    made on 2 May 2014 to refuse her leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 2. The claimant arrived in the United Kingdom on 19 February 2006 and  was
    granted leave to  enter  as  a  student  until  26  January  2009.   An
    application for a variation of her leave to allow her to  remain  as  a
    Tier 1 (General) Migrant was refused and  on  5  August  2009  she  was
    granted further leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  student
    until 31 October 2009.  The appeal against that  decision  was  allowed
    and to the limited extent that the matter was remitted to the Secretary
    of State to consider.  Again her duties pursuant to Section 55  of  the
    UK Borders Act 2009.  On 23 August 2011 after a  further  consideration
    the application was refused again. A fresh appeal against the  followed
    and again the appeal was allowed to the limited extent that the  matter
    was remitted to the Secretary of State to make  a  lawful  decision  to
    consider Section 55.

 3. The respondent refused the application for the reasons set out  in  the
    refusal letter of 2 May 2014 in which it is said:-

      i) Section 55 of the 2009 Act has been replaced by  paragraph  EX1  of
         the Immigration Rules, that paragraph reflecting the duty first  by
         Section 55;

     ii) that she was not the parent of a British  citizen  or  of  a  child
         settled in the United Kingdom or a  child  who  had  lived  in  the
         United Kingdom continuously for seven years  immediately  preceding
         the date of application thus she did not have a family life in  the
         United Kingdom under Article 8 which were the requirements set  out
         in Appendix FM;

    iii) that any interference with her child's relationship with her father
         would be minimal as she only has a visit from him twice a year  and
         that he could visit her in Nigeria and could remain in contact with
         her through modern means of communication;

     iv) that she did not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE  of  the
         Immigration Rules; that she  had  not  submitted  any  evidence  to
         support  her  argument  that  removal  would   give   rise   to   a
         disproportionate interference with Article 8.

 4. After arriving in the United Kingdom  the  appellant  met  Mr  Emmanuel
    Kolebaga, who is the father of her daughter  born  29  September  2007.
    She was subjected to domestic violence during her relationship and  she
    later learned that he was  married  and  has  children.   He  has  been
    providing for the daughter financially through the parent to the  Child
    Support Agency and maintains regular if unannounced contact with her.

 5. It is the claimant's case that  the  above  has  now  acquired  British
    citizenship but has refused to support or permit the daughter  to  have
    the necessary documents to allow her to acquire British citizenship.

 6. On appeal, Judge Callender-Smith had evidence  from  the  appellant  as
    well as submissions from her and Mr D Morley, a Home Office  Presenting
    Officer.  Judge Callender-Smith found that:-

      i) the appellant did not meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
         Rules, in particular EX.1  [33]  as  her  daughter  was  neither  a
         British  citizen  nor  had  she  lived  in   the   United   Kingdom
         continuously for  at  least  seven  years  preceding  the  date  of
         application;

     ii)  the  child  could  acquire  British  citizenship  if  her   father
         cooperated in the  process  [33],  the  respondent  already  having
         available  to  her  information  in  relation   to   the   father's
         citizenship [35];

    iii) this is a situation where he  could  properly  consider  Article  8
         outside the Immigration Rules [36];

     iv) the child had spent the entire seven years in  the  United  Kingdom
         and it was accepted that she has an existing relationship with  her
         father [41], the father visiting about once a  week  and  that  the
         daughter becomes distressed when she does not see  him  [42];  that
         the respondent had never challenged the assertion that the  child's
         father was a British citizen [49]; that the father is not  prepared
         to  allow  his  daughter  to  avail  herself  for  her  rights   to
         citizenship  because  of  his  obstructive  and  spiteful  attitude
         towards the appellant [51],  and  it  would  not  be  in  the  best
         interests of the child simply to accept that and that her potential
         British citizenship was a right which could not  be  ignored  [54];
         and,   given the age of the child, her latent  British  nationality
         and the effect of removing her to a country where she might  be  at
         risk of FGM, that this interference would not be in accordance with
         the law [58];

      v) and that in any event any interference would not  be  proportionate
         [60].

 7. The respondent sought permission to appeal the ground that the judge:-

      i) had failed to follow the approach as set out in Gulshan (Article  8
         - new Rules - correct approach)  [2013]  UKUT  640  in  failing  to
         identify what compelling circumstances that there were to warrant a
         grant of leave outside the Immigration Rules justifying an  Article
         8 analysis as outlined to Razgar;

     ii) erred in his analysis  that  the  appellant's  daughter's  apparent
         entitlement to British citizenship, straying into matters  possibly
         arising in the future; that the judge analysed the situation of her
         daughter without any consideration  that  she  has  no  independent
         right to stay in the country contrary to EV  (Philippines)  v  SSHD
         [2014] EWCA Civ 874;

    iii) failed  to  have  regard  to  Azimi-Moayed  [2013]  UKUT  197  when
         regarding the daughter's age is  a  relevant  factor  in  assessing
         proportionality;

     iv) failed to give adequate reasons for his findings in respect of  FGM
         or to take into account the relevant risks and given that this  was
         included as part of the balancing exercise, starting with the issue
         of the daughter's contact  with  her  father  entitled  to  British
         citizenship was not  in  themselves  wholly  determinative  of  the
         outcome of the appeal.

 8.  On  5  December  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett   granted
    permission on all grounds.

 9. When the matter came before me, Mr Walker was able to  explain,  having
    made enquiries, that the  claimant's  daughter's  father  had  obtained
    permanent residence pursuant to the EEA Regulations in 2008 and in 2012
    had become naturalised as a British citizen.  It is therefore  apparent
    that the daughter is not entitled to  British  citizenship  from  birth
    although if a proper application is made pursuant to  Section  1(3)  of
    the British Nationality  Act  1981  she  may  be  entitled  to  British
    Citizenship.

10. In considering the grounds of appeal I note that there is no  challenge
    to the findings of fact with regard to the  existence  of  family  life
    between the appellant's daughter and her father who is accepted to be a
    British citizen.  There is  no  challenge  to  Judge  Callender-Smith's
    findings that there is contact on a weekly basis contrary to  what  was
    asserted by the respondent.   The  submission  that  the  judge  failed
    properly to apply Gulshan is without merit.

11. Similarly there is no merit in the challenge in the grounds at A3  that
    the judge's approach to this case was in error. He was entitled  to  do
    found that the appellant's child had a family life with her father who,
    it is accepted, is a British citizen.  That is entirely contrary to the
    situation in EV (Philippines) where none of the family  was  a  British
    citizen or had the right to remain in the United Kingdom.   It  is  not
    disputed that here, the father is married to  someone  other  than  the
    appellant's mother or that he has children here from that marriage.  As
    was noted in EV (Philippines) the cases are inevitably fact specific.

12. Further, the assertion in the grounds at A4 that the  judge  failed  to
    have regard to Azimi-Moayed it is misconceived.  Whilst  that  decision
    may be authority for the proposition that the seven  year  period  from
    age 4 is likely to be more significant to a child in  the  first  seven
    years of life that does not mean that the first  seven  years  are  not
    significant.

13. It is not properly arguable that the judge erred in taking into account
    the fact that the appellant's daughter is, as a matter of  fact,  prima
    facie entitled  to  British  citizenship  if  an  application  is  made
    although it is difficult to discern how much weight was put on this.

14. It is evident in considering proportionality that the judge  took  into
    account the possibility of the appellant's daughter being subjected  to
    FGM.  His analysis of that risk is not adequate as it fails  to  engage
    with the background evidence relating to FGM in Nigeria  which  clearly
    exists; the extent to which internal flight would be possible; and, the
    extent to which there would be a sufficiency of protection.

15. On that basis, I am satisfied that the judge's  decision  involved  the
    making of an error of law and for that reason must be set aside.

16. The extent to which that decision requires any further fact-finding  is
    limited.  I therefore direct that any reconsideration by limited to the
    question of the possible FGM and a further  balancing  exercise  to  be
    undertaken.



Directions

 1. The matter is to be relisted for hearing for fresh findings of fact  to
    be reached with respect to the risk to the claimant's daughter  of  her
    being subjected to FGM. A fresh consideration  will  then  need  to  be
    given as to whether, in the light of these findings, and the  preserved
    findings, it would be proportionate to  remove  the  claimant  and  her
    daughter.

 2. Any new material on which it is sought to rely must be  served  on  the
    Upper Tribunal at least 14 days before the hearing.


Signed      Date: 17 March 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
