
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22291/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4th September 2014                           |On 15th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD

                                   Between

                         MR Babatunde Taoheed Dosumu
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Glass - Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by Mr Babatunde Taoheed Dosumu a citizen  of  Nigeria
    born 10th July 1988.  He appeals against the determination  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Talbot issued on 1st April 2014 dismissing in terms
    of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 his appeal
    against the decision of the Respondent  made  on  15th  March  2013  to
    refuse his application made on 25th September 2012 for an EEA residence
    card as the extended family member of an EEA national.

 2. The Appellant sought to appeal against that decision on the basis  that
    the Judge had erred in failing to deal with Article 8 of  the  European
    Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental  Freedoms
    (ECHR).   On  16th  May  2014  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   refused
    permission pointing out that the Appellant had not made an  application
    under Article 8 ECHR.  In any event no decision to remove had been made
    and the judge was not obliged to consider Article 8.

 3. What is submitted in the grounds is that Article 8 was  raised  in  the
    Grounds of Appeal and in the skeleton argument which was adopted by the
    representative.  Reliance  is  placed  on  the  decision  Ahmed  (Amos;
    Zambrano; reg 15A(3)(c) 2006 EEA Regs) [2013] UKUT 00089  at  paragraph
    79 in which is was held that Article  8  should  be  considered  in  an
    application under the EEA Regs.   Application  was  then  made  to  the
    Upper Tribunal,  again relying solely on Article 8 and  on Ahmed and on
    Huang and Anor v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11.  Permission was granted by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Macleman.  He pointed out that a removal decision is not
    needed before Article 8 issues  may  be  considered  per  GM  (Liberia)
    [2006] EWCA Civ 1402  and went on to say:

         "Parties will be expected to direct the UT to any authorities  upon
         the following questions:

         A8 is now (largely)  subsumed  into  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
         ground that a decision is not in accordance with those Rules is not
         available on an appeal under the Regs (Reg 26 and Schedule 1 para 1
         2002 Act, Section 84(1)(a) excepted).  The Respondent  invites  the
         Appellant to apply under the Rules if he thinks he has an A8  claim
         - does this mean there is no real interference to consider?  (Is it
         relevant that there may be a charge for an application?)

         A judge should (presumably) approach all A8 cases through the Rules
         before embarking upon a 'free  ranging'  A8  consideration  so  how
         might an Appellant present a case, in an  appeal  which  cannot  be
         allowed under the Rules?"

 4. The submission of Ms Glass was that it is clear that the Appellant  has
    a family life with his uncle.  He is an orphan.  He also has a  private
    life.  Article 8 was raised in the skeleton argument and in the grounds
    and it should have been dealt with by the Judge.

 5. Immigration Judges are divided  on  the  question  of  whether  or  not
    Article 8 should be considered in an EEA case.  There is a view as  was
    expressed by Justice Blake in Bee & Anor (permanent/derived  rights  of
    residence) [2013] UKUT 00083 that a decision on an  application  for  a
    residence permit is not an immigration decision as defined  in  Section
    82 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and that in  any  event
    in the absence of a  decision  to  remove,   there  is  no  prospective
    interference  with  any  Article  8  rights.   Justice  Blake  makes  a
    distinction between an immigration decision and an EEA decision with  a
    right of appeal under Regulation 26(1) of the 2006 Regs.

 6. It is to be hoped that some guidance on this matter is forthcoming  but
    in any event I do not consider that it is relevant to  this  particular
    appeal since there is nothing to suggest that any evidence on Article 8
    family or private life was relied on by the Appellant's representatives
    at the hearing or that any submissions  were  made  on  Article  8.   I
    accept that it was  raised  in  the  skeleton  argument  and  that  the
    skeleton  argument  was  relied  on  by  Mr  Khalaf,  the   Appellant's
    representative, but Judge Talbot in his conclusions said,

         "Mr Khalaf confirmed that he did not wish to pursue  the  issue  of
         Article 8 at this time."

 7. Ms Glass sought to persuade me that this sentence is  ambiguous  but  I
    can see no ambiguity in it.  She  suggested  that  having  adopted  the
    skeleton argument Mr Khalaf probably meant that he just did not want to
    make any detailed submissions on Article 8 at that time  but  I  cannot
    read the sentence as meaning that.  It  seems  to  me  clear  that  the
    representative did not wish to pursue the issue  of  Article  8  before
    Judge Talbot and that in those circumstances it  cannot  be  said  that
    Judge Talbot made an error of law in failing to deal with  it.   Indeed
    he may well have been guilty of erring in law had he proceeded to  make
    a decision on Article 8 having been asked not do so by the  Appellant's
    representative.  I d not accept that there is any overriding obligation
    on a judge to deal with Article 8 in an EEA case.

Decision

 8. I find that there is no material error of law in the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and that decision therefore stands.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Baird

