
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/22293/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 January 2017                    |On 13 January 2017                   |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                    B A P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Karim, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tony Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Swinnerton ("the FTTJ") promulgated on 7 March 2016,  in
    which he "refused" the appellant's appeal against the  refusal  of  his
    application for leave to remain on Article 8 grounds.

 2. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal  but,  given
    the references in this decision to the appellant's partner's health, an
    anonymity order is required.



Background

 3. The appellant is a Nigerian citizen who claims to have entered  the  UK
    illegally in 2000 using a false passport. He has  remained  in  the  UK
    since that date. The appellant has lived since 2003  with  his  partner
    who has dual British/Zimbabwean nationality.  His partner  has  various
    medical conditions.  The appellant's partner's 25 year  old  son  lives
    with the couple; he was, at the date of hearing before the FTTJ, in the
    final year of a degree course, intending to study for a Master's degree
    and had been offered permanent part-time work. The appellant's  partner
    works part-time as a nurse.  The appellant claimed to have  a  parental
    relationship with his partner's son with whom he had  lived  since  the
    latter was 12.  The appellant's parents and sister live in Nigeria  but
    the appellant claimed to have lost contact with them.

 4. Whilst the respondent noted the appellant's partner's ill  health,  the
    appellant's application was refused on the  ground  that,  pursuant  to
    EX.2 of Appendix FM, there were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's family life with his partner  continuing  outside  the  UK.
    Further, with regard to the appellant's private life,  there  were  not
    very significant obstacles to his integration in Nigeria, given he  had
    lived there for over 24 years before coming to the UK.

 5. The FTTJ dismissed  the  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  there  was  an
    inconsistency in the evidence regarding contact  with  the  appellant's
    family in Nigeria and it was not credible the appellant had  maintained
    no contact with family there. The FTTJ noted the appellant's  partner's
    son was an adult, had a degree of financial independence and  that  any
    ongoing financial dependence on his mother would be "limited". The FTTJ
    noted there was no evidence  that  the  appellant's  partner's  medical
    condition prevented her from travelling to Nigeria or receiving medical
    treatment there. The FTTJ concluded at  [73]  that  there  were  "would
    [not] be insurmountable barriers  to  the  appellant  and  his  partner
    returning to Nigeria".  The FTTJ found the appellant "would be able  to
    re-establish ties with his existing family in Nigeria".  The FTTJ found
    the appellant's partner's son "who is aged 25 and has indefinite  leave
    to remain in the UK, can choose to pursue a career  in  the  UK  or  to
    accompany his mother".   He  concluded  that  the  application  of  the
    appellant did not fall within EX.1.

Submissions

 6. Mr Karim, for the appellant, relied on the grounds  for  permission  to
    appeal and I summarise the areas of challenge as follows:

          a. The appellant had pursued the appeal  within  the  Rules.  The
             FTTJ had failed to address the grounds of appeal to  the  FTT;
             the appellant would  face  serious  obstacles  to  integration
             pursuant to 276ADE(1)(vi).  The FTTJ had failed to engage with
             this provision. There was only a brief reference  at  [73]  to
             "insurmountable barriers" but perhaps this referred to EX.1.

          b. The FTTJ's credibility findings were flawed; he  had  referred
             to inconsistency in the evidence as between the appellant  and
             his partner who had referred to a lack of contact with  family
             in Nigeria for "a few years" as against "6 or 7 years".  These
             periods were similar. This was not an inconsistency sufficient
             to found an adverse credibility finding.

          c. Thirdly, there existed family life between the  appellant  and
             his partner's son whom he had treated as his own child.  There
             were implications for the appellant relocating to Nigeria with
             or without his partner. The FTTJ should  have  considered  the
             impact on the stepson who had attended to give oral  evidence.
             The appellant relied on the guidance in Ghising (family life -
             adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 160 (IAC),  [52]  onwards.
             The appellant's stepson could not  be  considered  within  the
             Rules and should therefore have been considered outside  them.
             His mere adulthood  did  not  mean  he  was  independent;  the
             evidence before the tribunal was  that  he  lived  within  the
             family and was financially dependent on his mother.  This  was
             not a relationship which was to be penalised  under  s117B  of
             the 2002 Act. It was a material error of law for the FTTJ  not
             to make findings as to whether family life existed between the
             appellant and his stepson and the implications for the stepson
             as a result of the appellant's removal  with  or  without  his
             partner.

 7. Mr Melvin, for the respondent, submitted the only reason given for  the
    inability of the appellant to  return  to  Nigeria  was  his  partner's
    medical  condition.  The  FTTJ  had  dealt  with   that   at   [69-72].
    "Insurmountable barriers" and "very compelling circumstances" were much
    the same and the FTTJ's use of the  former  was  not  material  to  the
    outcome of the appeal.  As regards  the  credibility  findings  of  the
    FTTJ, the challenge was immaterial.  The  only  point  raised  was  the
    partner's medical condition; whether or not the appellant had family in
    Nigeria was not a material consideration. In  any  event,  this  was  a
    "small forensic point" rather than a matter going to the  core  of  the
    appeal. As regards the claimed family life between  the  appellant  and
    his partner's son, the reliance on Ghising was misplaced;  that  was  a
    case based on Gurkha policy and should not be extrapolated in a "normal
    case". There was nothing in the evidence  pointing  to  any  dependency
    over and above a normal  adult  relationship  between  the  appellant's
    partner and her son who, according to the evidence, was working towards
    a master's degree whilst employed.  He was effectively an adult  living
    independently albeit in the family home. He should not be considered  a
    child. The FTTJ had addressed all relevant issues.

 8. In reply Mr Karim submitted that the issue of whether or not there were
    very significant  obstacles  should  not  be  premised  solely  on  the
    partner's circumstances. The appellant had identified  in  his  witness
    statement provided in the FTT those factors to be taken  into  account.
    In any event, the FTTJ's use of the  phrase  "insurmountable  barriers"
    was not specifically related to either EX.1 or 276ADE(1)(vi) and it was
    not clear to which aspect of the Rules the FTTJ was referring. This was
    a misdirection as to the law and therefore material to the outcome.

Discussion

 9. I am unable to accept the submission that the FTTJ  failed  to  address
    all the issues raised in the grounds of appeal.  Following the  changes
    resulting from the Immigration  Act  2014,  the  appellant's  right  of
    appeal was limited to an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against  the
    refusal of his human rights claim. The  grounds  of  appeal  were  also
    limited to those in s84 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002, as substituted by s15 of the Immigration Act 2014.  The FTTJ  was
    not required to consider those matters outwith s84 and he  did  not  do
    so.

10.  The  FTTJ's  reference  to  "insurmountable  barriers"  at   [73]   is
    unfortunate and unhelpful. It suggests the FTTJ may not have  addressed
    his mind to the relevant issues. It is stated in the decision that  the
    FTTJ "has assessed the particular circumstances of this case and [does]
    not find that there would be insurmountable barriers to  the  appellant
    and his partner returning to Nigeria".  It is  not  clear  whether  the
    reference  to  "insurmountable  barriers"  is  meant  to  reflect   any
    particular paragraph of the Immigration Rules (eg EX.1 which refers  to
    "insurmountable obstacles" or paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) which  refers  to
    "very significant obstacles").   However, irrespective of this,  it  is
    clear from the FTTJ's findings, which are unchallenged in the main save
    for criticism of the finding of inconsistency as regards  contact  with
    family, are that the appellant is able to settle in  Nigeria  with  his
    partner. The FTTJ makes specific findings (unchallenged) that there  is
    no evidence the appellant's partner would not  be  able  to  travel  to
    Nigeria or obtain the requisite medical treatment there.   Furthermore,
    irrespective of the challenged inconsistency in the evidence, the  FTTJ
    finds the appellant could regain contact with his family on return;  he
    had lived in Nigeria for most of his life and spoke the  language.   On
    this basis and the remaining unchallenged evidence, even  if  the  FTTJ
    had misdirected himself as to the law, for example by setting too  high
    a threshold for either EX.1 or paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),  the  evidence
    was not such as to enable the FTTJ  to  find  that  the  appellant  had
    demonstrated that there were either  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    couple continuing their family life  in  Nigeria  or  very  significant
    obstacles to the appellant integrating into Nigerian life.   In  making
    this finding, I take into account the appellant's witness statement  in
    the FTT which includes a list of relevant factors,  together  with  the
    evidence generally  as  to  the  nature  of  the  appellant's  and  his
    partner's relationship with her son (and see also below as regards  the
    appellant's and his partner's claimed relationship with her son).

11. It is submitted for the appellant that the FTTJ did not  make  specific
    findings on family life between the appellant and his stepson and  that
    the failure to do so amounted to a material error of law.

12. At [68] the FTTJ makes specific findings of fact about the  appellant's
    partner's son's circumstances which are not challenged before me.  They
    are to the effect that the appellant's partner's son is aged 25, a  few
    months from completing his studies and  with  "a  degree  of  financial
    independence given his work with Virgin Atlantic in what now can  be  a
    permanent part-time position.  This work is connected directly  to  his
    studies and the career path which he wishes to follow  in  the  airline
    industry". The FTTJ finds that "as the appellant's step-son is  now  an
    adult  and  has  a  measure  of  financial  independence,  any  ongoing
    financial dependence on his mother is likely to be limited".    In  his
    statement for the hearing in the  FTT  the  appellant's  partner's  son
    referred  to  being  dependent  on  his  mother  both  emotionally  and
    financially.  However a degree of emotional and financial dependence is
    to be expected for an adult student  living  at  home.   The  issue  is
    whether that is over and above the norm.  The FTTJ's  findings  on  the
    issue are sustainable on the evidence.   None  of  the  witnesses  make
    reference to the appellant's  partner's  son  being  dependent  on  the
    appellant.  It cannot be said therefore that there exists family  life,
    such as to engage Article 8, between the appellant and/or  his  partner
    and her son.  Given the lack of evidence to  suggest  an  emotional  or
    financial bond over and above the norm  between  any  of  the  parties,
    there was no need for the FTTJ to make further findings on the issue.

13. The evidence before the FTTJ does not support a finding that there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to the appellant and  his  partner  continuing
    their family life in Nigeria; nor does it support a finding that  there
    are very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's  integration  on
    return.   The outcome of the appeal could have been no different  given
    the evidence before the FTTJ.

14. I do not accept Mr Karim's submission that the relationship between the
    appellant and his partner's son and/or the latter's  relationship  with
    his mother required the matter to be considered outside the Rules.  The
    partner's son's  age  and  personal  circumstances  did  not  meet  the
    criteria in the Rules and  those  rules  were  drafted  with  the  UK's
    obligations under Article 8 in mind.  There was no requirement  on  the
    FTTJ to consider the matter further outside the Rules given the  nature
    of the relationship between the appellant, his partner and her son  (SS
    (Congo) and Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and Sunassee [2015] EWHC 1604). The
    evidence was adequately considered by the FTTJ  under  the  Immigration
    Rules. The appellant's circumstances are not  such  as  to  justify  an
    assessment outside the Rules, insofar as his own relationship  and  his
    partner's relationship with her son is concerned.



Decision

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve a
    material error of law and the decision is preserved.

16. This appeal is dismissed.


A M Black

Signed      Date 13 January 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


A M Black

Signed      Date 13 January 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black

