
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia229632014
     ia229682014, IA229852014
     ia229922014, ia230022014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th April 2016                            |On 25th May 2016              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                     Kinsley Kem Eben (FIRST APPELLANT)
                 Ada Olufunmilayo Saheed (SECOND APPELLANT)
                          [K K E] (third appellant)
                         [K O E] (fourth appellant)
                          [K T E] (fifth appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Gilbert, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first Appellant is a national of Belize and  Nigeria.   The  second
    Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  The first and second Appellants are
    husband and wife and the parents of the third and fourth Appellants who
    are minor children born respectively on [ ] 2008 and  [  ]  2011.   The
    first Appellant entered the United Kingdom on  20th  April  2002  on  a
    visit visa.  He was subsequently granted on various occasions leave  as
    a student until 31st December 2007.  His spouse, the  second  Appellant
    was granted entry clearance as a visitor valid from  4th  October  2005
    for six months.

 2. In 2013 the Appellants made applications for leave to remain in the  UK
    on the basis of their relationship with their family and on  behalf  of
    the first and second Appellants in particular with regard to  the  fact
    that the third Appellant was 7 years old at the  time  of  application.
    The Secretary of State gave due  consideration  to  their  family  life
    under Article 8 which he noted from 9th July 2012 fell  under  Appendix
    FM of the Immigration Rules.  Their applications were  refused  on  8th
    July 2013.

 3. Thereafter application was made for permission to  apply  for  judicial
    review and the proceedings culminated in a decision of the Secretary of
    State on 12th May 2014 refusing the application for leave to remain  on
    the grounds that removal would not place the United Kingdom  in  breach
    of its obligations under the Human Rights Act 1998.  A direction  under
    Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 was given for removal
    of the Appellants from the United Kingdom.

 4. The Appellants appealed and the appeal came before Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Finch sitting at Taylor House on 6th January 2015.  In  a
    determination promulgated on 14th February 2015 the Appellants' appeals
    were allowed.

 5. On 23rd February 2015 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds  of  Appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  Those grounds contended firstly that the  judge
    had failed to properly apply the Immigration Rules, in particular  that
    the judge had failed  to  take  into  account  the  requirement  of  E-
    LTRPT.2.3-2.4, and so had failed  to  properly  apply  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Secondly the grounds contended that the  judge  had  failed  to
    properly apply statute insofar as the  judge  had  found  that  in  the
    context of the Immigration Rules Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act  meant
    that no weight had to be attached to the poor  immigration  history  of
    the first and second Appellants.  It was submitted that  that  approach
    constituted a material error of law.

 6. On 15th April 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert granted permission
    to appeal.  Judge  Lambert  noted  that  the  decision  was  less  than
    logically set out and that the judge had failed to make  clear  at  the
    end of the decision whether the appeals were allowed within or  outside
    the Immigration Rules.  There was no Rule 24 response.

 7. It was on that basis that  the  appeal  came  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there was a material error of law in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I found that there was and  that  the  judge  had
    failed to give due and  full  consideration  to  the  poor  immigration
    history  of  the  first  and  second  Appellants.   I  gave  directions
    indicating that the sole issue outstanding  related  to  the  balancing
    exercise to be carried out with  regard  to  the  appeals  pursuant  to
    Article 8 and the correct weight to be given  as  to  when  the  family
    should or should not be required to leave the UK.

 8. The matter returned before me on 27th November at which stage the first
    Appellant produced a letter from the Secretary of State dated 7th  June
    2010 indicating that it was under consideration that the Appellant  was
    to be granted indefinite leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom.   The
    Secretary of State sought time to consider that letter and acknowledged
    that if indefinite leave had been granted it would be the intention  of
    the Secretary of  State  to  withdraw  the  appeal.   The  matter  then
    reappeared before me on 26th February 2016 and the Secretary  of  State
    asked for more time.  I consented to such a request (with  the  support
    of the Appellant's representatives) but indicated that the matter could
    not be delayed further and the matter was to be relisted for the  first
    available date 28 days hence.

 9. It is on that basis that the appeal comes  back  before  me.   In  this
    instant case the Secretary of State is represented by her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Walker and the  Appellants  by  their  instructed
    Counsel Mr Gilbert.

Submissions/Discussion

10. Two matters are of importance here.  Firstly I am advised by Mr  Walker
    that the document of 2010 was produced by an administrative process  by
    the case owner and I am referred to  the  computerised  printout  which
    shows that whilst the case owner may be recommending  indefinite  leave
    to remain that is subject to approval by the caseworker's line  manager
    and that such approval was never granted.  The letter was never printed
    with the intention that it would be sent to the Appellant but  only  to
    the senior caseworker.  Consequently the position is that the Appellant
    is not in receipt of a grant of indefinite leave to remain.

11. Secondly as Mr Gilbert points  out  there  has  been  a  further  major
    development in that the third Appellant  [KKE],  enrolled  for  British
    citizenship in April 2016.  [KKE] was a child who had been born in  the
    UK and had been present for ten years in the UK and as Mr Walker agrees
    and concedes  firstly  [KKE]  meets  all  the  requirements  under  the
    Immigration Rules and secondly he satisfied the  requirements  to  make
    application for British  nationality.   Mr  Walker  accepts  that  this
    changes the whole complexion of the case  and  whilst  he  cannot  make
    concessions he acknowledges that the whole face of the application  has
    changed.

12. Mr Gilbert indicates that [KKE] is not yet a British citizen  but  that
    there is no doubt that the application will be confirmed and that he is
    entitled to it.  He further points out that the fourth Appellant  [KOE]
    has been here for almost eight years and that his  family  and  private
    life within the UK is also a weighty factor.  He asked me to allow  the
    appeal.

Findings

13. As Mr Walker states the application by  the  third  Appellant  and  the
    acceptance that he meets all the requirements  to  be  granted  British
    citizenship materially changes the whole aspect of the  appeal.   There
    are similarities between this case and the guidance  given  in  PD  and
    Others (Article 8 - conjoined family  claims)  Sri  Lanka  [2016]  UKUT
    00108 (IAC) where the President of the Tribunal stated

         "In considering the conjoined Article 8  ECHR  claims  of  multiple
         family members decision makers should first apply  the  Immigration
         Rules to  each  individual  applicant  and,  if  appropriate,  then
         consider Article 8 outside the Rules.  This exercise will typically
         entail the consideration and determination of all  claims  jointly,
         so as to ensure that all  material  facts  and  considerations  are
         taken into account in each case."

14. Applying that principle and the  fact  that  the  third  Appellant  now
    succeeds under the Immigration Rules and that British citizenship  with
    all requirements met is pending and the fact that the fourth  Appellant
    has been in the UK as a minor now for over eight years I  am  satisfied
    that with the third Appellant succeeding under  the  Immigration  Rules
    and the accepted fact that  it  would  inappropriate  to  separate  the
    family that despite the appalling immigration history of the first  and
    second Appellants the Appellants claims must succeed.

15. It would not be practical to allow the appeals of the third and  fourth
    Appellants and refuse those of the first and second.  It is plainly  in
    the best interests of the children to remain  with  their  parents.   I
    accept the submission of Mr Gilbert that it would not be reasonable  to
    expect the third and fourth Appellants  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom
    bearing in mind the continuity of social and  education  provision  and
    the fact that they have never visited Nigeria.  I further  accept  that
    the following factors point to the weighty integration  of  the  family
    within the UK namely

       . The first and second Appellants both speak English.

       . The first Appellant established private life to which weight can be
         attached during the lawful period of his residence i.e. five and  a
         half years.

       . That the first Appellant has been present in the  UK  for  fourteen
         years and only within  that  period  has  visited  Nigeria  on  one
         occasion for three weeks in 2007.

       . That the second Appellant has been present in the UK for eleven and
         a half years.

       . That neither  the  first  or  the  second  Appellant  had  received
         benefits from the UK social fund and that their support has been in
         kind for church activities.

Decision

The appeal of the 3rd Appellant is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

The appeals of all Appellants are allowed under Article 8  of  the  European
Convention of Human Rights.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 25 May 2016



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application made for a fee award and none is made.




Signed                              Date 25 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
