







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22456/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 18 January 2017                  |On: 2 February 2017                  |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                    Mr Chaudhary Muhammad Kashif Siddique
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr J Plowright, counsel (instructed by Lea Valley
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 15 December 1982.  He
      appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge NMK Lawrence,  promulgated  on  12  July  2016,  dismissing  his
      appeal.


   2. The appellant made an application on 13 July 2013 for leave to  remain
      in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.


   3. The application was refused on 19 May 2014. It was  alleged  that  the
      appellant had employed deception to secure leave by obtaining a  TOIEC
      test certificate, the test scores of which were cancelled  by  ETS  as
      the test was allegedly taken by a proxy.


   4. The appellant  did  not  attend  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal on 17 June 2016. The solicitors had  sought  an  adjournment.
      However, counsel (not Mr Plowright) attended the hearing and  informed
      the Judge that the appellant was unwell but that the proceedings could
      continue by way of submissions only.


   5. Oral submissions followed from both parties. Judge Lawrence took  into
      account evidence contained  in  the  respective  bundles  as  well  as
      documents submitted by the appellant at the hearing.


   6. The Judge stated that the appellant bears the legal  burden  of  proof
      "from  start  to  finish"  and  the  standard  is   the   balance   of
      probabilities.


   7. He noted that as the respondent alleged  that  the  appellant's  TOEIC
      certificate is not genuine the  respondent  bore  the  evidential,  as
      opposed to  the  burden  legal  and  needed  to  provide  evidence  of
      sufficient strength and quality, '....and she would need to subject it
      to a 'critical', 'anxious' and 'heightened' scrutiny [8].


   8. Once discharged, the evidential burden shifted to  the  appellant  who
      has to rebut it on the balance of probability.


   9.  Judge  Lawrence  had  regard  to  the  skeleton  argument  presented.
      Reference was made to various decisions including Qadir. He noted that
      the appellant had made an asylum claim. That was withdrawn.  The  only
      decision before him was that of the respondent dated 19 May 2014.


  10. He had regard  to  a  report  from  Professor  French,  a  speech  and
      linguistics specialist. He had considered the methodology carried  out
      by ETS in identifying whether an appellant took the  test  or  someone
      else. He noted that the two witness statements from  Rebecca  Collings
      and Peter Millington provided generic evidence rather than specific to
      a particular appellant.


  11. Professor French was also provided with a report from Dr  Harrison,  a
      forensic consultant. His methodology had been commended  by  Professor
      French.


  12. The Judge found that Professor French's conclusions  were  cogent.  He
      had considered Dr Harrison's  report  as  well  as  all  the  material
      usually relied on by the  respondent.  He  was  able  to  balance  the
      information presented in favour of  the  appellant  as  well  as  that
      presented on behalf of the respondent. He was  able  to  rely  on  his
      report.


  13. Judge Lawrence noted that the respondent alleged  that  the  appellant
      did not himself take the TOIEC test.  Whilst  the  witness  statements
      from Collings and Middleton in themselves may  not  be  authoritative,
      Professor French conducted an analysis of the methodology used by  ETS
      and concluded that the errors in the system used by ETS are small.  In
      the light  of  these,  he  found  at  [14]  that  the  respondent  had
      discharged the burden of proof to the requisite 'high standard'.


  14. At [15] Judge Lawrence stated that the appellant's case had  been  put
      on the basis of a challenge to the methodology relied on by  ETS.  The
      appellant had not provided any  positive  evidence  to  undermine  the
      evidence relied on by the respondent.  The  nature  of  that  positive
      evidence is a matter for him to decide.


  15. Having considered the  evidence  in  the  round,  he  found  that  the
      respondent had discharged the evidential burden of proof to the higher
      standard. The appellant had not taken any steps to  rebut  it  in  any
      positive way [16].


  16.  Nor  had  the  appellant  put  forward  any  evidence  amounting   to
      "compelling circumstances".


  17. The appellant's application was refused under paragraph  322(1)(A)  of
      the Immigration Rules.


  18. On 8 December 2016, Upper Tribunal Judge Coker granted  the  appellant
      permission to appeal on the basis that it was arguable that the First-
      tier Tribunal considered the appellant to  have  relied  upon  an  ETS
      obtained language  certificate  whereas  his  CAS  indicated  that  he
      obtained his language certificate through City and  Guilds.  That  did
      not appear to have been considered by the First-tier Tribunal  despite
      having been referred to in the skeleton argument.


The appeal


  19. Mr Plowright referred to a  letter  from  the  appellant's  solicitors
      dated 13 February 2014, in which it was noted that the  appellant  had
      already provided an additional language  test  from  City  and  Guilds
      (ESOL) along with his ETS TOIEC at the date of  the  application.  The
      CAS letter also referred to the City and Guilds and it  was  contended
      in that letter that his applications "could be considered  within  the
      standard decision time."


  20. He referred to the CAS statement at page 15 of the bundle  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal. That statement, dated 3 July 2013, noted that the
      appellant had been assessed by the CEFR Level C1 on the basis  of  his
      City  and  Guilds  certificate  in  ESOL  International.  It  was  the
      certificate relied on by the college. The First-tier Judge however did
      not refer to that certificate at all in  the  determination.  He  only
      referred to the TOIEC certificate.


  21. The appellant had  contended  in  his  witness  statement  before  the
      Tribunal that as he had already done his City and Guilds test, he  did
      not need to obtain a fake certificate from ETS. He  contends  that  he
      never relied upon an ETS certificate to obtain leave to remain in  the
      UK.


  22. The conclusion by the Judge that he had  not  presented  any  positive
      evidence was wrong.


  23. Nor did the Judge make a proper assessment of the "look up tool."  The
      appellant's name was spelled 'Chaudhar'. He is also  stated  to  be  a
      Bangladeshi national, although his date of birth is correct.  This had
      to be properly looked at and assessed. Accordingly, the  lack  of  any
      analysis meant that the respondent had not succeeded in  showing  that
      she had "passed the evidential level required."


  24. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Clarke submitted that the grounds were
      without merit. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that  the
      Judge did  not  consider  that  his  CAS  indicated  he  obtained  the
      certificate through City and Guilds.  The  complaint  that  the  Judge
      considered the TOEIC certificate is misplaced. The fact  remains  that
      the TOEIC certificate was provided by the appellant's solicitors along
      with his ETS TOEIC certificate at the date of application.


  25. He submitted that s.322(1)(A) is mandatory. That provides  that  where
      false representations have been made or false documents or information
      have been submitted (whether or not material to the  application,  and
      whether or not to the applicant's knowledge) or  material  facts  have
      not been disclosed, in relation to the application an application  for
      leave to remain is to be refused.


  26. He submitted that no  positive  evidence  had  been  provided  by  the
      appellant, who elected not to attend the hearing. There was  a  single
      sentence in the witness statement that he did not need to supply  fake
      certificates because he had already done the City and Guilds test. The
      fact that he stated that he did not rely upon the TOEIC from  ETS  and
      that he had already completed a City and Guilds test was  not  to  the
      point. The appellant did not make a positive  assertion  that  he  was
      present at the test which he attended. The witness statement relied on
      was in fact over two years old.


  27. The appellant did not attend the hearing to be cross examined. He  has
      in effect sought to rely on a new point which was not raised  at  this
      hearing.


  28. In reply, Mr Plowright submitted that  in  the  circumstances  it  was
      unnecessary for the appellant  to  put  up  a  positive  case  if  the
      respondent's evidence was insufficient.


      Assessment


  29. The Tribunal in SM and Qadir (ETS  -  Evidence  -  Burden  of  Proof),
      [2016] UKUT 229 concluded at [68] that while bearing in mind that  the
      context is one of alleged deception,  they  must  be  mindful  of  the
      comparatively modest thresholds which the evidential  burden  entails.
      This calls for an evaluative assessment on the part of  the  Tribunal.
      They must be satisfied that the secretary of state had discharged this
      burden. The effect of that is  that  there  was  a  burden,  again  an
      evidential one, on the appellant of raising an  innocent  explanation.
      The factors in relation to the ultimate legal burden are  set  out  at
      [69].


  30. In the grounds for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  it  was
      contended that the Judge erred in considering the facts of  the  case.
      The appellant did not submit the TOEIC certificate to the sponsor  and
      was not required to do so in order to  obtain  the  CAS.  Instead,  in
      order to obtain the CAS, he submitted an English language test awarded
      by City and Guilds. That was mentioned in the CAS and the statement of
      the CAS.  It  is  contended  that  he  never  relied  upon  the  TOEIC
      certificate to obtain that CAS or any previous leave to remain.


  31. However, it is accepted that  the  appellant  did  indeed  provide  an
      ETS/TOEIC certificate at the date of his application as well as a City
      and Guilds certificate. Accordingly, that document had been  submitted
      in relation to the application.  The document need not be material  to
      the application and need not even be to the appellant's knowledge.


  32. It is contended by Mr Plowright that the ETS relied on did not mention
      the correct details of the appellant. His  nationality  was  given  as
      Bangladeshi whereas he is a  national  of  Pakistan.  Accordingly,  it
      cannot be ascertained whether the ETS correspondence was in respect of
      the appellant or some other person with the  same  name  and  date  of
      birth.


  33. I note from the ETS report that on the first page the appellant's name
      is  spelled  'Chauhar  Siddique'.   His  nationality  is  said  to  be
      Bangladeshi. The date of birth is stated to be 15 December  1982.   At
      Annex A to that document, which sets out 'Evidence from ETS in respect
      of S1501480', the name is spelled 'Chaudhary'. The date  of  birth  in
      Annex A is also stated to be 15 December  1982.   Moreover,  the  test
      centre is stated to be Queensway College which the appellant  has  not
      challenged.


  34. I do not find that the Judge dismissed the appeal simply on the  basis
      of the generic evidence provided but the details were set out  in  the
      ETS SELT Source Data printout before the Tribunal. This  set  out  the
      relevant certificate number and the date and place where the test  was
      administered.


  35. The burden is on the respondent on the balance  of  probabilities  and
      not beyond any reasonable doubt. Although wrongly stating that  he  is
      Bangladeshi, his name, date of birth and the test centre as set out in
      the document have  not  been  challenged.  In  the  circumstances  the
      possibility as submitted by Mr Plowright that there may be two persons
      with the same names and dates of birth, who took the same test on  the
      same day at the same centre is  a  coincidence  too  far  and  is  not
      plausible.


  36. It has also been submitted that the  appellant  did  produce  evidence
      amounting to a positive  case.  In  his  witness  statement  dated  10
      November 2014 he stated that his CAS letter mentioned that  he  relied
      on the City and Guilds test to obtain the offer  of  studies.  He  had
      however not relied on the TOEIC test but the City and Guilds one.   He
      contended that as he had done the City and Guilds test he did not need
      to obtain a fake certificate from ETS.


  37. Apart from that assertion, however, he has failed to give any evidence
      that he sat  the  test  personally  on  the  date  and  at  the  venue
      concerned.  He did not present himself for cross examination on  these
      issues.


  38. The Judge stated that he considered the evidence  in  the  round,  and
      found that the respondent had discharged the burden  [16].  There  was
      sufficient sustainable evidence before the  Tribunal  justifying  that
      finding.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      any material error on a point of law, and shall stand.


      No anonymity direction is made.










      Signed                             Date 31 January 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer





