
                                    [pic]
ST

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/22074/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 24 January 2017                            |On 30 January 2017           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     M A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Respondent:    Mr Arayn, legal representative
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State pursues this appeal. I refer to  the  respondent
    in these proceedings as the  "claimant".  The  claimant,  who  was  the
    appellant in the First-tier Tribunal, appealed against the Secretary of
    State's decision to refuse him leave to  remain  in  the  UK  on  human
    rights  grounds  and  to  give  directions  pursuant  to  s47  of   the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 for his removal  from  the
    UK.

 2. The appeal came before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Cohen  ("the
    FTTJ") who, in a decision promulgated on 26 August  2016,  allowed  the
    appeal on human rights grounds outside the Immigration Rules.

 3. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal.  It was granted  by
    Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Landes  on  15  December  2016  who
    considered it arguable that the FTTJ did  not  take  into  account  the
    claimant had not met the Immigration Rules, s117B of the  2002  Act  or
    that the couple had married at a time when the claimant was in  the  UK
    unlawfully.  Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds albeit  it
    was not considered there was merit in the ground that the FTTJ  made  a
    misdirection in law by failing to identify any compelling circumstances
    (given the recent guidance in Hesham Ali (Iraq) [2016] UKSC  60).  Thus
    the appeal came before me.

Submissions

 4. For the Secretary of State, Mr Clarke submitted that  Hesham  Ali  only
    applied to deportation appeals  and  that  the  FTTJ  was  required  to
    identify compelling  circumstances  for  consideration  of  the  appeal
    outside the Immigration Rules and pursuant to Article 8  jurisprudence.
    No such circumstances had  been  identified,  contrary  to  SS  (Congo)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  The FTTJ's task was to look through the  lens  of
    the Immigration Rules, consistent with the guidance in SS (Congo).  The
    latter case did not preclude consideration of  an  appeal  outside  the
    Rules but a judge was required to identify the compelling circumstances
    which required such consideration before embarking on such an analysis.
     Such circumstances should go beyond any EX.1 findings under the Rules.
    Furthermore, the FTTJ had failed to have regard to the public  interest
    factors pursuant to s117B and Dube (ss 117A-117D)  [2015]  UKUT  00090.
    Had the FTTJ done so, little  weight  would  have  been  given  to  the
    claimant's private and family life with his wife. It was  an  error  of
    law for the FTTJ to find an entry clearance application by the claimant
    would succeed; there was no evidence to support such a finding.

 5. Mr Arayn, for the claimant, submitted the FTTJ had  based  findings  on
    the evidence. They were open to the FTTJ. They were not perverse. Given
    the recent guidance in Hesham Ali at [41]  and  162],  "an  applicant's
    failure to qualify under the rules is for present purposes the point at
    which to begin, not end consideration of the claim  under  article  8".
    He also referred to SS (Congo) at [44].  He submitted that  Hesham  Ali
    was relevant to non-deportation cases because inter  alia  the  Supreme
    Court had referred at [162] to the guidance in Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL
    11, a removal case.  In  any  event,  it  was  clear  from  the  FTTJ's
    findings that  the  claimant's  spouse's  circumstances  including  her
    health and caring responsibilities  had  been  influential.   Mr  Arayn
    referred to [28] and [29] of  the  FTTJ's  decision  where  the  public
    interest had been taken into account in accordance with the guidance in
    Dube (albeit there was no reference to s117B specifically).  As regards
    the public interest factors in s117B, Mr Arayn submitted  s117B(4)  and
    (5) had been addressed at [26] of the decision.  He submitted there was
    evidence before the FTTJ of the claimant's ability to  meet  the  entry
    clearance requirements.  It was implicit from [26] that  the  FTTJ  had
    assessed the degree of weight to be given to the claimant's private and
    family life.

 6. Mr Clarke replied that it was for the claimant to demonstrate he  would
    fulfil the entry clearance requirements. Whilst there was  evidence  of
    income, this was the couple's joint income and the Rules provided  that
    only the sponsor's income could be taken into  account.  There  was  no
    evidence of the claimant's  ability  to  fulfil  the  English  language
    requirements.

Discussion

 7. It is submitted for the Secretary of State, the FTTJ had identified  no
    compelling circumstances for consideration of the  appeal  outside  the
    Immigration Rules and pursuant to the Article 8 jurisprudence.  I  bear
    in mind the references by each party to Hesham Ali.  Whilst  that  case
    was indeed a deportation case, the guidance of the  Supreme  Court  has
    some bearing on  removal  cases  such  as  this.  The  Rules  are  more
    prescriptive in the case of deportation appeals and  yet  it  is  clear
    from that case that the Supreme Court did not consider the Rules to  be
    a complete code in deportation cases.  Lord Reed at paragraphs 47 -  50
    endorsed the structured approach to proportionality, found  in  Razgar,
    and said "what has now become the established method  of  analysis  can
    therefore continue to be followed in this  context  ...".   Given  this
    guidance, I am unable to find it was an error of law for  the  FTTJ  to
    undertake a full Article 8 assessment, particularly given the  evidence
    of the appellant's wife's health and the impact of this on the couple's
    family life.  It is arguable that those were  matters  which  were  not
    capable of consideration under the Rules (SS (Congo)).  That  said,  it
    follows that such an  assessment  requires  that  the  public  interest
    factors set out in s117A-s117D be taken into account (Dube).

 8. I am satisfied that the FTTJ failed to give due regard  to  the  public
    interest factors identified in s117B of the 2002 Act.   Whilst  I  note
    the guidance in Dube to the effect that specific reference to  the  Act
    is not necessary provided the relevant factors are addressed, it cannot
    be said that the FTTJ applied the test in s117B according to its terms.
     In particular, I do not accept the submission for  the  claimant  that
    the FTTJ gave little weight to the appellant's  relationship  with  his
    wife, a relationship which was formed at a time  when  the  appellant's
    leave to remain had expired and his right to appeal had  also  expired.
    I am unable to accept the submission that the reference at [26] to  the
    claimant's "immigration  history"  not  being  a  significant  negative
    factor weighing against him in the balancing  exercise  addresses  this
    point.  This means only that the FTTJ addressed the adverse  impact  of
    the appellant's immigration history; it is not  a  finding  as  to  the
    weight to be given to the relationship, given that it was formed  at  a
    time when he had no immigration status.  Indeed, this finding  suggests
    that the FTTJ has also given little weight to the  fact  the  appellant
    does not meet the criteria in the Immigration Rules for  the  grant  of
    leave to remain on human rights grounds.  Such an approach is  directly
    contrary to the current guidance on the issue which is  to  the  effect
    that the appeal should be decided through the lens of the Rules.   This
    error of law is significant and material, impacting as it does  on  the
    outcome of the appeal.

 9. I am also not satisfied that the FTTJ's findings  with  regard  to  the
    ability of the appellant to meet the entry clearance  requirements  are
    sustainable.  As Mr Clarke rightly  says,  only  the  earnings  of  the
    sponsor can be taken into account in assessing  whether  the  appellant
    would meet the financial requirements; the FTTJ appears to  have  taken
    into account their joint earnings. Furthermore, there  is  no  evidence
    the claimant would meet the English  language  requirements.   In  that
    regard it is perhaps relevant that  the  claimant  was  assisted  by  a
    Turkish interpreter at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.   Thus  the
    FTTJ's findings on whether or not the claimant  would  meet  the  entry
    clearance requirements are unsustainable on the  evidence.  This  is  a
    core aspect of his assessment of proportionality.  It is also  relevant
    to the public interest in  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    control (s117B(1)).

10. For these reasons, the FTTJ's assessment of the proportionality of  the
    proposed interference with the claimant's right to a private and family
    life is fundamentally flawed and unsustainable. It must be  set  aside.
    All parties were agreed that, in such circumstances, it was appropriate
    for the appeal to be decided afresh in the First-tier Tribunal  because
    medical evidence may be required with regard to the  claimant's  wife's
    health and their IVF treatment. I agree with that course.  No  findings
    of fact are preserved.  I observe in passing that the claimant does not
    cross-appeal the FTTJ's finding that the claimant  does  not  meet  the
    Immigration Rules. However, given that a fresh hearing will require  an
    assessment  of  the  evidence  at  the  date  of   hearing,   including
    consideration of whether or not  the  claimant  meets  the  Immigration
    Rules at that date, I set  aside  the  whole  decision,  including  the
    decision  that  the  claimant  does  not  meet  the  criteria  in   the
    Immigration Rules.  A proper assessment of the appeal on  human  rights
    grounds will necessitate consideration afresh of whether  the  claimant
    meets the Rules.

11. For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains  an
    error of  law  in  the  assessment  of  the  evidence  as  regards  the
    claimant's human rights claim.  It must be set aside in its entirety.

Decision

12. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside in its
    entirety.  The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be
    dealt with afresh, pursuant to  Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunal
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement  7.2(v),  before
    any judge aside from FTTJ Cohen.

13. Whilst no anonymity direction was made in the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I
    make such a direction now in view of my references  to  the  claimant's
    wife's health and the IVF treatment.



A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
    Dated: 30 January 2017




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimant and to the  Secretary  of  State.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
  Dated: 30 January 2017

                                 DIRECTIONS


 1. Any further documentary evidence relied upon by either party is  to  be
    filed with the Tribunal and served upon the other  party  by  no  later
    than 14 days before the date of the hearing in the First Tier Tribunal.

 2. The appeal is listed at Taylor House with  a  time  estimate  of  three
    hours to be heard at 10.00 am on ............................

 3. A Turkish interpreter is required.



A M Black

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
        Dated: 30 January 2017

