

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
                                                               IA/22267/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Manchester                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 20th July 2016                            |On: 20th July 2016           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between


                                  Mary Sowa
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Harrison,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Moksud, International Immigration Advisory
Service


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of  Sierra  Leone  born  on  the  2nd  June
    1969[1].


 2. On the 9th December 2014  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Dickenson)
    dismissed her appeal on human rights  grounds  against  a  decision  to
    remove her from the United Kingdom pursuant to s10 of  the  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999.  By way of written decision promulgated on the 3rd
    June 2016 I set that decision aside.  My full reasons are  set  out  in
    the  attached  'Error  of  Law'  decision  but  in  essence  the  error
    identified was a failure to make  clear  findings  as  to  whether  the
    Appellant enjoys a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  with
    her daughter in the United Kingdom. Her daughter,  identified  in  this
    determination as M, now has indefinite leave to remain, having lived in
    this country since 2005.

 3. This is the re-made decision.  The  appeal  is  pursued  on  Article  8
    grounds only. It is necessary to briefly address why  that  is.  First,
    the Appellant cannot hope to succeed under the Immigration  Rules.   In
    respect of Appendix FM she cannot show that she is  a  'partner'  since
    she does not have a qualifying relationship. Nor can she show that  she
    is a 'parent' under the terms of that  part  of  the  Rules  since  she
    shares (at the very least)  parental  responsibility  for  M  with  her
    sister, Ms Kamara.   Second, in respect of private life  the  Appellant
    concedes that she cannot meet any  of  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)  concerning   either   long   residence   or   obstacles   to
    reintegration.  She can only hope  to  succeed  on  Article  8  grounds
    'outside of the rules'. I am satisfied that there are good  grounds  to
    consider her case on this footing: Appendix FM is not a "complete code"
    and this case is a paradigm example of why.   The Appellant may well be
    a parent with a genuine and subsisting family life  with  a  minor  who
    nevertheless falls outwith the scope of Appendix FM.


    The Evidence

 4. The evidence which led the First-tier Tribunal to doubt the  nature  of
    the claimed relationship between the Appellant and her daughter  is  an
    Order of the Manchester County Court date 19th September 2007 in  which
    parental responsibility for M is conferred upon the Appellant's  sister
    Camilla Kamara.


 5. The Appellant now relies upon the  following  material  to  demonstrate
    that she does have a genuine and subsisting relationship with M:

                  i) A letter dated 14th June 2016 from the Secretary of St
                     Thomas of Canterbury RC Primary School in Salford. Mrs
                     Sarah  Wallace writes to confirm that M  was  a  pupil
                     there between September 2007 and July 2015.    As  far
                     as the school are concerned the Appellant had parental
                     responsibility for M throughout that entire period, or
                     at least from October 2007. The Appellant dropped  her
                     at and picked her up from school  and  was  the  first
                     point  of  contact  for  teachers.  She  was   "hugely
                     involved" in M's school life  and is described as "one
                     of the most supportive parents" the  school  has  ever
                     known.


                 ii) A letter dated  2nd  June  2016  from  Reverend  David
                     R.Macfarlane P.P of St Thomas  of  Canterbury  Church.
                     Rev. Macfarlane writes that he has known the Appellant
                     since October 2007 and that she regularly attends mass
                     with her two daughters. He describes her  as  a  "good
                     mother to her children and is bringing  them  up  very
                     well".

                iii) A statement from the Appellant dated 12th July 2016 in
                     which she avers that she has had  full  responsibility
                     for M since resuming living with her in October  2007.
                     Prior to that she was away training as a nurse  and  M
                     was living with her aunt Camilla  Kamara.  It  was  at
                     that time that the Court Order was obtained.

                 iv) A letter (undated  and  handwritten)  from  M  herself
                     confirming that her love  for  her  mother  (and  baby
                     sister) is "infinite" and that  without  her  mother's
                     support she would not have managed  to  get  into  the
                     good secondary school that she now attends.

                  v) A statement dated 12th July 2016 from  Camilla  Kamara
                     confirming the contents of the Appellant's  statement.
                     Ms Kamara states that she and her sister have  brought
                     up the Appellant's children,  and  her  own  daughter,
                     together. They have supported each other and  share  a
                     strong bond.

    Both the Appellant and M attended the hearing but were not called  upon
    to give any further evidence.



       My Findings


 6. There is a family life between the Appellant and her  daughter  M.  The
    evidence itemised at (i)-(v) above all attests to  that.  There  is  no
    credible evidence to the contrary. I am satisfied that there is further
    a family life between M and her sister, born in the UK in May 2013.   I
    am satisfied that the decision to remove the Appellant (and her younger
    daughter whom  the  Secretary  of  State  has  agreed  to  treat  as  a
    dependent) would interfere with the family life they both share with M.
     Article 8 is therefore engaged.


 7. The decision  to  remove  persons  with  no  leave  to  remain  is  one
    rationally connected with the legitimate Article 8(2) aim of protection
    of the economy.

 8. The remaining Razgar question is whether the decision is proportionate.
    The parties agree that in determining that question I must have  regard
    to the factors set out in section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.   It is not  contested  that  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control is in the public interest, nor that  the  Appellant
    has not had any leave to remain since September  2005.   The  Appellant
    speaks fluent English and is financially independent  in  that  she  is
    supported by her sister.   Little weight can be placed on  her  private
    life, established as it was when her status was unlawful.  I  bear  all
    of those factors in mind. The principle provision that has relevance to
    this appeal is s117B(6):

         (6)In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

         (a)the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a qualifying child, and

         (b )it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         United Kingdom.


 9. In MA (Pakistan) & Ors [2016] EWCA Civ 705 the  Court  of  Appeal  held
    that this provision is not simply  one  of  six  that  all  have  equal
    application. At paragraph 17 Elias LJ states:


         "there can be  no doubt that section 117B(6) must be read as a self-
         contained provision in the sense  that  Parliament  has  stipulated
         that  where  the  conditions  specified  in  the  sub-section   are
         specified, the public interest will not justify removal".

10. If the Appellant can show  that  she  meets  all  three  of  the  limbs
    contained in the provision, the public interest does  not  require  her
    removal and it would follow that her appeal must be allowed, since  the
    Secretary of State would be unable to show that her  removal  would  be
    proportionate.

11. I find as fact that M is a qualifying child.  She  now  has  indefinite
    leave to remain, having lived here continuously since 2005.    She  has
    therefore lived here for well in excess of  seven years.

12. I find as fact that the Appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental
    relationship with M. That is plain from the evidence of the school, the
    Reverend, M herself and her aunt.  The fact that Ms Kamara was  granted
    parental responsibility in 2007 does not negate the relationship that M
    enjoys with her mother.

13. The remaining question is whether it is reasonable for M to  leave  the
    UK. I need not decide that question since it has already been resolved.
    In its decision dated 9th December 2014 the First-tier  Tribunal  found
    that she met the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  and  allowed
    her appeal. That decision was not challenged  by  the  Respondent,  who
    granted her leave to remain.  It  is  the  Respondent's  position  that
    "reasonable" in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) means the same as  "reasonable"
    in s117B(6), and this approach has been endorsed by the Court of Appeal
    in MA (Pakistan) [at 13].

14. All three limbs of the tests in s117B(6) are made out  and  the  public
    interest does not therefore require the Appellant to  be  removed  from
    the United Kingdom.



    Decisions

15. The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.


16. The appeal is allowed on Article 8 grounds.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                     20th
                                  July 2016
                           -----------------------
[1] The date of birth given in the appended Error of Law decision is
incorrect

