
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22804/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 1st June 2015                              |On 9th June 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MR JOHN TEYE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Kenny Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No attendance

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The Respondent to this appeal is a  citizen  of  Ghana  born  on  25th
      August 1969.  He successfully  appealed  against  a  decision  of  the
      Appellant dated  13th  May  2014  to  refuse  his  application  for  a
      Residence  Card  under  the  Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)
      Regulations 2006.   His appeal was allowed at the  first  instance  by
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Wiseman sitting at Richmond  on  27th
      January 2015. Although the Respondent could not show he was  a  family
      member of a qualifying person under Regulation 7 as a  spouse  he  was
      nevertheless in a permanent relationship with his partner. He was thus
      an extended family member under Regulation 8.  The Appellant  appealed
      against that decision arguing that the Judge  should  have  found  the
      decision to refuse not in accordance with the law such that a decision
      under Regulation 8 remained outstanding for the Appellant to take.

   2. Permission to appeal was granted on 27th March 2015 by Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Martin and the Upper Tribunal sent out a notice  of  hearing  to
      the parties on 5th May 2015 advising them of the hearing of the appeal
      fixed for 1st June 2015. On 21st May 2015  the  Appellant  decided  to
      grant the  Respondent's  application  for  a  Residence  card  without
      waiting for the outcome of her appeal. I was told that the case worker
      had decided to review the file before the matter came into court.

   3. At the hearing before me the  Presenting  Officer  indicated  that  in
      these circumstances the Appellant wished to withdraw  her  appeal  and
      sought the leave of the Tribunal under Rule 17 (1) (b) of the Tribunal
      Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 which provides  that  notice  of
      withdrawal may be given orally at the hearing.  Pursuant to Rule 17(2)
      I indicated that the Upper Tribunal would consent to  that  course  of
      action. As the Respondent's solicitors had noted in a  letter  to  the
      Upper Tribunal dated 28th May 2015 the appeal had now become  academic
      in the light of the grant and it was in accordance with the overriding
      objective that the appeal be withdrawn and the case closed.

Notice of Decision

Leave to the Appellant to withdraw her appeal.

Appeal withdrawn

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.

Signed this 5th day of June 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The fee award made at first instance shall stand.

Signed this 5th day of June 2015
.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

