
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/22864/2014
     IA/22858/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 March 2016                              |On 6 May 2016                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                            Mrs Razia Gul Afridi
                          Mr Atta Ur Rehman Afridi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R Martin of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, a Senior Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Pakistan  who  appealed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal with the permission of First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson.

2.   In granting permission  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Robertson
    identified that Immigration Judge Chana  (the  Immigration  Judge)  had
    wrongly stated that  the  appellant  and  her  representative  had  not
    attended the hearing when in fact they had.  Indeed, some of the  facts
    set out in the Immigration Judge's  decision  did  not  relate  to  the
    appellant's appeal.  These were clear procedural and substantive errors
    which had resulted in prejudice to the appellant  and  which  justified
    the grant of permission.

3.   The respondent, in  her  Rule  24  response,  did  not  seek  to  argue
    otherwise.

The Hearing

4.   At the hearing, which was attended by  both  parties'  representatives,
    it was accepted on behalf of the respondent  that  there  had  been  an
    unfair disposal and that none of the  findings  of  fact  made  by  the
    Immigration  Judge  could  stand.   Both  parties   agreed   that   the
    appropriate means of disposal was for the matter to be remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (FtT) for a  hearing  to  be  conducted  before  an
    Immigration Judge other than the Immigration Judge.

Decision and Directions

5.   Accordingly, upon the Upper Tribunal finding a material  error  of  law
    in the decision of the FtT I remit the matter back to the FtT.  I  make
    the following directions for the future disposal of this case:

    (1)  the matter be remitted to  the  FtT  for  a  new  hearing  of  the
         appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision;


    (2)  the hearing has to take place before a judge other than  Judge  of
         the First-tier Tribunal Chana;


    (3)  the hearing is preferably to take place before the IAC Birmingham;


    (4)  all further directions are to be sent out by the FtT;


    (5)  the appellant's  representatives  are  to  indicate  whether  they
         require an interpreter within 7 days of the service of this order;


    (5)  The FtT is to consider whether to make any fee award.


Anonymity

There is no anonymity direction in this case.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There is no fee award at this stage.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

