
                                    [pic]
IAC-BFD-MD-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/22697/2015
                                                               IA/22707/2015
                                                               IA/22702/2015
                                                               IA/22709/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 December 2016                   |On 13 December 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                             Bolanle [A] - first
                               [D O A]- second
                               [D A A] - third
                              [D J A] - fourth
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Izevbizua, Legal Representative.
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first Appellant is the mother  of  the  second,  third  and  fourth
    Appellants.  They  are  all  Nigerian  citizens  who  applied  to   the
    Respondent for leave to remain on the grounds  of  private  and  family
    life. Their appeals were heard at Bradford before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Pickup who in a decision promulgated on  27  April  2016,
    dismissed them.

 2. The Appellants sought permission to  appeal.  Their  applications  were
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hodgkinson. His reasons for
    so doing were:-

         "1. Permission is sought  to  appeal  the  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal  Judge  Pickup,  dated  27  April  2016,  dismissing   the
         appellants' appeals against the respondent's decisions to refuse to
         grant them leave to remain on private and family life grounds.  The
         appellants comprise mother and three children.

         2. The applications for permission to appeal are significantly  out
         of time. There  is  an  explanation  for  this;  namely,  that  the
         appellants  were  disadvantaged  by  the  fact  that  their  former
         solicitors, who were sent a copy  of  the  Judge's  decision,  were
         intervened against by the Solicitors' Regulation  Authority,  which
         intervention is clearly documented. I am satisfied that  the  delay
         in lodging the notices of application is  serious  and  significant
         but I am also satisfied that there is a potentially good reason for
         this, as indicated. I conclude that, in the interests  of  justice,
         time should be extended in this instance.

         3. The grounds argue that the Judge failed properly to consider all
         material facts and circumstances, failed to take into  account  the
         fact that there was a (separate) pending application for  leave  to
         remain made by the husband of the family, and failed adequately  to
         consider the best interests of the children, bearing in mind length
         of residence in the United Kingdom.

         4. It is arguable that the Judge has  inadequately  considered  the
         best interests of the eldest child of the family, bearing  in  mind
         that, at the hearing before the Judge, that child  had  resided  in
         the United Kingdom throughout his life  and  for  nearly  9  years.
         Permission is granted on this ground only."

 3.  Thus the appeal came before me today.

 4. Mr Izevbizua handed up a list of authorities which he intended to  rely
    upon and which were referred to in his skeleton argument. I have  taken
    that bundle into account. Amongst other things  it  includes  the  Home
    Office Immigration Directorate  Instructions  and  the  authorities  of
    Treebhawon and others (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 674  (IAC)  and  MA
    (Pakistan)  &  Ors,  R  (on  the  application  of)  v  Upper   Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

 5. He urged me to accept that the Judge had failed to,  consider  all  the
    material facts of the case with particular reference to the  Article  8
    rights of the first child of the family, failed to take judicial notice
    of  relevant  statutory  instruments  and  failed  to  properly  assess
    "section 55 best interest of the first child who is a qualifying  child
    under the Rules". He then went on to argue that as the first  child  of
    the family has lived in the United Kingdom continuously  for  at  least
    seven years the public interest does not require  the  child  with  his
    family to be removed as no criminality is involved. Further that  under
    the Respondent's own policy "it will take a strong contravening  factor
    to refuse a qualifying child with his family leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom or to be removed from the United Kingdom". On this basis
    I was urged to set aside the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  decision  and
    to allow the appeal.

 6. Mr Diwnycz submitted that there was no material error of law within the
    Judge's decision. The Judge was required to determine the appeal on the
    basis of the facts at the time of the hearing and was entitled to  come
    to the conclusion that it was reasonable to expect the eldest child  of
    the family to return to Nigeria for the reasons outlined  in  paragraph
    16 to 19 of the decision.

 7. Those paragraphs state,

        "16.      I have taken account of the best interests of each of the
             three children as a primary consideration pursuant  to  section
             55. There is no question of the family being split  up;  either
             they will remain together as a family unit or leave as a family
             unit. I bear in mind the young age of  the  children,  of  whom
             only the oldest has been in the UK over 7 years, now  almost  9
             years. I take into account everything in the evidence and other
             materials placed  before  me  and  in  the  oral  evidence  and
             submissions,  but  I  find  that  their  best   interests   are
             undoubtedly to remain with their parents  and  that  if,  as  I
             find, their parents are to be removed, their best interests are
             to leave with their parents.


        17.  In reaching this conclusion, I have  taken  into  account  the
             brief letters about the schooling of the two older children and
             fully accept that they have  settled  and  are  doing  well  at
             school. I bear in mind  that  they  will  have  developed  some
             friendships around  school  and  the  community,  including  at
             church. However, the primary focus of such  young  children  is
             inevitably on the family unit, which has  a  cohesive  cultural
             background of Nigeria, even though none of  the  children  have
             ever lived in Nigeria. There will be no language difficulty and
             state schooling will be available to them,  even  though  their
             parents say they have nothing to return to, no  employment  and
             thus will not be able  to  afford  private  school  fees.  Even
             though the eldest child has lived in the UK over  7  years  and
             all three were born here, the case authorities indicate that  7
             years from the age of 4 is likely to  be  more  significant  in
             development of private life than 7 years  from  birth.  I  also
             have to bear in mind that the first appellant came to the UK as
             a student with the intent to return to Nigeria on completion of
             her studies. In having further children born in the UK she must
             have understood that they took would be accompanying them  back
             to Nigeria and thus as the children have grown they should have
             been aware that they would be returning eventually to Nigeria.


        18.  I have also taken into account the witness statements and oral
             evidence of the first appellant and her husband. I bear in mind
             that they claim to be settled in the community and  at  church,
             where her husband is a pastor. Obviously, they  want  the  best
             for their children and  are  worried  that  they  do  not  have
             accommodation or employment to return to, but  both  worked  in
             Nigeria before coming to the  UK  and  must  have  expected  to
             return. The first appellant remains in contact with her  mother
             and sister in Nigeria, whilst she has two sisters and  an  aunt
             in the UK. Her husband has a brother in Nigeria and  no  family
             in the UK. It follows that they  have  significant  family  and
             cultural ties to Nigeria. Whilst there may be  difficulties  in
             returning to Nigeria I am satisfied on the evidence taken as  a
             whole that there  are  no  insurmountable  obstacles,  or  very
             significant obstacles, or very significant  difficulties  which
             could not be overcome.


        19.  In  all  the  circumstances,  putting  all  of  this  evidence
             together in the round, I find that it is reasonable  to  expect
             the eldest child to return with  the  rest  of  his  family  to
             Nigeria. I thus find that he does not meet the requirements  of
             paragraph 276ADE, even though he has been in the  UK  for  more
             than 7 years."

 8. The background facts of this appeal  are  not  in  dispute.  The  first
    Appellant entered the United Kingdom as a student in July 2007 and  her
    husband accompanied her. At that time she was pregnant and  gave  birth
    to her first child in the United Kingdom on 3 August 2007.  Since  then
    she has had two other children. Her leave was extended and last expired
    on 31 July 2013. A further application to remain as a Tier 4  (General)
    Student was refused on 10 October 2013 and  she  became  appeal  rights
    exhausted. This also applied to her husband and another child who  were
    dependent upon her student leave. The two younger children  have  never
    been included in previous applications and have never had leave in  the
    United Kingdom. In January 2015  the  first  Appellant  and  the  three
    children made the applications  for  leave  to  remain  which  are  the
    subject of the appeal heard by Tribunal Judge Pickup. Her  husband  did
    not  make  an  application  and  as  found  by  Judge  Pickup  was  not
    "referenced at all in the applications" which relied on the Seven  Plus
    Years' Residence of the eldest child so that the Secretary of State was
    unaware that he was still part  of  the  family.  He  made  a  separate
    application in October 2015 for leave to remain which at  the  date  of
    decision was undecided and which Mr  Izevbizua  confirmed  today  still
    awaited a decision.

 9. The Appellants' applications were refused as they did not  meet  either
    Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE and no  compelling  circumstances  were
    found to justify granting  leave  to  remain  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

10. It is not in dispute that  on  the  facts  found  the  Judge  correctly
    dismissed the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  albeit  that  it  is
    suggested within Mr Izevbizua's skeleton argument that the Judge failed
    to apply paragraph 276ADE(iv) (amongst other things) in coming  to  his
    conclusion. The nub though of this challenge to the Judge's decision is
    a failure to deal with the best interests of the eldest  child  who  by
    the time of the hearing was almost 9 years of age.

11. Quite simply that ground is not made out. I have deliberately  set  out
    above the Judge's findings. Amongst other things he  acknowledges  that
    he has to give consideration to Section 55 issues  and  that  the  best
    interests  of  each  of  the  three  children  amount  to   a   primary
    consideration pursuant thereto.

12. On the evidence that was before him the Judge was entitled to  come  to
    the conclusions that he did. For a child to be in  the  United  Kingdom
    for a period in excess of seven years does  not  provide  an  automatic
    right to his or her  appeal  succeeding.  That  "clear  line"  approach
    amounted to the nub of Mr Izevbizua's submission. It is not one that  I
    accept. The Judge must look at the totality of the family life  of  all
    the Appellants (in this appeal)  and  their  family  members.  That  is
    exactly what has been done. The Judge has subsumed within the Article 8
    proportionality exercise the Section 55 issues and has taken account of
    the best interest of each of the three child Appellants. The Judge  has
    adequately reasoned why he came to  the  conclusions  that  he  did  on
    findings that were open to be made on  the  totality  of  the  evidence
    before him.

13. In dismissing the appeal under the Immigration Rules and on  Article  8
    grounds the Judge has not materially erred.

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

15. I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 12 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
