

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/22747/2015

                                                   IA/22748/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Determination Promulgated       |
|On Tuesday 8 August 2017                  | On Tuesday 29 August 2017       |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                               MR XIAOBIN RONG
                               MRS LIMIN ZHOU

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Lam, Counsel instructed by AP solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was not granted by the First-tier Tribunal.  There  is  no  reason
in this case to make an anonymity direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Appellants appeal against the Respondent's decision dated 5 June
       2015 refusing their application for indefinite leave to remain as  a
       Tier 2 migrant and dependent and directing their  removal  to  China
       under section 47 Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act  2006.   By
       my decision promulgated on 2 May 2017, I set aside the  decision  of
       First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Beach  dismissing  their  appeals.   My
       earlier decision is appended to this decision for ease of reference.
       The appeals come before me for re-making of the decision.


    2. The facts of these cases are set out at [2] of my earlier  decision.
       The issues arising are at [3] of my  earlier  decision.   I  do  not
       therefore need to repeat those matters.


    3. The Respondent refused the Appellants'  application  for  indefinite
       leave to remain as a Tier 2 migrant  and  dependent  on  the  basis,
       first that she did not believe that the  First  Appellant's  English
       language  certificate  was  genuine.   That  is  an  Entry  Level  3
       Certificate in ESOL International (reading,  writing  and  listening
       and spoke) (Achiever B1) issued following  a  course  undertaken  at
       Whitechapel College in 2011 ("the Certificate").   I  note  at  this
       juncture, that this is not a TOEIC test and this is not therefore  a
       so-called ETS case.


    4. The Respondent did not believe the Certificate to be genuine as  the
       First Appellant  was  only  able  to  answer  a  limited  number  of
       questions at an interview undertaken  in  January  2015.   She  also
       refused the application for the further reason that the sponsor  who
       had issued the First  Appellant  a  certificate  of  sponsorship  in
       relation to his last period of leave  and  who  remained  the  First
       Appellant's sponsor at the date of the application had  allowed  its
       licence to lapse in February 2015 and had not renewed it.


    5. The  appeals  proceed  under  the  provisions  of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") as in  force  prior
       to the amendments brought about by the Immigration  Act  2014.   The
       appeals are subject to the transitional arrangements  based  on  the
       timing of  the  Appellants'  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
       remain.


      The hearing and evidence


    6. The First Appellant gave evidence before me with the  assistance  of
       an interpreter.  Although the interpreter spoke Chinese Mandarin and
       the First Appellant's first language is Chinese  Cantonese,  it  was
       confirmed to  me  that  the  First  Appellant  and  the  interpreter
       understood each other.


    7. As I indicated at [16] of my earlier  decision,  whether  the  First
       Appellant currently speaks  English  is  not  the  issue.   Although
       paragraph 245HF(f) requires the First Appellant to  have  sufficient
       knowledge  of  English  (in  the  present  tense),  that  is  to  be
       demonstrated "in accordance  with  Appendix  KoLL".   It  is  common
       ground that the Certificate meets the requirements of that  Appendix
       if it is genuine.  The issue therefore is whether the Certificate is
       genuine.


    8. Due to the First Appellant's inability to answer questions about the
       English language test in 2011, the  only  evidence  from  the  First
       Appellant about the course and the test is contained in his  written
       witness statement.  That is in quite general terms  and  lacks  some
       details.  I therefore asked the representatives if one of them could
       put to the First Appellant in  evidence  the  questions  which  were
       asked of him at interview in January 2015 so that I could assess his
       responses.  Mr Lam agreed to do so as part of the First  Appellant's
       evidence in chief.


    9. As a result of the First Appellant's oral evidence coupled with  his
       written statement dated 25 July 2017, I understand his  evidence  to
       be as follows.  He took the test following  a  course  which  lasted
       three months.   He  attended  Whitechapel  College  because  he  was
       introduced there by a friend.  He attended the course two  days  per
       week.


   10. He paid approximately �200 for the test and �350 for the course.  He
       applied and paid for the test online.  He was assisted in  so  doing
       by one of the teaching assistants at the college.  He is  unable  to
       remember whether he paid for the course by cash or credit card.   He
       has no documentary evidence  as  to  attendance  on  the  course  or
       payment for that or the test.  He says that he did  not  realise  he
       could obtain such evidence.  He no longer banks with the  same  bank
       and he assumed that they would not therefore  supply  him  with  any
       documents.


   11. At the time of the course and test, the First Appellant says that he
       was working in Oxford Street and living in Chinatown.  He says  that
       Whitechapel College is located near  Stratford.   In  order  to  get
       there, he took the Piccadilly Line and  then  changed  to  "the  red
       line", he thinks at Oxford Circus although he cannot  remember  that
       exactly as it is a long time ago.  That line took him to Stratford.


   12. The First Appellant confirmed that the test took about two and  half
       hours.  It was spread over two days with a break of one week between
       the two.   The examiner read some texts to him and there was then  a
       question and answer discussion.  He also remembers that  he  had  to
       answer some questions on paper.  He did not find the tests easy  and
       he could not answer all the questions but he did his  best  and  was
       relieved when he learnt he had passed the test.


   13. He explained his inability to answer questions at interview as being
       because it was some time after his test.  His  English  was  at  its
       best immediately after he took the test because he  had  studied  in
       preparation and practised for the test.  Since then, he had  limited
       opportunity to practise English as all his colleagues  are  Chinese.
       He accepted that it would be better if he learnt English in order to
       integrate and would like to do so if permitted to stay.  He did  not
       think he could learn English using a book and teaching himself.   He
       needs a good teacher.


   14. The First Appellant says in his statement that he considers  himself
       able to speak, listen and understand  basic  English.   He  says  in
       relation to his inability to answer the questions at interview  that
       he  was  "put  in  a  nervous  situation  being  in  an  immigration
       interview, facing unfamiliar words or jargons, combined with  facing
       someone who had an accent" and  that  he  "may  not  have  expressed
       [himself] very well due to [his] nervousness".


   15. The First Appellant said that the interviewer  had  quite  a  strong
       accent and he had difficulty understanding.  He said he  was  unable
       to raise this at the time because the interviewer did not  give  him
       time to say this and he was nervous.  Although he was represented by
       solicitors at the time, they did not attend the interview  with  him
       and he did not think to ask them to write afterwards to explain  his
       failure to understand the interviewer.  They simply told him to wait
       for news.


    Decision and Reasons


    The Certificate


   16. Although Mr Lam  started  his  submissions  by  referring  to  voice
       recordings, as I pointed out, those have no relevance in this  case.
       As I have already noted, this is not an ETS  case.   However,  cases
       such as SM and Qadir v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
       (ETS - Evidence - Burden  of  Proof)  2016]  UKUT  00229  (IAC)  and
       Muhandiramge  (section  S-LTR.1.7)  [2015]  UKUT  00675  (IAC)   are
       relevant to the law in relation to burdens and standards  of  proof.
       I have already summarised the case law in that area (which is not in
       dispute between the parties) at [13] of my earlier decision and I do
       not repeat it.


   17. I have no difficulty in finding that  the  Respondent  has  met  the
       initial evidential burden in  this  case  by  reason  of  the  First
       Appellant's failure to answer  questions  at  interview  in  January
       2015. The burden then switches to the  First  Appellant  to  explain
       that deficiency and provide evidence to show that he  did  take  the
       test and obtain the Certificate.


   18. I accept the First Appellant's evidence that his  ability  to  speak
       English had suffered between 2011 and 2015 when he  was  interviewed
       because he was unable to practise his English.  It is reasonable  to
       expect a person who is about to take a test to study  for  it.   The
       First Appellant is a dim sum chef.  It  is  therefore  a  reasonable
       explanation that, working as he does with  colleagues  who  are  all
       Chinese nationals, he would not have the opportunity which might  be
       open to staff who are "front of house", for example,  to  come  into
       contact with English speakers.


   19. I also accept that an interviewer in the Liverpool area might have a
       strong accent which might be difficult for a non-native  speaker  to
       understand, particularly one who has been living in London  and  not
       in that area.  I also accept that the First Appellant is  likely  to
       have been nervous and his nervousness was no doubt accentuated  when
       he realised that he was to be asked to answer questions  without  an
       interpreter.


   20. I do not accept that  at  that  time  of  the  interview  the  First
       Appellant's English was even of a basic standard when one  looks  at
       the answers to the questions (insofar as he answered them  at  all).
       Nor do I accept that the interview questions were other  than  quite
       basic.  If he spoke and understood basic English at that time, there
       is no reason why he would not have been unable to answer them.  As I
       have already pointed out, though, whilst a relevant factor, that  is
       not the central issue.


   21.  The  issue  whether  the  Certificate  is  genuine  depends  on  my
       assessment of the First Appellant's evidence as to  the  course  and
       test and whether I find his evidence to be  credible.   I  start  by
       noting that the Appellants have failed to  provide  any  documentary
       evidence in relation to the taking of the course, the sitting of the
       test or payment for either.   I  reject  at  this  point,  Mr  Lam's
       submission that the Respondent  ought  to  have  made  enquiries  of
       Whitechapel College to check whether he took the course or  sat  the
       test and/or to have  verified  the  Certificate.   It  is  extremely
       doubtful that the college would have provided  such  information  at
       least not without the First Appellant's  consent.   Of  course,  the
       Respondent  could  have  obtained  that   consent.    However,   the
       Appellants have been represented throughout by solicitors and  those
       solicitors could have been expected to make the necessary  enquiries
       and to provide documents if those were available.  I  do  accept  Mr
       Lam's submission however that the  Appellants  should  not  be  held
       responsible for the failure of their solicitors in this regard.


   22. Turning then to the First Appellant's evidence as to the  taking  of
       the course and test, I accept that evidence as reasonably likely  to
       be true (at least to the  standard  which  applies).   Although  the
       First Appellant said that,  understandably,  given  the  passage  of
       time, he cannot remember much detail about the course and  test,  he
       was able  to  give  an  indication  about  the  cost  of  both,  the
       timescales involved and the basic outline of the test.  His  account
       of where he was living and working in relation to  the  location  of
       the college is plausible and his account of how  he  travelled  from
       where he lived to the college is  also  broadly  correct.  I  accept
       therefore that the First Appellant has discharged the  burden  which
       switched to him.


   23. Since the Respondent  has  not  provided  any  documentary  evidence
       relating to the Certificate, having accepted the  First  Appellant's
       evidence, I accept that the Certificate is genuine.  I  accept  that
       the First  Appellant's  English  is  not  now  up  to  the  standard
       reflected  by  the  Certificate.   However,  having  regard  to  the
       evidential requirements which underlie the requirement in  paragraph
       245HF(f) of the Rules in relation to the English language  abilities
       which  are  only  that  the  applicant  provide  a   relevant   test
       certificate, and since there is no dispute that the Certificate,  if
       genuine, satisfies this requirement, I find that the First Appellant
       does meet paragraph 245HF(f) of the Rules.




    The Sponsor Licence


   24. That though, as I have  noted,  is  not  the  only  reason  why  the
       Appellants' application failed under the Rules.  Paragraph  245HF(d)
       of the Rules provides as follows:-
           "The Sponsor that issued the  Certificate  of  Sponsorship  that
           lead to the applicant's last grant of leave must:
           i) still hold, or have applied for a renewal of a Tier 2 Sponsor
              licence in the relevant category; and
            (ii)  certify in writing that:
           1) he  still  requires  the  applicant  for  the  employment  in
              question, and
           2) in the case of  a  Tier  2  (General)  Migrant  applying  for
              settlement, the applicant is paid at or above the appropriate
              rate for the job as  stated  in  the  Codes  of  Practice  in
              Appendix J...."


   25. It is common ground that although the First Appellant's  certificate
       of sponsorship was valid when he made the application,  it  was  not
       valid at the date of the Respondent's decision and that  the  reason
       it was not valid is that the First Appellant's sponsor  allowed  its
       licence to lapse in February 2015 and did not renew it.


   26. The Appellants' answer to this places reliance on the case of  Patel
       (revocation of sponsor licence - fairness) India [2011]  UKUT  00211
       (IAC) ("Patel").  The relevant part of the  headnote  in  that  case
       reads as follows:-
            "(1) Immigration Judges have jurisdiction to determine  whether
           decisions on variation of leave applications are  in  accordance
           with the law, where issues of fairness arise.
            (2)  Where a sponsor licence has been revoked by the  Secretary
           of state during an application for variation of  leave  and  the
           applicant is both unaware of the revocation and not party to any
           reason why the licence has been revoked, the Secretary of  State
           should afford an applicant a reasonable opportunity to vary  the
           application by identifying a new sponsor before the  application
           is determined.
            (3)  It would  be  unfair  to  refuse  an  application  without
           opportunity being given to vary it under s.3C(5) Immigration Act
           1971.
            (4)  ...
            (5)  Where the Tribunal allows an appeal on the ground that the
           decision was not taken fairly and therefore  not  in  accordance
           with the law, it may be sufficient  to  direct  that  any  fresh
           decision is not to be made for a period of sixty days  from  the
           date of the reasoned decision being transmitted to the  parties,
           in order to give the appellant a reasonable opportunity to  vary
           his application.
            (6)  By analogy with the present UKBA policy on curtailment  of
           leave where a sponsor licence is revoked  a  60  day  period  to
           amend the application would provide such a fair opportunity."


   27. In directions given as part of my earlier decision, I required  both
       parties to provide "any policy or guidance issued by the  Respondent
       dealing with her practice  where  a  Tier  2  sponsor's  licence  is
       revoked or not renewed whilst  an  application  is  outstanding  and
       where that sponsor is relied upon in an application  for  indefinite
       leave to remain as a Tier 2 migrant.  That shall encompass also  any
       policy or guidance relating to the practice (if any) of  granting  a
       Tier 2 migrant in  those  latter  circumstances  a  period  to  find
       another sponsor or a lesser period of leave".


   28.  The Appellants rely on a policy entitled  "Tier  2  of  the  Points
       Based System - Policy Guidance (Version 04/17)" ("the Policy").  The
       Policy is expressed to apply to all Tier 2 applications made  on  or
       after 6 April 2017.  It is therefore not the Policy in force at  the
       date of the application in this case.  However,  I  heard  argument,
       without demur from Mr Melvin, on  the  basis  that  the  same  or  a
       similar policy would have been in force at the relevant time.


   29. Mr Lam drew my attention to [242] and  [243]  of  the  Policy  which
       read, so far as relevant as follows:-
             "[242]      We  will  curtail  your  leave  in  the  following
       circumstances:
               . If you fail to start working for your sponsor; ...
                 [243] We may curtail your leave if:
               . Your sponsor ceases to have a sponsor licence (for whatever
                 reason)..."


   30. Those paragraphs have no application though to the current case.  At
       the time of the Respondent's decision, the Appellants had  no  leave
       save that which continued by reason of section  3C  Immigration  Act
       1971.  There was therefore nothing to curtail.


   31. Mr Lam was unable to point me to any provision of the  Policy  which
       requires the Respondent to put an application on hold in cases  such
       as this.  The closest one comes is a provision at [A303] that  if  a
       sponsor's licence is suspended by the  Respondent,  the  application
       will be put on hold until that action is finalised  with  revocation
       or reinstatement.  The Policy goes on to  say,  however,  at  [A305]
       that  if  an  applicant  does  not  have  a  valid  certificate   of
       sponsorship, the Respondent will not put  the  application  on  hold
       whilst one is obtained.


   32. Mr Lam says that Patel applies by analogy.  He says  therefore  that
       the Respondent is required to allow the Appellants a period to  find
       another sponsor.  There are a number of difficulties in the  way  of
       the Appellants in this regard.  The first is that Patel  applies  to
       Tier 4 migrants.  The relationship between college and student is  a
       very different one to that between employer and employee.  Whilst it
       is often the case that a student may be unaware of the operations of
       his/her college and therefore unaware of revocation, the same  ought
       not to be true of an employee's knowledge of his employer, not least
       because once the licence ceases, the employer ought not to  continue
       with the employment.


   33. I do take into account though that the First Appellant says that  he
       was unaware that his employer's licence had lapsed until he received
       the Respondent's decision.  This though leads to the second problem,
       namely that, as the Respondent points out, the First Appellant could
       not succeed in  relation  to  his  application  once  the  sponsor's
       licence had lapsed.   This  is  due  to  the  wording  of  paragraph
       245HF(d) which I set out at [24] above.   The  First  Appellant  was
       required to be sponsored by the same sponsor  as  sponsored  him  in
       relation to his last period of leave.  Once that sponsor  no  longer
       held a licence, his application was bound to fail.


   34. Even without that provision, I would not have accepted that the
       Respondent was required to put the application on hold and permit
       the Appellants to make other arrangements in order to make an
       application, if necessary on some other basis.  The Respondent did
       not of course do so because she considered the Certificate to be
       false and, as she says, would not have done so in any event because
       of the provisions of paragraph 245HF(d).  As the Respondent also
       points out, though, any unfairness in this case is not procedural in
       terms of her decision-making process or in any way due to action by
       the Respondent.  The Respondent draws my attention to what is said
       in the case of Marghia (procedural fairness) [2014] UKUT 00366 (IAC)
       as follows:-
           "The common law duty of fairness is essentially about procedural
           fairness. There is no  absolute  duty  at  common  law  to  make
           decisions which are substantively "fair".  The  Court  will  not
           interfere  with  decisions  which  are  objected  to  as   being
           substantively unfair, except the decision in question falls foul
           of the Wednesbury test i.e. that no reasonable decision-maker or
           public body could have arrived at such a decision.
           It is a matter for the Secretary of State whether she  exercises
           her  residual  discretion.  The  exercise   of   such   residual
           discretion, which does not appear in the Immigration  Rules,  is
           absolutely a matter for the Secretary of State and nobody  else,
           including the Tribunal - Abdi [1996] Imm AR 148."


   35. As the Respondent points out, the reason why these Appellants cannot
       meet the Rules has nothing to do with any procedural action taken by
       the Respondent.  The reason their application fails is  because  the
       First Appellant's sponsor had permitted its licence to lapse without
       renewing it for whatever  reason.   That  is  very  similar  to  the
       scenario under consideration in Marghia.  Further, as the Respondent
       points out, there would be little point in permitting the Appellants
       to seek out another sponsor in circumstances where their application
       would be bound to fail in any event  because  of  the  operation  of
       paragraph 245HF(d).  It was not therefore  procedurally  unfair  for
       the Respondent not to put the application on hold for  a  period  to
       permit the Appellants to find another sponsor.


   36. For those reasons, and in spite of my finding that  the  Certificate
       was genuine and the Appellants therefore  meet  paragraph  245HF(f),
       they still fail to meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  245HF  by
       reason  of  paragraph  245HF(d).  Their  appeals  under  the   Rules
       therefore fail.


    Article 8 ECHR


   37. The remaining issue which I  am  required  to  decide  concerns  the
       appeal on human rights grounds.  Although permission to  appeal  was
       not granted on this ground, I  set  aside  the  First-tier  decision
       without preserving any of the findings and I am  therefore  required
       to consider whether the decision to remove the Appellants  to  China
       breaches their human rights.


   38. I begin by noting that the Appellants  do  not  meet  the  Rules  in
       relation to their private and family life.  Mr Lam did  not  suggest
       that they did and he was right not to do so.   Both  Appellants  are
       Chinese nationals as is their child.  Neither partner nor  child  is
       British or settled.  Appendix FM to the Rules  has  no  application.
       The Appellants have not been in the UK for twenty years.  It is  not
       suggested that there are any very significant  obstacles  or  indeed
       any obstacles to their return to China.  They cannot meet  paragraph
       276ADE of the Rules.  They have not been  lawfully  resident  for  a
       continuous period of ten years.  They cannot meet paragraph 276B  of
       the Rules.


   39. I am left therefore with an Article 8 claim outside the Rules.   The
       only evidence I  have on this issue appears in the First Appellant's
       statement as follows:-
            "[20]      I have been living in the UK for 8  years.   I  live
           here with my wife and we have also recently had a baby, born  in
           the UK on 21 June 2016.  Our baby's name is [O].
            [21] Our baby has brought us a lot of  joy.   He  is  the  best
           thing in our life.  We have  also  been  making  a  lot  of  new
           friends with other parents with children and babies  of  similar
           ages.  We socialise together and let the children play and  meet
           new friends.  We are very happy to be raising our child in  this
           country where we intend to settle  and  live  the  rest  of  our
           lives."
       I accept that, following a period of residence of eight  years,  the
       decision to remove will interfere with  their  private  lives  to  a
       sufficient degree that Article 8 is  engaged  and  the  interference
       falls to be justified by the  Respondent  as  being  in  the  public
       interest.   The  issue  in  this  case  is  justification  for   and
       proportionality of the interference.


   40. I begin by considering the best interests of the Appellants'  child.
       Those are a primary consideration but not the primary  consideration
       and are capable of being outweighed by other considerations.  [O] is
       aged a little over one year.  There is  little  evidence  about  him
       other than his birth certificate.  That  is  unsurprising  since  at
       that young age, his life will revolve around his parents.  I  accept
       the evidence that he probably enjoys  playing  with  children  of  a
       similar age but is  not  in  the  position  as  yet  to  form  close
       friendships.  It is also likely given the First Appellant's evidence
       about his reasons for not speaking good English that the  Appellants
       socialise  with  people  from  their  own  community  and  that  [O]
       similarly plays with children from that  background.   That  may  be
       speculative but even if that is not so [O] is not of  an  age  where
       there is likely to be disruption to his life caused  by  taking  him
       away from his playmates. His life is with his parents and  his  best
       interests at his tender age are to remain with  them  wherever  they
       live.


   41. I accept that during the time that the Appellants have lived in  the
       UK, they will have formed friendships with others.  There is a  lack
       of evidence about such friendships and given the  First  Appellant's
       level of English, I again surmise that most  of  their  friends  are
       likely to be within their own community.  I was not told whether the
       Second Appellant speaks English but it is unlikely that she does as,
       if that were so, the First Appellant would have said so as it  would
       be relevant to his ability to practise English with her at home.


   42. I accept that the Appellants have not remained in the UK  in  breach
       of any immigration laws and that they came here with the expectation
       and hope that they would  be  able  to  settle.   Their  status  was
       however precarious and dependent on  them  continuing  to  meet  the
       Rules. I recognise that they are  in  no  way  to  blame  for  their
       inability now to meet the Rules to remain as a worker and  dependent
       but the precariousness of their status is relevant to the  weight  I
       can give to their private lives (insofar as  I  have  been  provided
       with evidence about those in any event).


   43. I am bound to have regard to section 117B of the 2002 Act.   I  take
       into account in the Appellants' favour  that,  at  least  until  the
       lapsing of  the  First  Appellant's  sponsor's  licence,  the  First
       Appellant was able  to  maintain  his  family  and  that  they  were
       financially independent.  I take into  account  as  adverse  to  the
       Appellants the First Appellant's inability to speak English.   As  I
       note, I think it unlikely that the Second Appellant  speaks  English
       either.  It is clear,  however,  from  the  First  Appellant's  oral
       evidence that the family has not integrated into the UK  because  he
       has been working alongside other Chinese nationals and has therefore
       lost the ability to express himself in English.  The reason that  an
       ability to speak English is considered to be important to the public
       interest  relates  to  the  ability  to  integrate.   I  do  however
       recognise that the First Appellant says that, if he  were  permitted
       to stay, he would like  to  study  English  again  to  help  him  to
       integrate.


   44. By far the weightiest factor adverse to the Appellants though is the
       maintenance of immigration control.  I  have  found  that  they  are
       unable to meet paragraph 245HF of the  Rules.   There  is  no  other
       basis for them to stay under the Rules.  As I have  also  concluded,
       they are unable to succeed under the  Rules  in  relation  to  their
       family and private lives.  As  the  Supreme  Court  makes  clear  in
       Agyarko and Ikuga v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
       [2017] UKSC 11 at [60], where an applicant is  unable  to  meet  the
       Rules, it is only where there are exceptional circumstances, in  the
       sense of unjustifiably harsh consequences for an applicant, that the
       case can succeed outside the Rules on  the  basis  that  removal  is
       disproportionate.  Here, there is nothing of  that  level.   I  have
       scant evidence as to the private lives they have formed  in  the  UK
       and with which removal  will  interfere.   The  Appellants  are  all
       nationals of China and can return there together. It  is  reasonable
       to expect them to do so. As nationals of that country, they will  be
       permitted to live and work there. Their  family  life  can  continue
       unabated in that country. I  am  satisfied  that  interference  with
       their private lives by the decision  to  remove  is  in  the  public
       interest and proportionate.

            DECISION
    The appeals of the Appellants are dismissed under the Rules
    The appeals of the Appellants are dismissed on human rights grounds.

          Signed
          [pic]

                   Upper           Tribunal           Judge            Smith
     Dated: 29 August 2017
                       APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA227472015
                                                                 IA227482015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Wednesday 26 April 2017                    |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                               MR XIAOBIN RONG
                               MRS LIMIN ZHOU

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Lam, Counsel instructed by AP solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was not granted by the First-tier Tribunal.  There  is  no  reason
in this case to make an anonymity direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

   45. The Appellants appeal against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge Beach  promulgated  on  20  September  2016  ("the  Decision")
       dismissing the Appellants' appeals against the Secretary of  State's
       decision dated 5 June 2015 refusing their application for indefinite
       leave to remain as a Tier 2  migrant  and  dependent  and  directing
       their removal to China under  section  47  Immigration,  Asylum  and
       Nationality Act 2006.


   46. The Appellants are nationals of China.  The First Appellant  entered
       the UK on 7 June 2009 with leave as a work permit  holder.   He  was
       later granted leave to remain as a Tier  2  migrant  with  leave  to
       remain until 4 March 2015.  On 1 May 2014, he applied for indefinite
       leave to remain in that category.  His wife is his dependent.


   47. The Respondent gave two reasons for refusing his  application.   The
       First Appellant produced ESol certificates  dated  October  2011  to
       show that he had sufficient  knowledge  of  English.   However,  the
       First Appellant was interviewed in relation to his application on 22
       January 2015 concerning the  test  and  was  unable  to  answer  the
       majority  of  the  questions.   For  that  reason,  the   Respondent
       concluded that the First Appellant had made false representations in
       support of his application and  refused  it  under  general  grounds
       (paragraph 322(1A)) of the Immigration  Rules  ("the  Rules").   The
       application was therefore refused under paragraph  245HF(b)  on  the
       basis that the First Appellant fell for refusal  under  the  general
       grounds for refusal. The Respondent was also not therefore satisfied
       that the First Appellant met paragraph  245HF(f)  of  the  Rules  in
       relation to  his  ability  to  speak  English.  Further,  the  First
       Appellant's Tier 2 sponsor's licence had expired and the sponsor had
       not applied to renew.  Accordingly, the Respondent also refused  the
       application under paragraph 245HF(d) of the Rules.


   48. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the appeal under  the  Rules
       and also on human rights grounds.  Permission was granted  by  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Rintoul on 14 March 2017 for the following reasons:-
           " "It is arguable that First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach erred  in
           her approach to the evidential and legal burden with respect  to
           the impugned English language certificates,  as  is  averred  in
           grounds 1 and 2 of the original grounds.  If that  decision  was
           incorrect, it is not clear how the judge was  able  to  conclude
           that the English language requirement was not met, given what is
           averred in the renewed grounds.
           It is also, just, arguable that the respondent acted unfairly in
           not allowing the appellant to obtain another sponsor.
           The parties are expected to be able to address how the  impugned
           tests, if genuine, met the requirements of paragraphs 245HF, and
           Appendices KoLL and O."


   49. The matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision contains a
       material error of law and, if so, to re-make the decision  or  remit
       the appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.

      The grounds and submissions


   50. Mr Lam's grounds and submissions can be  reduced  to  the  following
       propositions:-
           1) The Judge has  arguably  erred  in  considering  whether  the
              certificates  were  fraudulent  by  improperly  applying  the
              relevant burdens and standards of proof.  If  the  Judge  had
              properly considered the evidence, she could  not  have  found
              that the Respondent who holds the  legal  burden  of  proving
              deception has met that burden.  Mr Lam pointed out that there
              is no verification report in relation to the certificates.
           2) If the Judge was not entitled to or did  not  reach  a  clear
              finding that the certificates were  fraudulent,  it  was  not
              then open to the Judge to find that the First  Appellant  was
              not able to satisfy the requirement in paragraph 245HF(f)  as
              to the sufficiency of his English  language  skills.  Mr  Lam
              pointed out that the certificates  meet  the  requirement  in
              Appendix KoLL.  He drew an analogy with a driving test  where
              a person has to demonstrate an ability at a particular  point
              in time but does not need to prove that ability on an ongoing
              basis.
           3) If the  Appellants  succeed  in  relation  to  the  foregoing
              propositions, then the Respondent was  obliged  to  give  the
              First Appellant a period to find an alternative sponsor.  The
              refusal  under  paragraph  245HF(d)   cannot   therefore   be
              determinative or, put another way, the Respondent's  argument
              that the first error is not material  for  that  reason  must
              fail.


   51. The Respondent's rule 24 statement accepts that the Judge's  finding
       that the First  Appellant's  English  language  abilities  may  have
       deteriorated in the period between 2011 and 2015 was  not  relevant,
       particularly since the  refusal  in  relation  to  the  certificates
       depends on paragraph 322(1A).  However, she asserts that  the  Judge
       has not improperly applied the burdens and  standards  of  proof  in
       relation to whether the certificates are fraudulent  (or  the  First
       Appellant has exercised deception in some way  in  obtaining  them).
       Although Mr Duffy accepted that it might  be  said  that  the  Judge
       failed to use the correct terminology, the effect of [26]  and  [27]
       of the Decision was that the  Respondent  satisfied  the  evidential
       burden and that the explanation put forward by the  First  Appellant
       was insufficient to discharge the evidential burden on him.


   52. In relation to paragraph 245HF(d), Mr Duffy pointed  out  that  this
       sub-rule is in a different form to  that  relating  to  a  grant  of
       further  leave  to  remain.   It  requires  the  applicant  to  have
       sponsorship from the same sponsor as at the time of the  last  grant
       of leave.   That  presumably  has  the  aim  of  ensuring  that  the
       employment covered by the sponsorship is secure.  Mr  Duffy  pointed
       out that  the  case  of  Patel  (revocation  of  sponsor  licence  -
       fairness) India  [2011] UKUT 00211 (IAC) concerns grants of leave to
       Tier 4 students and not Tier 2  migrants.   He  was  unsure  whether
       there was a similar policy in relation to Tier 2 migrants.  He  also
       indicated in response to a question  from  me  that  he  was  unsure
       whether there was a policy to grant a further  period  of  leave  to
       remain rather than  indefinite  leave  to  remain  to  an  applicant
       deprived of indefinite leave only on the basis that his last sponsor
       no longer held a licence.  Mr Lam was unable  to  point  me  to  any
       policy in either regard but made the submission that if  there  were
       not such a policy, then the refusal  would  be  unlawful  as  unfair
       based on the ratio in Patel.


   53. I indicated that, if I were persuaded by the first  ground  (covered
       by proposition (1) and (2) at [6] above), I would not find that  any
       error was not material on this basis and I would  give  the  parties
       the opportunity to produce any policies or guidance  on  this  point
       and would allow Mr Lam to develop his submissions as  to  unfairness
       in the event that no policy or guidance exists.


   54. I reserved my decision in relation to whether there is an  error  of
       law in the Decision.  In  discussion  with  the  representatives,  I
       indicated that, if I find  an  error  of  law  in  relation  to  the
       certificates point, I would resume the  hearing  in  this  Tribunal.
       Although I accept that the issue of  whether  the  certificates  are
       genuine or whether deception has been exercised in their procurement
       depends on the credibility  of  the  First  Appellant,  Mr  Lam  was
       content that the appeal should not be remitted.


    Discussion and conclusions


   55. Dealing with the grounds in order, I begin with the Judge's findings
       as to the certificates.  Those are as follows:-
            "[26]      It is correct to state that the burden lies  on  the
           respondent  to  show  that  the   appellant   has   made   false
           representations or submitted fraudulent documents.  However, the
           passage of time may  well  make  it  difficult  to  obtain  such
           evidence.  The respondent had legitimate concerns regarding  the
           1st appellant's English language ability given the fact that the
           1st appellant was only able to answer 3 questions  at  interview
           and this was enough, in  my  view,  to  raise  extremely  strong
           suspicions that the 1st appellant had even taken the  tests.   I
           find that, in those circumstances, the burden  then  shifted  to
           the 1st appellant to show that he had, in fact, undertaken those
           tests.
            [27] As outlined above, the evidence of this  is  sparse.   The
           1st appellant's witness statement is extremely limited. The  1st
           appellant  gave  evidence  in  Mandarin  rather   than   English
           suggesting an inability to express  himself  in  English  or  to
           understand questions (although I find this to  be  a  relatively
           neutral factor given that appellants naturally often  feel  more
           comfortable giving evidence in their first language).   The  1st
           appellant gave no explanation within his witness  statement  for
           being unable to answer the questions and his explanation changed
           during his oral evidence with the 1st appellant firstly  stating
           that he did not understand the interviewing officer's accent and
           then that he can understand English but finds it hard to express
           himself.  If he did not understand the interviewer's accent,  he
           failed to state this at interview at any stage and did not raise
           it afterwards or write to the respondent outlining his  concerns
           about the interview and requesting a further interview.  I  find
           that the 1st appellant's explanation has been  inconsistent  and
           that it is not credible that if he truly did not understand  the
           interviewer's accent he would not have raised this at  interview
           or at least straight after the interview in writing.
            [28] I find that the evidence strongly suggests  that  the  1st
           appellant did not, in fact, take the English language  tests  as
           claimed.  In any event, even if he did take the  tests  at  that
           time, his English has now deteriorated to such an extent that it
           is questionable whether he fulfils the requirements for  ILR  in
           any event.  Paragraph 245HF(i) states  that  an  applicant  must
           demonstrate sufficient knowledge of the English knowledge [sic].
           This is a present requirement ie at the time that the  applicant
           makes the application he must demonstrate this knowledge.  It is
           clear from the interview, however, that the  1st  appellant  did
           not have a sufficient knowledge of  English  shortly  after  the
           date of his application suggesting that he does not fulfil  that
           requirement of the Immigration Rules."


   56. I begin with the Judge's finding in the last sentence of [28] of the
       Decision since  that  is  not  impacted  upon  by  the  burdens  and
       standards of proof which apply  to  the  certificates.   As  already
       noted and as Mr Duffy accepted in submissions, the point is made  at
       [4]  of  the  Respondent's  rule  24  statement  that  the   Judge's
       consideration  of  whether  the  First   Appellant's   English   had
       deteriorated was not material.  I agree with that submission.   What
       is required by the relevant part of rule 245HF (which is at (f)  and
       not (i)) is as follows:-
            "(f) The  applicant  must  have  sufficient  knowledge  of  the
           English language and sufficient  knowledge  about  life  in  the
           United Kingdom, in accordance with Appendix KoLL."
       Although the Judge is right to observe that the requirement to  show
       a sufficient knowledge of English is a present one, that has  to  be
       read in the context of what follows which requires  compliance  with
       Appendix KoLL. The relevant part of Appendix KoLL as at the date  of
       the Respondent's decision required production of a certificate.  The
       certificates produced in this case appear on their  face  to  comply
       with that requirement.


   57. I then turn to deal with the issue of deception.  Mr Lam relies upon
       the cases of SM  and  Qadir  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department (ETS- Evidence - Burden  of  Proof)   [2016]  UKUT  00229
       (IAC) and Muhandiramge (section S-LTR.1.7) [2015] UKUT 00675  (IAC).
       In the former case at [57] and with some  minor  qualification,  the
       Tribunal cited with approval from  the  latter  case  at  [10].   As
       canvassed  in  the  course  of  submissions  and  agreed   by   both
       representatives, the legal position is as follows.  The burden is on
       the Respondent to prove  deception  to,  at  least,  a  standard  of
       balance of probabilities.  However, this is a three  stage  process.
       The Respondent bears the initial evidential burden of making a prima
       facie case that the  Appellant  has  exercised  deception.   If  she
       discharges that burden, there is then an evidential  burden  on  the
       Appellant to raise an innocent explanation to show that he  did  not
       exercise deception.  Again, if he is able to  satisfy  that  burden,
       the legal burden shifts back to the Respondent to show that  on  the
       balance of probabilities the Appellant did exercise deception.


   58. Although it is not crucial  for  Judges  to  express  themselves  in
       precisely that way, the Judge is required to show that this  is  the
       exercise undertaken.  In this case I am  satisfied  that  the  Judge
       erred in law when considering this issue for the following  reasons.
       First, although the Judge correctly directs herself at [26]  of  the
       Decision that the burden lies on the Respondent (see also [7] of the
       Decision), the last sentence of [26] appears incompatible with  that
       analysis.  In that sentence, she appears to place the burden on  the
       Appellant to a higher  standard  than  would  at  that  juncture  be
       required.  Conversely, in the first sentence of [28] she places  too
       lower a burden on the Respondent if in fact her finding is that  the
       Appellant has satisfied the evidential burden on him.


   59. That leads me on to the second reason for finding an error of law as
       there is no clear finding that the Appellant did exercise deception.
        In order so to find, the Judge either had to refuse to accept  that
       the Appellant had discharged  the  burden  on  him  to  provide  "an
       innocent explanation" or, having found that  the  legal  burden  was
       then on the Respondent to prove the deception to the standard  of  a
       balance of probabilities, she had  to  show  that  the  Respondent's
       evidence satisfied that burden.


   60. Third, there is an issue in relation to what it was that  the  Judge
       considered when looking at whether deception had been exercised.  As
       the Judge rightly observed in the  last  sentence  of  [26]  of  the
       Decision, the issue was whether the  Appellant  had  undertaken  the
       tests which the certificates showed he had.  However, what the Judge
       considers at [27] of the Decision  is  the  Appellant's  ability  to
       speak English and his explanation for not performing to a sufficient
       standard in interview.  Whilst that is relevant to the issue whether
       the Appellant obtained the certificates  on  which  he  relied,  the
       central issue is whether the Appellant took the tests and  genuinely
       obtained the certificates.


   61. The interview conducted by the Respondent was in fact  to  ascertain
       the circumstances surrounding the  taking  of  the  test,  no  doubt
       because the Respondent was not satisfied for  whatever  reason  that
       the certificates were genuine.  Unfortunately, the interview  record
       assists very little with that issue because the Appellant was unable
       to understand or answer the questions.  However, that issue remained
       to be explored at the appeal hearing.  It does not appear however to
       have been the subject of the oral evidence and little is said  about
       it in the Appellant's witness statement.  The Judge's  reference  to
       the Appellant's evidence about the test recorded at [22] and [23] of
       the Decision  appears  to  relate  to  the  Appellant's  answers  in
       interview but of course the  Appellant  was  unable  to  answer  the
       questions and so the answers are not  a  failure  to  explain  those
       matters but a failure to give any  evidence  because  he  could  not
       understand what he was being asked.  Those  were  therefore  matters
       which should have been explored in evidence at the hearing  if  they
       were to be relied upon adversely to the Appellant.


   62. For those reasons, I am satisfied that  the  Decision  discloses  an
       error of law.  I set aside the Decision.  I  have  given  directions
       below for the re-making of the Decision.


      DECISION
    I am satisfied that the Decision contains material errors of  law.  The
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach promulgated on 20 September
    2016 is set aside. I make the following directions for the re-making of
    the Decision:-


    1. Within 28 days from the date when this decision is promulgated,  the
       parties shall file with the Tribunal and serve on  the  other  party
       the following:-
           1) Any further evidence on which they rely relating to the issue
              of deception/genuineness of the certificates;
           2) Any policy or guidance issued by the Respondent dealing  with
              her practice where a Tier 2 sponsor's licence is  revoked  or
              not renewed whilst an application is  outstanding  and  where
              that sponsor is relied upon in an application for  indefinite
              leave to remain as a Tier 2 migrant.   That  shall  encompass
              also any policy or guidance relating to the practice (if any)
              of granting a Tier 2 migrant in those latter circumstances  a
              period to find another sponsor or a lesser period of leave.


    2. Within 14 days from the service of evidence  under  [1]  above,  the
       parties may file with the Tribunal and serve on the other party  any
       evidence in reply.
    3. Within 28 days from the service of evidence  under  [1]  above,  the
       Appellants are to file with the Tribunal and serve on the Respondent
       a skeleton argument setting out their position in  relation  to  the
       issues in this appeal.  By the same date, they are to file with  the
       Tribunal and serve on the Respondent a paginated  bundle  containing
       all relevant material (including evidence served in accordance  with
       [1] and [2] above).
    4. Within  14  days  from  the  service  of  the  Appellants'  skeleton
       argument, the Respondent is to file with the Tribunal and  serve  on
       the Appellants her skeleton argument in response.
    5. Any legal authorities relied upon by either  party  shall  be  filed
       with the Tribunal (in bundle form if necessary) and  served  on  the
       opposing party no later than 7 days prior to the date listed for the
       resumed hearing.
    6. The resumed hearing shall be listed before UTJ Smith  on  the  first
       available date after 12 weeks from the date when  this  decision  is
       sent.  If the Appellants require an  interpreter  for  the  hearing,
       they must inform the Tribunal office no later than  14  days  before
       the date listed for the resumed hearing.  Time estimate 2 hours.


          Signed

[pic]

                  Upper           Tribunal            Judge            Smith
            Dated:   27 April 2017

