
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/22629/2014
     IA/22631/2014
     IA/22634/2014
     IA/22644/2014
     ia/22647/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 June 2014                               |On 23 June 2015               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

                           anthony olawale adigun
                            fausat abolore olowo
                        al-ameen oluwatobiloba adigun
                           aliyah temitope adigun
                         zeenah olamide abike adigun
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants     Miss W Bremang, Counsel instructed by Whitecross
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although three of the appellants are children and facts  in  the  appeal
    touch on their welfare the details are very general and we no need  for,
    and do not make, any order restricting publication of any of the details
    of this case.

 2. The five appellants in this case are members of  the  same  family;  the
    first two appellants are married to  each  other  and  the  other  three
    appellants are their minor children.  We remind ourselves of the age  of
    the children. They are aged 14 years, nearly 11 years and nearly 8 years
    and they have all lived in the United Kingdom for more than seven years.
     The first four appellants arrived in 2006. The fifth appellant was born
    in the United Kingdom.

 3. They appeal against a decision of the respondent refusing them leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  They argue their  cases  particularly  on
    human rights grounds  with  reference  to  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.  Their application was considered  carefully
    by the Secretary of State and refused and the reasons for refusal  given
    in writing in  the  usual  way.  Their  appeals  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal were unsuccessful.  They were given permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal. The main point of concern  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge who gave permission was that it was arguable  that  proper  regard
    had not been given to the best interests  of  the  children,  given  the
    amount of time they had spent in the United Kingdom and given the  clear
    statutory obligations imposed by Section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal has lent itself to criticism by  dealing  rather
    briskly with the rights of the children and by not making clear findings
    in  respect  of  each  child  and  explained  why  in   its   judgement,
    notwithstanding the need to promote the best interests of the  children,
    the appeal should be dismissed.  This is not by any means necessarily  a
    fatal failing.  For  reasons  we  go  on  to  explain  it  has  made  no
    difference in this case but it  is  this  failure  which  has  attracted
    criticism and is something that the judge might want to think  about  in
    future determinations.

 5. Ms Bremang has seized on this point and politely, but firmly,  has  made
    all that can be made of it and we have reflected on what she has to say.
     We are not persuaded that there is any material error here.

 6. The key point is that it Ms Bremang had to agree that although there  is
    considerable documentary evidence about the achievements of the children
    in summary the evidence is that they are all doing well  at  school  and
    are showing  that  they  have  settled  in  the  community.   These  are
    important points but that is the  extent  of  them.  It  is  clear  from
    paragraphs 24, 26 and 27 of the Decision and Reasons that the First-tier
    Tribunal appreciated this before  going  on  to  decide  that  the  best
    interests of the children law in the family  staying  together.  It  was
    expected that they could all live together and the children could settle
    in Nigeria with the love and support of their parents  and  do  well  in
    their education there as they seemed to be  doing  well  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 7. Ms Bremang suggested that the children were at a critical stage in their
    education.  We do not accept that.  They are the ages they are but  this
    is not, for example, as case where an appellant was  only  a  few  weeks
    away from sitting public exams.

 8. Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  makes
    provision for a "qualifying child" so that in the case of a  "qualifying
    child" the public interest  does  not  require  their  or  the  parents'
    removal.  However this benefit is qualified further.  Section 117B(6)(b)
    shows that section 117 only assists appellants seeking to resist removal
    if it would "not be reasonable to expect" the child to leave the  United
    Kingdom.  This has plainly been considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  He refers expressly to paragraph 117B (he means  Section  117B),
    and there is nothing we can see that would have supported  a  conclusion
    that it would not be reasonable to expect  the  children  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.

 9. We recognise that they have spent a lot of their  lives  in  the  United
    Kingdom but that is not sufficient reason to entitle them  to  stay  and
    that is all that really is in this case.

10. Here the Judge can see no basis whatsoever for allowing  the  appeal  of
    the appellants who have no right to remain in the United Kingdom at  all
    except possibly on human rights grounds for the sake  of  the  children.
    Although the rights of the children have to respect the statute provides
    that applications can only be allowed when it would not be reasonable to
    expect the children to leave. If  there  are  circumstances  where  this
    statutory formula produced a result that is contrary to the  appellants'
    human rights they do not exist here.

11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  has  considered  the  prospects  for  the
    children in the event of their leaving.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  has
    made lucid findings at paragraph 26 of the Decision that are  consistent
    with the evidence. We find that although it  may  be  thought  that  the
    decision could have usefully been expressed more thoroughly it  is  done
    well enough to discharge the obligations imposed by Section  55  of  the
    Border Control and Immigration Act.  Once that is appreciated it follows
    that the children's interests have been put first.  There is  no  proper
    basis for finding it not reasonable to expect the children to  leave  so
    the restrictions imposed by Section 117B do not assist them.

12. In short  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  reached  a  permissible
    conclusion which is explained, at least adequately, in the determination
    when it is read carefully.

13. It follows that although we appreciate Ms Bremang's efforts  in  pushing
    hard in the weak spot of the Decision we are not persuaded that there is
    a material error of law and we dismiss the appellants' appeals  in  this
    case.

    Notice of Decision

    The appeals are dismissed.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 19 June 2015                   |










