
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/22083/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 September 2015                 |On 16 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                RASHID BASHIR
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    no appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I  will  refer  to
    the parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant, a  citizen  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 7 May  2014
    to refuse his application for permanent residence  as  confirmation  of
    his right to reside in the UK with a retained right of residence  under
    regulations 15 (1) (f) and 10 (5) of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations
    2006 (the Regulations). First-tier Tribunal Judge Jessica Pacey allowed
    the appeal.  The Secretary of State appeals  with  permission  to  this
    Tribunal.

 3. Following  a  hearing  on  10  June  2015  I  decided,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 7  July  2015,  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal contained an error of law for the  reasons  set  out  in  that
    decision and I set aside the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  decision.  In
    summary I decided that the  Judge  had  no  evidential  basis  for  her
    finding that the appellant satisfied Regulations 10 (5) (a) and (b)  of
    the Regulations and she erred in failing to make findings as to whether
    the EEA national former civil partner of the appellant, rather than the
    appellant, was residing in the UK in accordance with the Regulations at
    the date of termination of the civil partnership.

 4. I listed the appeal for a  resumed  hearing  in  order  to  remake  the
    decision. In light of the failure of the Presenting Officer  to  comply
    with her  undertaking  to  provide  clarification  as  to  whether  the
    Secretary of State could obtain  HMRC  records  about  the  appellant's
    former partner, I issued a direction  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    establish whether she can obtain evidence in relation to the activities
    of the appellant's former partner between 16 November 2010 and the date
    of the termination of the civil partnership on 17 September 2012 and to
    obtain any such evidence in advance of the hearing.

 5. There was no appearance by or on behalf of the appellant at the resumed
    hearing. Since the promulgation of my  decision  on  7  July  2015  the
    appellant has sought to challenge my decision by way of Judicial Review
    and to the Supreme Court. However, in the absence of any order  from  a
    Higher Court, I am of the view that I am still seised  of  this  appeal
    and I am satisfied that it is appropriate for me to proceed  to  remake
    the decision in this appeal.

 6. It is clear from the correspondence form  the  appellant  that  he  was
    aware of the resumed hearing. It appears from the  correspondence  that
    it was not likely that he would  attend  the  resumed  hearing.  I  was
    satisfied that the appellant had been notified of  the  hearing  and  I
    considered that it was in the interests of justice to proceed with  the
    hearing despite the absence of the appellant and I did so in accordance
    with Rule 38 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 7. I heard submissions from Mr Clarke.  He accepted that section 40 of the
    UK Borders Act 2007 gives the Secretary of State the  power  to  obtain
    evidence from HMRC however he submitted that there is no duty to do so.
    He relied on the cases of Amos v SSHD  [2011]  EWCA  Civ  552,  SSHD  v
    Rodriguez [2914] EWCA Civ 2 and AG  and  Others  v  SSHD  [2007]  UKAIT
    00082. He also submitted a copy of an  extract  from  the  respondent's
    policy guidance in relation to family members  who  have  retained  the
    right of residence. This guidance outlines the circumstances in which a
    Home Office case worker may  make  inquiries  as  to  whether  the  EEA
    national sponsor has been exercising  free  movement  rights.  Although
    this policy guidance us from April 2015 Mr Clarke did  not  argue  that
    it, or a predecessor policy, does not apply in this case. He  submitted
    that the  guidance  could  have  been  considered  and  the  discretion
    exercised despite not being referred to  in  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter. He submitted that in this case there is a gap in  the  evidence
    covering a two year period and because this is a long period it may not
    have been appropriate to exercise  the  discretion  in  this  case.  He
    submitted, in line with AG, that if I found that the discretion has not
    been exercised the decision of the Secretary of  State  is  potentially
    unlawful and, if so, any remedy would be to  return  the  case  to  the
    Secretary of State for exercise of the discretion.

Remaking the decision

 8. The decision of the Secretary of  State  dated  7  May  2014  makes  no
    reference to the policy guidance submitted  by  Mr  Clarke  or  to  its
    predecessor. I do not accept that it can be assumed that  consideration
    was given to the exercise of this discretion in circumstances where  it
    was not mentioned in the reasons for refusal letter. The appellant  had
    indicated to the respondent in his covering  letter  dated  1  November
    2013 that he could not obtain the necessary evidence in  light  of  the
    circumstances of the relationship  breakdown.  It  is  clear  from  his
    application that the appellant  was  unable  to  provide  the  evidence
    required to show that he met the requirements of regulation 10 (5).  No
    consideration was given to the reasons  why  the  appellant  could  not
    obtain the evidence required  to  show  that  his  former  partner  was
    exercising treaty rights at  the  date  of  termination  of  the  civil
    partnership.

 9. In these circumstances I am satisfied that the Secretary of  State  has
    not exercised her  discretion  to  consider  making  enquiries  on  the
    appellant's behalf to establish whether the  appellant's  former  civil
    partner was exercising Treaty rights at the date of the termination  of
    the civil partnership. Accordingly I am satisfied that the decision  of
    the Secretary of State is unlawful  in  that  she  failed  to  exercise
    discretion.

10. I allow the appeal to the extent that the decision remains  outstanding
    before the Secretary of State for the exercise of her discretion as set
    out in the policy guidance.

Conclusion:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on point of law.

I set the decision aside and remake it by allowing the appeal to the  extent
that the decision remains outstanding before the Secretary of State.


Signed      Date: 16 September 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

