
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/22495/2014
     ia/22484/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|Oral decision given following hearing         |On 11 May 2015                |
|On 21 April 2015                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                              ALEXANDRA EDWARD
                                ROLAND EDWARD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr T Aitken, Counsel instructed by Richmond Chambers
LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants in this case are siblings who were born respectively  on
    7 August 1984, that is the first appellant Miss Edward,  and  30  April
    1987  which  is  the  second  appellant,   Mr   Roland   Edward.    The
    circumstances in  which  they  came  to  be  in  this  country  can  be
    summarised briefly.

 2. Their mother who  is  now  Mrs  Dunmore,  and  I  will  deal  with  her
    circumstances  below,  arrived  in  this  country  in  or  around  2001
    intending to study.  She came on her own and was given a visa to  study
    for a brief period of time.  Mrs Dunmore had three children.   She  had
    one child by a previous relationship prior to her marriage to Mr Edward
    and then she had two further children who are  the  two  appellants  in
    this case.  She clearly, as I  find,  had  no  immediate  intention  to
    return to Zimbabwe because she brought each of  her  children  here  in
    turn having previously made arrangements in respect of each of them for
    their schooling in this country.  All of them came on visitors'  visas,
    and none of them left when their visas expired.  The  first  appellant,
    Miss Edward, was 16 when she came and the second appellant, Mr  Edward,
    was 14.  Neither of them have returned to  Zimbabwe  since  coming  and
    have accordingly spent about half their lives in this country.

 3. The appellants made a number of attempts to do what they now say was to
    "regularise" their position in this country which included applying for
    British nationality on grounds of ancestry  on  the  basis  that  their
    father was a British citizen who had  been  born  in  Scotland.   These
    applications  were  unsuccessful  and   their   appeals   against   the
    respondent's refusal to grant them British nationality  failed  because
    the documents which were produced  in  support  contained  within  them
    fairly basic and obvious mistakes.  In the marriage certificate which I
    have seen Mr Edward is said to be 60 at a time when, if he  was  indeed
    born when he is claimed to have been in 1922, he would  have  been  59.
    Also a death certificate was produced which stated an incorrect age  by
    several years.  I should note that I have also been shown what is  said
    to be a corrected death certificate (obtained much later) but  that  in
    itself as Ms Isherwood on behalf  of  the  respondent  pointed  out  in
    argument possibly raises more questions than it answers because  it  is
    stated on the face of this document that "this  certificate  is  issued
    without amendment".  Clearly if this was a certificate which  had  been
    corrected that cannot be true.  Accordingly the position at least until
    2010 was that Mrs Dunmore and the two appellants were and had been  for
    most of their stay in this country without any lawful permission to  be
    here.

 4. It is probably common knowledge that the period in which the appellants
    and their mother were in this country was one in which, because of  the
    circumstances and uncertainty with prevailed in Zimbabwe at  the  time,
    there were very few  forced  removals  to  Zimbabwe.   It  is  probably
    because of that rather than any factors which are specific to this case
    that no attempts were made to remove the appellants or their mother and
    they were allowed to remain here,  although  the  appellants  were  not
    permitted to work in consequence of which they enjoyed, if that is  the
    right word, what might properly be regarded as  a  half  life  in  this
    country. Not only were they not able to work, but they were also unable
    to pursue the sort of education that they might have pursued  had  they
    been in this country lawfully because without any valid  permission  to
    be here they could not access loan monies and in respect of Mr  Edward,
    the second appellant,  although  he  did  undertake  a  course  in  car
    mechanics he was not then able to go on to have an apprenticeship which
    he otherwise might have done.

 5. In 2010 the appellant's mother married Mr  Dunmore  who  is  a  British
    citizen and in consequence she  but  not  the  appellants  was  granted
    discretionary leave for three years which leave has been extended for a
    further three years.  It is common  ground  between  the  parties  that
    absent any bad behaviour on her part, it is likely that in  due  course
    she will be granted permanent leave to remain in this country.

 6. The appellants' case is that Mr Dunmore is currently unwell.  It is not
    entirely clear when he became ill and the medical evidence is not  very
    satisfactory but he apparently has some anger management  problems  and
    it is said that he is stressed and suffers from anxiety.   He  has  not
    given evidence to the Tribunal and it is difficult to be more  specific
    about exactly what is wrong with him.  However it is  their  case  that
    the appellants have provided and  continue  to  provide  a  substantial
    amount of assistance to their mother and stepfather.  This is a  matter
    which I will discuss in more detail below.

 7. In 2014 the appellants made a further  application  to  be  allowed  to
    remain on the basis that they had a family life  within  this  country.
    This application was refused by the respondent who also made a  removal
    decision in respect of each applicant.  The  appellants  both  appealed
    against this decision which had not been certified and their appeal was
    heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge Juss sitting at  Sheldon  Court,
    Birmingham on 17 October 2014.

 8. In a determination promulgated on 30 October 2014  Judge  Juss  allowed
    the appeals under Article 8.   The  respondent  appealed  against  this
    decision, with leave, and that appeal came before me on 9 February 2015
    when I found that Judge Juss's decision had contained an error  of  law
    such that that decision had to be set aside  and  re-made.   I  do  not
    propose to repeat fully in this determination the reasons I gave for so
    finding but I will summarise them briefly.

 9. The judge found that notwithstanding the decision  in  Kugathas  [2003]
    EWCA Civ 31 this was a case  in  which  there  were  more  than  normal
    emotional ties between on the one hand the two appellants who  are  now
    aged 30 and 27 and their mother and stepfather such  that  family  life
    properly could be said to exist between them.  The  judge  went  on  to
    find that for this reason it would not be proportionate to remove  them
    from this country.  As I indicated in the  decision  I  gave  following
    that hearing what the judge did not do was  to  carry  out  any  proper
    proportionality exercise which was necessary before he  could  consider
    whether or not removal was proportionate.  He  had  no  regard  to  the
    Immigration Rules as currently drafted and in particular to the  effect
    of Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    which was inserted pursuant to Section 19 of the Immigration  Act  2014
    and which sets out the public interest considerations applicable in all
    cases with regard to Article 8 claims.  Accordingly, I gave  directions
    that this case would  be  re-listed  speedily  before  me  when,  after
    hearing evidence, I would re-make the decision.

10. Today's hearing has been for the purpose of  my  hearing  such  further
    evidence and submissions on behalf  of  both  parties  although  I  had
    indicated following the hearing in February that  I  would  retain  the
    finding made by Judge Juss that  there  was  family  life  between  the
    appellant and their mother and stepfather.  What of course needed to be
    established was the strength of this family life and whether  this  was
    sufficiently strong that (when added to the other factors which were in
    the appellants'  favour)  these  outweighed  the  factors  which  would
    otherwise make removal more or less inevitable.  I should say  at  once
    that I am extremely grateful to both representatives in this case, that
    is Mr Aitken on behalf of the appellants and Ms Isherwood on behalf  of
    the respondent for the concise yet thorough  way  in  which  they  have
    advanced their clients' respective cases before the tribunal.

11. The appellants each gave evidence and  were  cross-examined  thoroughly
    but fairly, as was their mother.  The second appellant, Roland, has  in
    the meantime commenced a relationship with a young lady,  a  Ms  Wiggin
    who is currently nine  weeks'  pregnant  and  she  also  gave  evidence
    briefly before the Tribunal.  She was cross-examined sensitively by  Ms
    Isherwood.  I do not propose within this determination to  set  out  in
    detail the evidence which I heard and which is contained also in  large
    part within the witness statements which were adopted in  evidence.   I
    shall accordingly refer below only to  such  of  this  evidence  as  is
    necessary for the purposes of this determination.  I also will not  set
    out in full all the submissions  which  were  made  on  behalf  of  the
    parties or were included in the skeleton argument produced on behalf of
    the appellants but again shall refer only to such of these  submissions
    as is necessary.   I  have  however  taken  into  consideration  before
    reaching my decision everything which was said to me both  in  evidence
    and submissions and all the material contained within the file  whether
    or not the same is specifically referred to below.

12. I find that the appellants' mother when she came to  this  country  and
    separately brought her children to join her did not at that stage  have
    any intention that they should return notwithstanding that they had  no
    lawful basis for remaining here.  I am unable to reach  any  conclusive
    finding with regard to the applications which had been made  on  behalf
    of the appellants for British nationality on the  grounds  of  ancestry
    save to say that  there  is  no  basis  upon  which,  on  the  evidence
    currently before me, I could go behind the previous findings which have
    been made to the effect that they had not established their  claim.   I
    could not however make a finding that  the  appellants  themselves  had
    been party to the production of false documents in this regard  because
    I simply do not know what the position is in that respect.

13. Having heard evidence from the appellants and their  mother  which  was
    broadly consistent on the substantive points I consider it more  likely
    than not that they are the children of a Mr Edward  and  that  he  died
    before their mother came to this country.  Quite what the circumstances
    are regarding his nationality I simply do not know but I  am  satisfied
    to the requisite standard of proof that he is no longer alive and  that
    accordingly the appellants do not have a father either in this  country
    or in Zimbabwe.  The position therefore is that these  appellants  have
    currently been in this country for some  thirteen  or  fourteen  years,
    without leave, during which time they have continued to live with their
    mother and certainly since 2010 with their stepfather as well.

14. Regarding the stepfather, although  it  is  argued  on  behalf  of  the
    appellants that their presence is vital  to  his  wellbeing,  I  cannot
    accept that this is necessarily as vital as the  appellants  and  their
    mother assert.  As I have already indicated  the  medical  evidence  is
    scant and the appellants were not assisted by  the  presence  of  their
    stepfather.  I was told that the family  feared  that  he  would  react
    badly to giving evidence in the Tribunal and that might be the case but
    giving evidence is rarely a wholly pleasant experience and sometimes in
    order to support close family one really needs to do something (in this
    case  come  to  court,  give  evidence  and  be  available  for  cross-
    examination) which in the normal course of events one would prefer  not
    to do.  It is regrettable that he did not give evidence.  It would have
    been a matter for the Tribunal to decide whether or not  that  evidence
    assisted and the fact that Mr Dunmore has chosen not to  give  evidence
    means that evidence which might have supported the appellants  has  not
    been before the Tribunal.

15. I also do not accept the submission made on behalf  of  the  appellants
    albeit not ultimately pursued with any vigour on their behalf and by Mr
    Aitken who preferred to concentrate on his better points that were  the
    appellants to be returned to Zimbabwe  they  would  be  destitute  with
    nowhere to live and effectively no means of support.  It is quite clear
    from the evidence which eventually surfaced  during  the  hearing  that
    they have some family in Zimbabwe, albeit not close, and that they also
    have some friends one of whom was responsible for obtaining some of the
    documents in this case.  It would perhaps have been better if this  had
    been put frankly before the court at the outset rather than essentially
    coming out in dribs and drabs while the evidence was being  given.   It
    is also quite clearly the case that insofar as the  appellants'  mother
    and stepfather have been providing financial support for the appellants
    while they have been in this country, they could continue to do so were
    they to return to Zimbabwe.  So the fact  is,  if  they  went  back  to
    Zimbabwe they would be able to scrape some  form  of  living  and  they
    would have some ties within that country.  To that extent,  insofar  as
    it might originally have been argued on their behalf that they  had  no
    ties with Zimbabwe such that they would be  entitled  to  remain  under
    Article 8 under  the  Rules,  in  my  judgment  that  argument  is  not
    sustainable and again, vey sensibly, Mr Aitken in oral argument did not
    seek to pursue that argument before me.

16. An argument was advanced before  me  certainly  in  evidence  that  the
    effect on the appellants' mother and  stepfather  would  be  absolutely
    catastrophic if these appellants were to be made to return to  Zimbabwe
    because in those circumstances they on their own would not  be  capable
    of looking after themselves.  Again in my judgment this puts their case
    too high.  I do not accept that they would not be able to cope at  all,
    albeit I do accept that their lives would be poorer as a result of  the
    appellants returning.

17. Insofar as I have accepted that there is  a  family  life  between  the
    appellants and their mother and stepfather I do not believe this to  be
    by any means minimal family life.  It was clear to me on the evidence I
    heard, albeit that I did not accept all the evidence which was given in
    particular by the appellants' mother who as  I  have  already  noted  I
    believe never intended for her children to  return  after  their  leave
    expired, that their relationship with their mother is far greater  than
    one might normally anticipate between adult children and their parents.
     Part of the reason  for  this  is  that  due  to  circumstances  which
    admittedly were of their own making they  have  continued  living  with
    their mother throughout the time they have been in  this  country,  and
    consequently have done so throughout all their lives.  Further, as they
    have remained here when they have been unable to work,  I  also  accept
    that their stepfather, albeit  not  necessarily  as  ill  as  has  been
    asserted,  has  nonetheless  benefited  from  their  support  and   the
    appellants do have strong and close family ties with their  mother  and
    stepfather.  Also, although the appellants are not totally without ties
    in Zimbabwe, these are not close ties and their real family life is  in
    this country. Although they are adults and adults usually  are  obliged
    to return to their country of nationality, these family  ties  must  be
    considered.

18. There is of course one other factor  in  this  case  which  I  have  to
    consider and that is that the second appellant now has  a  relationship
    with Ms Wiggin who is nine weeks'  pregnant.   I  do  however  have  to
    consider  this  against  the  background  of  Section   117B   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2005  which  was  inserted  by
    Section 19 of the Immigration Act  2014.   This  provides  among  other
    things that:

         "(1) the maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest" and

         "(4) that little weight should be given to -

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully".

     As I have already indicated the second appellant  is  in  this  country
    unlawfully  and  this  relationship  with  Ms  Wiggin  was  undoubtedly
    established while he was here unlawfully.

19. Insofar as the appellants have built up a  private  life  beyond  their
    family life in this country I have to  have  regard  to  117B(5)  which
    states  that  "little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
    established by a person at a time when the person's immigration  status
    is precarious".  In this case this clearly applies because such private
    life as they have in this country was established at a time when  their
    immigration status was precarious.

20. Interestingly, Section 117B(6) now provides as follows:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom".

21. Were the situation to have been that Ms Wiggin had already given  birth
    and the second appellant had a relationship with the child,  this  sub-
    Section might have come into play.  However, it appears to be the  case
    that I cannot give great weight to this sub-Section until such time  as
    the child is born which he or she has not been yet.  However, that does
    not mean that I have to disregard this factor totally when  considering
    proportionality in general.  In this regard  I  should  make  clear  my
    finding, having heard Ms Wiggin give evidence, that I do accept to  the
    requisite standard of proof, that the second appellant and Ms Wiggin do
    enjoy a real relationship and that it is  a  genuine  one,  that  other
    things  being  equal,  Ms  Wiggin  would  wish,  as  would  the  second
    appellant, to continue this relationship and that the  consequences  of
    the second appellant being removed to Zimbabwe and not being allowed to
    come back, would be that she would quite literally be left holding  the
    baby.

22. It is against the background of these  findings  that  I  now  have  to
    consider whether or not it would be proportionate for these  appellants
    now to be removed, and I  briefly  summarise  what  I  understand  both
    parties agree is the law that has to be applied having  regard  to  the
    Immigration Rules and to Section 117B of  which  I  have  set  out  the
    relevant parts and also current jurisprudence from Nagre onwards.  I do
    not propose to set out a detailed treatise regarding the law but rather
    to summarise the position.

23. The Immigration Rules  now  set  out  in  most  cases  the  appropriate
    considerations to be applied where an application is made under Article
    8.  Absent factors outside the Immigration Rules it is  very  difficult
    to conceive of circumstances where an application  to  remain  will  be
    allowed where those factors which are taken  into  account  within  the
    Rules do not apply.  It is not now argued that these applications could
    succeed within the Rules because it has to be accepted in light of  the
    evidence which was given that the appellants do retain  at  least  some
    ties with Zimbabwe.  What is however argued is that there  are  factors
    in this case which are not contemplated within  the  Rules  and  in  my
    judgment that is clearly correct because although the Rules  deal  with
    relationships between children  and  parents  where  the  children  are
    minors there is no provision within the Rules as to the  weight  to  be
    given or the manner in which  consideration  should  be  given  to  the
    unusual circumstances where a Tribunal or a decision maker  finds  that
    there is a relationship between adults such as to give rise to a family
    relationship (other than a relationship with a partner which  is  dealt
    with now under Section 117B).  Clearly this is such a case  because  as
    Judge Juss found and  I  also  find,  the  relationship  between  these
    appellants and their mother and  stepfather  does  go  beyond  what  in
    Kugathas was considered to be the normal emotional ties to be  expected
    between a parent and his or her adult children.

24. In addition I do have to consider to what extent  I  should  also  have
    regard to the situation regarding the second appellant whose girlfriend
    with whom he has a genuine relationship is pregnant and whether and  if
    so to what extent this is a factor which should be given any weight  at
    all.  It is not entirely clear within  the  Rules  as  to  what  weight
    should be given to the pregnancy.  It is right  that  under  the  Rules
    little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  relationship  formed  with  a
    qualifying partner but it is also clear within the Rules that were  the
    child to be born the public interest would not require removal were the
    father to have a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  the
    child and it would not be reasonable to expect that child to leave this
    country.  (As the child would be a British national through his or  her
    mother, it would arguably not be reasonable to  expect  that  child  to
    leave this country in order to live in  Zimbabwe).   Quite  where  that
    leaves the situation where the relationship formed with the partner  is
    at the stage where a child is due to be born but has not yet been  born
    is not entirely clear but I propose to deal with this case on the basis
    that although it is not a factor that I totally leave out of account  I
    do not give any great weight to it at this stage.

25. Accordingly, I have now to consider the competing factors and I have in
    mind what the courts have consistently stated from Nagre onwards  which
    is that where there are factors outside the Rules such that independent
    consideration has to be given to  whether  outside  the  Rules  removal
    should not take place on Article 8 grounds, there have to be compelling
    reasons why, notwithstanding the public interest  reasons  why  removal
    should normally take place, the consequences would be unduly harsh such
    as to make that removal disproportionate.  I say at the outset that the
    weight to be given to  the  public  interest  in  removing  persons  in
    circumstances such as apply here in light of the immigration history of
    the appellants and their mother is extremely high.  Put simply,  it  is
    important in terms of immigration  control  that  the  public  in  this
    country and also those who might otherwise be tempted to come  to  this
    country without leave and then  remain  in  the  hope  that  they  will
    somehow be allowed to remain understand that this will not be made easy
    for them.  If the courts allow  applicants  such  as  these  appellants
    other than in very rare circumstances to successfully challenge removal
    decisions in cases like this, it  will  be  very  difficult  indeed  to
    maintain effective immigration control which is extremely important for
    this country.  To their credit, the  appellants  I  believe  understood
    this. Even though they have remained without leave for a long period of
    time, the first appellant in particular did, I believe, appreciate that
    if she won her appeal this would be exceptional in the sense  that  few
    cases of her type could succeed.  Again, very sensibly, Mr  Aitken  did
    not attempt to advance a contrary argument. Accordingly, what I have to
    consider is whether, considering all the  factors  in  the  round,  the
    circumstances in this particular case are so compelling as  to  justify
    the Tribunal reaching a decision which would only be  reached  in  very
    rare cases indeed and which can truly be said to be an exception to the
    general rule that people who remain in this country without leave  will
    be required to return.

26. Having given very anxious scrutiny  to  this  case  indeed  I  am  just
    persuaded in what I consider to be a very finely balanced case that the
    consequences to this family were the appellants to be removed would  be
    unduly harsh such that removal would not be proportionate.  I  bear  in
    mind that albeit they should individually have returned once they  were
    adults, both appellants came here as children and  cannot  properly  be
    blamed for the initial decision that they should  remain  here  without
    leave, which was essentially a decision taken by their mother.  I  take
    into account also the fact that they have been here for a  long  period
    of time.  Neither of these factors on their own would be sufficient  to
    mean that their appeal should succeed because these  are  matters  that
    are dealt with within the Rules.  However, what  does  take  this  case
    beyond the normal case and make the circumstances rare is the extent of
    the relationship which they have with their  family  in  this  country,
    which is not a factor contemplated  within  the  rules.   Although  the
    appellants would be able to subsist in Zimbabwe such that it could  not
    properly be argued that  they  could  not  be  returned  there  in  any
    circumstances  (and  certainly  were  this  a  deportation  case  where
    different considerations would  apply,  their  cases  would  be  fairly
    hopeless) nonetheless, having heard all the evidence and even though  I
    do not accept that they would on a practical level be unable to survive
    on their own or that their mother and stepfather  would  be  unable  to
    cope on their own either, I do accept that the relationship between the
    appellants and their mother and stepfather is an extremely  strong  one
    and that the family bonds are very strong indeed.  I  believe  that  it
    would not be wrong to say that were they to be  removed  the  emotional
    effect on the family would be quite devastating and would cause a  huge
    amount of grief and heartache.  Regrettably that is what removal  often
    does and, as I  say,  were  this  a  deportation  case  that  would  be
    something that the appellants would have to live with;   however,  this
    is not a deportation case and it is  after  weighing  all  the  factors
    together in the round, including  giving  great  weight  to  the  need,
    absent compelling reasons, to maintain effective  immigration  control,
    but also having in mind that the appellants have a  substantial  family
    life now in the UK, which could not  realistically  be  carried  on  by
    modern methods of communication, that they  did  not  come  to  the  UK
    originally with any personal intention to remain  without  leave,  that
    they have been here now for about 13 years and that  they  are  not  in
    receipt of public funds and it is not anticipated  that  they  will  be
    (and it will be open to the respondent to make this a condition of such
    leave as they  may  be  granted  following  this  decision  if  she  so
    chooses), that I consider that their removal would be unduly  harsh  in
    the circumstances.

27. As I have said I reach this  decision  without  given  any  substantial
    weight to the position regarding Ms Wiggin and  her  pregnancy;  had  I
    given weight to this factor my decision would  have  been  clearer  and
    less finely balanced.  In these  circumstances  the  decision  of  this
    Tribunal, for the reasons which have been set out above,  is  that  the
    appeals of the appellants will be allowed.

28. Since I  gave  my  provisional  judgement  in  this  case,  immediately
    following the hearing, the Court of Appeal has published  its  decision
    in SS (Congo) and others  v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 387 (this decision was
    published on 23 April 2015).  Having considered  the  judgement  in  SS
    (Congo) carefully, I am satisfied that my decision in this case  is  in
    accordance with the guidance so recently given by the Court  of  Appeal
    in that decision.





Decision

I  set  aside  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Juss  as
containing a material error of law and I substitute the following decision:

The appellants' appeal is allowed under Article 8, outside the Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed:

     [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
                       27 April 2015

