

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22097/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 December 2014                           |On 19 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                                BINTA CEESAY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who was born on 18 August 1987 and who is a  citizen  of
    Gambia, appeals against the determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Gordon that was promulgated on 18 August 2014.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge V Osborne
    on 25 September 2014 on the grounds that it  was  arguable  that  Judge
    Gordon had erred by dealing with the appeal without a hearing when  the
    appellant had in fact notified the First-tier Tribunal on 13 June  2014
    that although she had initially indicated in her notice of appeal  that
    she wanted the hearing "on papers" she  had  subsequently  changed  her
    mind.

 3. After being advised by me  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  indeed
    received such a request but  had  failed  to  act  upon  it,  Mr  Smart
    informed me that he no longer opposed the appeal.  He suggested that in
    such circumstances a procedural error had been committed and  that  the
    proper course of action would be for the appeal to be remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a hearing afresh.

 4. I agree with his suggestions as they properly reflect  the  authorities
    on such matters.

 5. In order that the remitted appeal  can  proceed  smoothly  I  make  the
    following directions.  These may be supplemented  by  other  directions
    made by the First-tier Tribunal.

     a. The appeal is to be heard by the First-tier Tribunal on  the  first
        available date at the Birmingham hearing centre.

     b. Nothing is preserved from the determination of Judge Gordon.

     c. No additional appeal fee is required.  The  appeal  has  reached  a
        stage where it would be unjust not to conduct an oral hearing.

     d. The issues arising in this appeal relate to whether  the  appellant
        is the spouse of an EEA national working in the UK even though  the
        couple is separated.  It is for the appellant to show  that  it  is
        more likely than not that she is still the spouse  of  a  qualified
        person and that her spouse is exercising EU law rights in the UK.

     e. The parties are required to submit to  the  Tribunal  and  to  each
        other all documents on which they will seek to rely at least  seven
        calendar days before the substantive hearing.  Failure to do so may
        result in late evidence not being admitted.

Decision

The determination of Judge Gordon contains an error on a point  of  law  and
is set aside.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal is remitted  to  that  chamber  for  a
fresh hearing.



                               Signed   Date 23 December 2014


                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
