
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22460/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 14 December 2016                      |On 9 October 2017                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                          mufatau abimbola afolabi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Ahmed, a Home Office Presenting Officer


          DECISION AND REASONS FOR FINDING A MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

1.   The appellant was born on 26 April 1978 and is Nigerian.

2.   The present appeal is by the appellant  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  to  dismiss   his   appeal   against   the
    respondent's decision under the EEA Regulations.

3.   Unfortunately, the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT Judge  Watt  -
    the Immigration Judge) treated the case  as  though  it  were  a  paper
    appeal when in fact, it seems, the  appellant  had  requested  an  oral
    appeal and had attended the hearing with a representative with  a  view
    to giving evidence in support of his case.

4.    Judge  of  First-tier  Tribunal   Osborne   considered   the   present
    application for permission to appeal against the decision of the FtT on
    9 December 2016 and decided it was appropriate to grant  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  All issues raised in  the  grounds  were
    allowed to be argued.  He pointed out that at the hearing the appellant
    had waited in a public area until approximately  3:30pm,  when  he  was
    informed that his case had been disposed of on paper without  the  need
    for him to attend the hearing room.

5.    As  Judge  Osborne  comments,  the  FtT  appears  to  have  reached  a
    procedurally unfair decision.  The case had been listed as a paper case
    but the appellant and his solicitor had attended court and should  have
    been given an opportunity to be heard before  the  tribunal  reached  a
    decision.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

6.   At the hearing I heard brief oral  submissions  by  Mr  Karim  for  the
    appellant and Ms Ahmed for the respondent.  They both candidly accepted
    that because there had not been a fair hearing before the  FtT  it  was
    necessary to remit the matter back for a fresh hearing.  I  acceded  to
    their consensual remittal  and  made  appropriate  directions  for  the
    onward conduct of this matter.  I  suggested  that  in  future,  at  Mr
    Karim's suggestion, the matter should not be listed as a floating case.



7.   I concluded at the end  of  the  hearing  that  the  matter  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  and  I  now  provide  very  brief
    reasons for the remittal.

Summary of conclusions

8.   Having carefully considered the reasons given by the Immigration  Judge
    I am afraid they are tainted by  the  fact  that  he  had  not  had  an
    opportunity to hear the appellant's account.  Ordinarily this would not
    make a difference but here it is clear the appellant could  have  given
    an explanation as to a number of the documents produced  and  it  might
    have materially affected the outcome.  Furthermore, justice  should  be
    seen to  be  done  and  this  includes  giving  all  the  litigants  an
    opportunity to present their case in  the  manner  that  they  see  fit
    provided this is consistent with the requirements of the rules and  the
    requirement for proportionality.

Decision

9.   It is my decision therefore to allow  the  appellant's  appeal  against
    the decision of the FtT and remit the matter to the FtT for it to  make
    a fresh decision. None of the findings of the FtT shall  stand  and  it
    will be necessary to hold a de novo hearing in due course.   Directions
    for that hearing will be sent out by the FtT.

10.  No anonymity direction was made by the FtT  and  I  make  no  anonymity
    direction.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Although I have allowed the appeal to the UT there has been no fault on  the
part of the respondent and I make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

