
[pic]
IAC-BFD- MD

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22980/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st August 2015                  |On 7th September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts


                                   Between

                      Ms Maria paula martinez Rodriguez
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant a citizen of Colombia born 2nd  June  1985  appeals  with
    permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  M  B
    Hussain) in which it  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's refusal to grant her a Residence Card as the family member
    of a French national exercising Treaty rights  in  the  United  Kingdom
    under the EEA Regulations 2006.



Background

 2. The Appellant entered the UK on an  unknown  date  as  a  student.  She
    remained as a student, being granted various extensions to her leave  -
    the last being valid to 4th February 2014.

 3. In October 2011 she  and  her  Sponsor,  Mr  Fabio  Lafranca  a  French
    national, started a relationship and on 4th January 2014  they  married
    in London.

 4. Following her marriage, the Appellant applied, in  March  2014,  for  a
    Residence Card under Regulation 6 of the EEA Regulations 2006. This was
    refused by the Respondent in May 2014 on the grounds that the Appellant
    had failed to show evidence that  her  husband  was  exercising  Treaty
    rights for the relevant period and  that  he  was  a  qualified  person
    within the EEA Regulations.

 5. The Appellant appealed the refusal and her appeal came before the First-
    tier Tribunal,  who  dealt  with  the  matter  on  the  papers  at  the
    Appellant's request. The appeal was dismissed by a decision promulgated
    on 18th December 2014.

 6. Permission to appeal that decision  was  sought  and  whilst  initially
    refused this was granted on a  renewed  application  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 7. The grant of permission reads as follows.

         "The grounds of appeal assert that  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal  had  erred  in  his  consideration  of  the   appellant's
         application for a residence card on the basis that her husband  was
         an EEA national exercising Treaty rights.

         Having considered the evidence before the judge I consider that the
         grounds of appeal are arguable."

    Thus the matter comes before me.

Error of Law/Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8. I find I am able to deal with this matter briefly. I am grateful to  Mr
    Walker for his assistance in this regard.

 9. Short evidence was taken from the Sponsor, who confirmed  that  he  had
    resided in the UK continuously since the time he had  gained  permanent
    residence. He confirmed he had not been absent  from  the  UK  for  any
    period exceeding two years.

10. Having heard that evidence and having had sight of  all  the  documents
    put forward on behalf of the Appellant,  (scheduled under  the  heading
    'Index' and  containing Annexes A to H) Mr Walker said he was satisfied
     that this evidence showed that the Sponsor had  continuously  retained
    his permanent residence in the UK since 8th February 2007. Furthermore,
    he was satisfied that the documents confirmed that the Sponsor had  not
    been absent from the UK for a period exceeding two  consecutive  years.
    Therefore the conditions for the Appellant being  granted  a  Residence
    Card as a family member of an EEA national were met.  There  has  never
    been any challenge to the relationship between the parties.

11. Mr Walker invited me to find that  the  FtT  Judge  had  erred  in  his
    decision; to set the decision aside  and  to  remake  it  allowing  the
    Appellant's appeal.

12.  I agree with that course.

Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  dismissing  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the Respondent's refusal of 19th May 2014,  to  grant  a
    Residence Card under the  EEA  Regulations  2006,  is  set  aside.  The
    decision is remade. The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made


Signature     Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



Fee Award

As I have allowed the appeal I have decided to make  to  make  a  whole  fee
award of any fee which has been paid.


Signature     Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

