
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
IA/22842/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 2 June 2014                           |On 3rd June 2014          |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr SHEHZAD GUL
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Mohsin, Counsel
      (instructed by S Z Solicitors)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal  Judge  Pirotta  on   23   April   2014   against   the
           determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Coutts  who  had
           allowed the Respondent's appeal to the extent  of  finding  that
           the Secretary of State's decision dated 23 May 2013 was  not  in
           accordance with the law in  a  determination  promulgated  on  4
           March 2014.  The Respondent is a national of Pakistan,  who  had
           applied for further leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
           Student Migrant, which was  refused  on  the  grounds  that  the
           Appellant had not submitted a valid CAS  with  his  application.
           He had not provided an English language test certificate from an
           approved provider.  The application was refused under  paragraph
           245ZX(c) of the  Immigration  Rules.  The  reasons  for  refusal
           letter conveying the decision to refuse to vary the Respondent's
           existing leave incorporated a  second  decision  to  remove  the
           Respondent  by  way  of  directions  under  section  47  of  the
           Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

      2.    Judge Pirotta considered it arguable that  Judge  Coutts  should
           not have concluded that  the  Secretary  of  State  should  have
           exercised discretion  and  applied  her  Evidential  Flexibility
           Policy, because the English language test certificate was not in
           the wrong format: on the  contrary  it  did  not  exist  at  the
           material time.  (The issue of maintenance had been  conceded  by
           the Secretary of  State  at  the  hearing:  see  [10]  of  Judge
           Coutts's determination.)


      3.    The reasons for refusal letter dated 23 May 2013 stated that the
           Respondent had claimed 30 points for his CAS but  the  Secretary
           of State was not satisfied that the Respondent's Tier 4  sponsor
           had ensured that the Respondent was either competent in  English
           language at a minimum of level  B2  of  the  CEFR  or  that  the
           Respondent met an alternative requirement.  His CAS was to study
           for a Diploma in Strategic Management, which was at NQF level 7,
           above degree level  and  so  required  the  Respondent  to  show
           English  language  at  level  B2.   The  CAS  produced  was  not
           accompanied by a hard copy certificate  or  score  report.   The
           scores on the  CAS  were  shown  as  "to  be  confirmed".   Such
           evidence was not acceptable.  The Respondent met  no  applicable
           exemption.


      5.     No  such  test  certificate  has  ever  been  produced  by  the
           Respondent.


      6.    Mr Avery for the Appellant submitted that the decision to refuse
           had been based solely on the  Appellant's  CAS,  which  was  not
           compliant with Appendix A. The Respondent had not complied  with
           the English language test certificate requirements.   There  was
           no scope for  the  application  of  the  Evidential  Flexibility
           Policy because there was no reason for the Secretary of State to
           have believed that there was a compliant English  language  test
           certificate in existence.  This was not  a  format  error.   The
           judge had fallen into material error of law to  have  considered
           otherwise.  The  appeal  fell  to  be  dismissed   because   the
           Immigration Rules in force at the date of decision had not  been
           met.


      7.    Ms Mohsin for the Respondent submitted that the judge  had  been
           right.  The reasons for  refusal  letter  had  stated  that  the
           Appellant had obtained the B2 level, so an enquiry  should  have
           been made.  Moreover, the Respondent had  previously  passed  an
           English language test so there was reason  to  believe  that  he
           would have done so on this occasion: the  certificate  was  from
           the University of Hertfordshire and was dated 20  January  2011.
           In  discussion,  Ms  Mohsin  accepted  that  any  dispute  about
           responsibility for the CAS was between the  Respondent  and  his
           college, and was not a matter for the Secretary of State.


      8.    At the conclusion of submissions the tribunal indicated that  it
           found that the judge had fallen  into  material  error  of  law.
           There was insufficient evidence for the  Evidential  Flexibility
           Policy to come into play: see Rodriguez [2014] EWCA Civ 2.   The
           terms of the Appellant's CAS, which stated  expressly  that  the
           test scores were "to be confirmed,"  tended  to  show  that  the
           results were not available at all.  That was compounded  by  the
           absence of a  hard  copy  test  certificate.   At  [11]  of  his
           determination the judge recorded "The Appellant explained to  me
           how he  had  tried  to  obtain  the  original  English  language
           certificate but had  met  barriers  from  the  institution  when
           making enquiries... it had proved difficult to find someone  who
           would take responsibility for sorting this issue out."  On  that
           evidence alone it is plain that the  test  certificate  was  not
           available either at the application stage or  the  appeal  stage
           and that the Appellant's own  efforts  to  obtain  it  had  been
           unsuccessful.  There is no reason to think that the Secretary of
           State might have done any better.


      9.    Indeed, paragraph 245AA(c) of the Immigration Rules states  "The
           UKBA (now to be read  as  the  Home  Office)  will  not  request
           documents where a specified document has not been submitted (for
           example an English language certificate is missing)..."
      10.   The fact that the Respondent had passed an English language test
           in 2011 was not relevant as the  Respondent  had  to  produce  a
           certificate valid for the current application.  There  would  be
           no reason for the Secretary of State to have checked a  previous
           application for that purpose.  Even if that had been done, there
           would in any event have been no reason  for  Appellant  to  have
           made any further enquiries in the face of paragraph 245AA(c).


      11.   Thus while it is  possible  to  see  why  the  judge  felt  some
           sympathy for the Respondent, the only course open to  the  judge
           was to have dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.


      12.   Accordingly the Upper  Tribunal  must  allow  the  Secretary  of
           State's appeal, sets aside the  determination  and  remakes  the
           decision so as to dismiss the appeal


      13.   Ms Mohsin accepted in further argument that any claim  based  on
           the Respondent's private life in the United Kingdom as a student
           under  Article  8  ECHR  could  take  matters  no  further.  The
           Respondent was not part way through a course (as in CDS  (Points
           Based System: "available": Article 8) Brazil [2010]  UKUT  00305
           (IAC))  and  he  could  return  to  Pakistan   without   serious
           difficulty  or  expense  to  make  a   fresh   entry   clearance
           application from there if he wished to undertake another  course
           of study in the United Kingdom.  There would be no unduly  harsh
           consequences: see Gulshan (Article  8  -  new  rules  -  correct
           approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC).  Any  interference  with  the
           Respondent's private life would thus  be  proportionate  to  the
           legitimate objectives set out in Article 8.2 ECHR.


      14.   Alternatively, as the Respondent has married a  British  Citizen
           since he commenced his studies in the United Kingdom, as appears
           from the Respondent's bundle for the First-tier Tribunal  appeal
           hearing, although it was not a live issue before the  First-tier
           Tribunal, he could make  a  fresh  application  on  that  basis.
           Again it would be proportionate to expect that of him and  there
           was no evidence to suggest otherwise. The appeal is dismissed.


      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision involved the making  of  an  error
on a point of law.  The Upper Tribunal sets aside  the  decision,  which  is
remade as follows:

      The appeal is dismissed


      Signed                                  Dated


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
      FEE AWARD


      The appeal has been dismissed and so no fee award can be made.


      Signed                                  Dated


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell

