

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/22019/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 8th November 2017                  |       On 28th November 2017          |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                        miss Triscy Sushana Williams
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Fisher, Counsel instructed by D J Webb & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a  national  of  Jamaica,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State of 28th May  2015
    to refuse her application for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of
    her private and  family  life.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  L  Murray
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  1st
    February 2017.  The Appellant's application for permission to appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal was refused in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  upon
    renewal to the Upper Tribunal application for permission to appeal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill on 4th October 2017.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant entered the  UK  in
    on 23rd October 2002 as a visitor (I note that although the reasons for
    refusal letter indicates that the Appellant first  entered  the  UK  in
    October 2012 the immigration history set out in the Respondent's First-
    tier Tribunal bundle states that  it  was  2002).   The  Appellant  was
    granted leave to remain as  a  student  until  31st  January  2004  and
    subsequent periods of leave to remain as a student were  granted  until
    30th September 2010 when  she  applied  for  a  post-study  visa.   Her
    application was refused but a subsequent  application  was  granted  in
    July 2011. The Appellant's application for further leave to remain as a
    Tier 4 student was refused in September 2013 and  her  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain on the basis of long residence  was  refused
    in November 2013. The Appellant submitted the application which is  the
    subject of the current appeal on 4th March 2015.  That application  was
    based on the Appellant's claim that she would be unable  to  return  to
    Jamaica because there would be nowhere for her to live there.  She also
    claimed that she helps to care for Mrs Bradshaw with whom she  resides,
    along with Mrs Bradshaw's two daughters.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard evidence from  the  Appellant,  Mrs
    Bradshaw and her two daughters.  The judge concluded  at  paragraph  14
    that the Appellant had  not  established  that  there  would  be  "very
    significant obstacles" to her returning to Jamaica.  The judge went  on
    to consider the appeal under Article 8 through the steps set out in the
    decision in R v SSHD  ex  parte  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27.   The  judge
    concluded that the Appellant had established a private life in  the  UK
    but weighed the fact that she could not meet the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  and  the  fact  that  her  private  life  had  been
    established while her status was precarious or unlawful, and  concluded
    that the decision to refuse her application for leave to remain  was  a
    proportionate one.

 4. There are two Grounds of Appeal. The first  ground  contends  that  the
    judge had a flawed  approach  to  the  question  of  "very  significant
    obstacles" in her assessment of paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  It is contended in the second ground  that  the  judge  made  a
    material misdirection in law in terms  of  her  erroneous  approach  to
    Article 8, including her fact-finding in relation  to  the  nature  and
    extent of the relationship between the Appellant and  the  family  with
    whom she resided.

 5. The first ground of appeal contends that the judge was  flawed  in  her
    approach to paragraph 276ADE.  As the Appellant had been in the UK  for
    less than twenty years the requirements to be met are those set out  in
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  The judge carried  out  an  analysis  of  the
    evidence at paragraphs 12 and 13 noting that at the time of the hearing
    the Appellant had been in the UK for fourteen years,  that  her  mother
    and  three  siblings  lived  together  in  Jamaica  and  set  out   the
    qualifications the Appellant had obtained in the UK and  her  voluntary
    work that she undertakes.  The judge concluded at paragraph 14:-

         "The Appellant is clearly a very capable and determined  individual
         who has been very active in the community and has an extremely good
         reputation amongst her peers.  She has  also  gained  a  number  of
         qualifications since arriving here.   She  has  asserted  that  she
         would find it hard to find employment in Jamaica and gave  evidence
         that she had checked on line but could  not  find  jobs  in  events
         management or behavioural science which are her fields.  I  do  not
         accept, in the absence of reject letters or supporting evidence  of
         a lack of  job  opportunities  for  someone  with  the  Appellant's
         qualifications and experience, that she would not be able  to  find
         employment.  She is a resourceful and  qualified  individual.   She
         has family in Jamaica consisting of her mother, aunt, siblings  and
         cousins and retains family and social ties.  She confirmed in cross-
         examination that she remains in regular contact  with  her  mother.
         Despite the fact that the  house  is  overcrowded,  I  consider  it
         likely that they would be able to accommodate her at least  in  the
         short term until she finds a job and can provide  for  herself.   I
         therefore do not consider that  there  would  be  very  significant
         obstacles to her integration.  She does not make a claim under  any
         other paragraph of the Immigration Rules."

 6. Ms Fisher relied on the decision in the case of SSHD  v  Kamara  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 813 submitting that the judge was  required  to  carry  out  a
    broad evaluative assessment when considering whether  there  were  very
    significant obstacles as to whether the person would be able to fit in,
    in their home country.  She submitted  that  the  evidence  before  the
    judge was that the Appellant had spent most of her adult life in the UK
    from 2002 onwards and the issue was whether she is enough of an insider
    to make a life in Jamaica again.

 7. However, in my view it is clear from  the  assessment  carried  out  in
    paragraph 14 as set out above that the  judge  considered  all  of  the
    evidence before her in relation to the Appellant's return  to  Jamaica.
    The judge took  into  account  the  prospects  of  employment  for  the
    Appellant within and out-with her field.   The  judge  also  took  into
    account the availability of short-term accommodation and the fact  that
    the Appellant has family members with whom she is still in  contact  in
    Jamaica.  These findings were open to the judge on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence available to her. It is clear  from  the  terms  of  paragraph
    276ADE that "very significant obstacles" is a very high  threshold  and
    in my view the judge has taken into account all the  evidence  and  has
    given proper reasons for finding that the Appellant had not  met  these
    requirements.  The Appellant has not made out this ground of appeal.

 8. It is contended in the second ground of appeal that the judge  made  an
    error in relation to her assessment of Article 8.  At  the  hearing  Ms
    Fisher contended that the judge erred in  describing  the  relationship
    between  the  Appellant  and  Mrs   Bradshaw   as   effectively   being
    "effectively an employment relationship"[19] in light of  the  evidence
    before her.

 9. Ms Fisher relied on the case of Lama (video recorded evidence -weight -
    Art 8 ECHR) [2017] UKUT 00016 (IAC).  At  paragraph  32  the  Tribunal
    said:-

         "Thus, at its heart, family life denotes real or committed personal
         support between or among the persons concerned.  Such persons  need
         not necessarily be related by blood and, in that sense, are  not  a
         family in the traditional or conventional  senses.   However,  they
         are readily embraced  by  one  of  the  dictionary  definitions  of
         'family', namely 'a group of things that are alike  in  some  way'.
         Mere likeness is not, of course, sufficient for Article 8 purposes.
         The 'likeness', in Article 8 terms,  is  constituted  by  committed
         support, emotional bonds and, very frequently, a  strong  sense  of
         duty".

10. At paragraph 36 the Tribunal said:-

         "Based on those  findings,  I  consider  firstly  the  question  of
         whether there is family life between the Appellant and Mr R. I  can
         identify no legal obstacle to an affirmative finding on this issue.
         Their  relationship  is  characterised   by   profound   bonds   of
         friendship,  support,  respect  and  dependency.   Furthermore,  as
         regards the Appellant, there is a clear sense of duty.  I  consider
         it important not to  view  dependency  through  an  inappropriately
         narrow lens.  I am satisfied that the element of dependency in this
         relationship is mutual.  It is both of the emotional  (bilaterally)
         and physical (unilaterally) variety. The abundance  of  documentary
         evidence, some of which I have highlighted  above,  bears  eloquent
         testament  to  the  quality,  potency  and   profundity   of   this
         relationship".

11. In Ms Fisher's submission, as in the case of  Lama,  the  judge  should
    have concluded that there was family life between the Appellant and Mrs
    Bradshaw.

12. In the instant case the judge has accepted that private life  had  been
    established [17], in fact the judge considered that the  Appellant  had
    established "strong private life ties to the  family  she  lives  with"
    [20].  In my view it is clear that the judge took into account  all  of
    the evidence in relation to this issue.  At paragraph 18 the judge took
    into account the fact that Mrs Bradshaw is 94,  partially  sighted  and
    suffers from dementia.  She took into account the length  of  time  the
    Appellant had been living with Mrs Bradshaw and her two  daughters  and
    the care that she provides.  The  judge  accepted  that  the  Appellant
    provides  a  service  and  cares  for  Mrs  Bradshaw  in   return   for
    accommodation and money.  I note the evidence before the  judge  as  to
    the relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  Mrs  Bradshaw  and  her
    daughters.  Ms Fisher did not point to any part of  the  evidence  that
    the judge had failed to consider.  It is clear that the judge was fully
    aware of the  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  the  Bradshaw
    family.  It is clear that the judge appreciated the role undertaken  by
    the Appellant. In my view it was open to the judge to conclude  as  she
    did that the Appellant had established strong private life ties to  the
    family.

13. In my view it is clear from the decision in Lama that there are no hard
    and fast rules as to what constitutes family life within Article 8.   I
    note the guidance at paragraph 32 in the decision in Lama  highlighting
    the need for "a fact sensitive  approach"  to  the  assessment  of  the
    existence of family life and referring to the  definition  in  Kugathas
    [2003] EWCA Civ 31 of real, committed and effective support between  or
    among the persons concerned.  It is clear  that  the  judge  took  into
    account all of the factors in this case and that is what  was  required
    of her.

14. In any event the finding that the Appellant  had  strong  private  life
    ties, rather than a family life, with  Mrs  Bradshaw  and  her  family,
    would not make any material outcome to the proportionality  assessment.
    As the then President said at paragraph 37  of  the  decision  of  Lama
    that, although the Tribunal had found that  there  was  a  family  life
    between the Appellant and the person he cared for:-

         "It is not, however,  a  necessary  pre-condition  of  this  appeal
         succeeding, given that there is no dispute that the Appellant has a
         highly developed private life in the United Kingdom,  the  elements
         and components whereof are significantly based on his  relationship
         with Mr R.   The  Appellant's  private  life  extends  beyond  that
         relationship to  encompass  matters  such  as  his  involvement  in
         charitable activities, about which there is uncontested documentary
         evidence.  Thus, irrespective of whether one views the  Appellant's
         case through the  prism  of  family  life  or  private  life  or  a
         combination of both, the ultimate question of  law  is  unaffected,
         namely whether the impugned decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
         represents a disproportionate interference."



11. Ms Fisher  further  contended  that  the  judge  erred  in  failing  to
    undertake a more nuanced assessment of the role played by the Appellant
    in the life of Mrs  Bradshaw.   She  relied  on  paragraph  41  of  the
    decision of Lama where the Tribunal found that the  Appellant  in  that
    case was not irreplaceable in the narrow sense in that Mr  R  with  the
    assistance of others self-funded or state-sponsored may be able to find
    a substitute carer.  The Tribunal went on to find:-

         "However, taking into account  the  nature  and  longevity  of  the
         relationship which has  developed  and  having  regard  to  Mr  R's
         advanced years and progressive disabilities, I  consider  that  the
         Appellant  is  irreplaceable  in  the  broader,  more  nuanced  and
         emotional sense" [41].

12. However, it is important to distinguish the facts in Lama from those in
    the instant case. The Appellant in Lama lived with the person he  cared
    for alone.  However, in this case the Appellant lives with Mrs Bradshaw
    and her two daughters.  Further, Mrs Bradshaw attends a day centre.  In
    these circumstances the evidence does not point to the Appellant  being
    irreplaceable in the narrow sense,  or  indeed  in  the  broader,  more
    nuanced sense set  out  in  Lama.   Ms  Fisher  pointed  out  that  the
    Appellant is regarded as a family member and has known the  family  for
    twelve years, however it is apparent that the judge was  well-aware  of
    this in her analysis of paragraphs 18 and 19.

13. Mr bramble pointed out that there is a further distinction between  the
    facts of this case and the scenario in Lama  where  the  Tribunal  took
    into account that the Appellant had  "impeccable  immigration  history"
    [43] and that he had been a primary carer during  the  period  of  some
    five years [21].  However, in this case this Appellant had been in  the
    UK precariously until  September  2013  and  unlawfully  thereafter,  a
    factor taken into account by the judge at paragraph  25  and  a  factor
    which affected the weight to be attached  to  the  Appellant's  private
    life.  Further, it is unclear on the evidence when it is said that  the
    Appellant became a carer for Mrs Bradshaw. Ms Fisher submitted that the
    Appellant had been Mrs Bradshaw's primary carer for  a  period  of  six
    years, however, she did not point to evidence  which  clearly  supports
    that assertion.

14. Ms Fisher further submitted that the Appellant's failure  to  meet  the
    Immigration Rules is not determinative of the public interest  and  the
    proportionality assessment.  However, in my view  the  judge  does  not
    consider that matter determinative.  The judge considered the weight to
    be attached to the fact that the Appellant did not meet the Immigration
    Rules, but also considered all of the  other  factors  as  set  out  in
    paragraphs 18-20 and 24 to 26.  Ms Fisher submitted that the judge  had
    failed to  consider  the  Appellant's  wider  community  relationships.
    However, the judge did consider this at paragraph 20 where she accepted
    that the Appellant had "formed good relationships with  individuals  in
    the community".  Essentially Ms Fisher's  submissions  in  this  regard
    complain about the weight attached  to  these  factors.   Weight  is  a
    matter for the judge having considered all of the evidence before  her.



15. In conclusion I find that the judge  properly  considered  all  of  the
    evidence before her and reached conclusions open to her on the evidence
    in relation to paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  and  in
    relation  to  the  assessment  of  family  and  private  life  and  the
    assessment of the proportionality of the Respondent's decision  Article
    8.

Notice of Decision

16. There is no material error of law in the judge's decision.

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

18. There is no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date: 27th November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
