
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22131/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 November 2016                   |On 9 November 2016                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                Michael Brown
                             [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr D Balroop, Counsel instructed by Shan & Co,
solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Decision and reasons

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal to refuse him an EEA residence card as  a  spouse  or  an
    extended family member of an EEA national, pursuant to the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended).  The  appellant
    is a citizen of Ghana and his claimed partner is a citizen of Germany.

 2. The appellant puts his case in two ways:  firstly, he contends that  he
    is the spouse of an EEA national and is entitled to  a  residence  card
    under Regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations,  as  a  family  member.   He
    relies on a claimed proxy marriage between himself and a German citizen
    of Ghanaian origin, entered into when they  were  both  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 3. Secondly, if that  argument  is  unsuccessful,  he  contends  that  the
    evidence relied upon by the respondent under Regulation 8 to show  that
    he is not in a durable relationship, and that his marriage (if such  it
    be), is a sham marriage, is insufficient to shift the burden  of  proof
    to him to prove the contrary.

 4. There is no challenge  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  under
    Article 8 ECHR.

Regulation 7: the proxy marriage

 5. It is accepted on behalf of the appellant  that  no  evidence  was  put
    before the First-tier Tribunal as to the laws of  Germany,  the  Member
    State from which the appellant's claimed spouse obtains nationality, in
    relation to proxy marriages.  The appellant's Counsel wished to reserve
    his position as to whether that absence of evidence  was  determinative
    of the Regulation 7 element of the appeal, pending the decision of  the
    Court of Appeal on an appeal from the Upper Tribunal's guidance  in  TA
    and others (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316 (IAC).

 6. The First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal are bound by the law  as
    it stands, rather than as it may be after  a  future  decision  in  the
    Court of Appeal.  The Upper Tribunal in Kareem held that:

         a.   A person who is the  spouse  of  an  EEA  national  who  is  a
         qualified person in the United Kingdom can derive  rights  of  free
         movement and residence if proof  of  the  marital  relationship  is
         provided.

         b.   The production of a marriage certificate issued by a competent
         authority (that is, issued according to the  registration  laws  of
         the  country  where  the  marriage  took  place)  will  usually  be
         sufficient. If not in English (or Welsh in relation to  proceedings
         in Wales), a certified translation of the marriage certificate will
         be required.

         c.   A document which calls itself a marriage certificate will  not
         raise a presumption of the marriage it purports to record unless it
         has been issued by an authority  with  legal  power  to  create  or
         confirm the facts it attests.

         d.   In appeals where there is  no  such  marriage  certificate  or
         where there is doubt that a marriage certificate has been issued by
         a competent authority, then the marital relationship may be  proved
         by other evidence. This will  require  the  Tribunal  to  determine
         whether a marriage was contracted.

         e.   In such an appeal,  the  starting  point  will  be  to  decide
         whether a marriage was contracted between  the  appellant  and  the
         qualified person according to the national law of the  EEA  country
         of the qualified person's nationality.

         f.   In all such  situations,  when  resolving  issues  that  arise
         because of conflicts of law, proper respect must be  given  to  the
         qualified person's rights as provided  by  the  European  Treaties,
         including the right to marry and the rights of  free  movement  and
         residence.

         g.   It should be assumed that, without  independent  and  reliable
         evidence about the recognition of the marriage under  the  laws  of
         the EEA country and/or the country where the marriage  took  place,
         the Tribunal is  likely  to  be  unable  to  find  that  sufficient
         evidence has been provided to discharge the burden of  proof.  Mere
         production of legal materials from the EEA country or country where
         the marriage took place will be insufficient evidence because  they
         will rarely show how such law is understood  or  applied  in  those
         countries. Mere assertions as to the effect of such laws will,  for
         similar reasons, carry no weight.

         h.   These remarks apply solely to the question of whether a person
         is a spouse for the purposes of EU law. It does not relate to other
         relationships that might be regarded as similar to  marriage,  such
         as civil partnerships or durable relationships."

 7. The position was further clarified in the  judicial  headnote  to  TA's
    case:

         "Following the decision in Kareem (proxy marriages - EU law) [2014]
         UKUT  24,  the  determination  of  whether  there  is   a   marital
         relationship for the purposes of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations
         2006 must always be examined in accordance with  the  laws  of  the
         Member State from which the Union citizen obtains nationality."

 8. The First-tier Tribunal was bound by the decisions in Kareem and in  TA
    and would therefore have been obliged to dismiss the spouse element  of
    the appellant's argument,  because  no  satisfactory  evidence  of  the
    existence of the claimed proxy marriage, or its  validity  in  Germany,
    was produced.  The appellant had not discharged the burden upon him  of
    showing that he was in fact the spouse of  an  EEA  citizen  exercising
    Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

 9. There is no error of law, material  or  otherwise,  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision under Regulation 7.

Regulation 8: Durable relationship

10. The remaining question is  whether  the  appellant  is  entitled  to  a
    residence card under Regulation 8 as an extended family member, because
    he claims to be in a durable relationship with  an  EEA  national.   On
    that point, a question of jurisdiction arose, which had not been  taken
    below.  In Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC) the Upper
    Tribunal held that:

         "There is no statutory right of appeal against the decision of  the
         Secretary of State not to  grant  a  Residence  Card  to  a  person
         claiming to be an Extended Family Member."

11. In Virk & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 652, Lord Justice Patten, with whom Lord Justice  Briggs  and  Lord
    Justice Leveson agreed, held that a point on jurisdiction can be  taken
    at any time:

         "23. This decision is consistent with the fact that the  First-tier
         Tribunal is a creation of statute whose jurisdiction in  this  case
         is limited by the terms of s.82 of the 2002 Act. The same goes  for
         the Upper Tribunal. Statutory jurisdiction cannot be  conferred  by
         waiver or agreement; or by  the  failure  of  the  parties  or  the
         tribunal to be alive to the point. Although, as Longmore LJ pointed
         out, decisions taken without jurisdiction may in due course  become
         irreversible, that point has not been reached in this case. It was,
         in my judgment, open to either the First-tier Tribunal or the Upper
         Tribunal to take the point about jurisdiction  notwithstanding  the
         failure of the Secretary of State to raise it herself. ..."

    It is a material error of law to proceed to determine an issue on which
    a Tribunal has no jurisdiction.

12. In this case,  applying  Sala,  I  find  that  neither  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, nor the Upper Tribunal,  has  jurisdiction  to  entertain  an
    appeal against refusal of an application for  a  residence  card  under
    Regulation 8 as an extended family member. It follows that there is  no
    valid appeal before me.

13. Even if there had been a valid appeal before the First-tier Tribunal on
    this issue, I do not consider that it could have  succeeded.   For  the
    reasons set out at [47]-[53] in the First-tier Tribunal  decision,  the
    Judge found that the respondent  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant was not living at the address where he claimed to be  living.
    In particular, he noted that:

      a) Immigration Officers conducted a visit at  the  address  where  the
         appellant and his claimed partner said they lived.  The tenancy was
         in the name of another person (and his Council tax shows  that  the
         tenant was claiming single person's relief).  It  was  occupied  by
         that tenant, and three other individuals, none of  whom  recognised
         the names of the appellant or his claimed partner.   The  appellant
         does not dispute that the  visit  occurred:   he  was  told  of  it
         promptly by those who were questioned at the property.

      b) The appellant asserted that he was known by a different name at the
         address in question,  but  produced  no  evidence  from  the  other
         persons living at that address to confirm that, and no  explanation
         at all as to why they did not recognise his claimed partner's name.



      c) The appellant asserted that he and his claimed partner were allowed
         to stay in that property on the  basis  that  they  would  pay  the
         utility bills, but the evidence produced did not  demonstrate  that
         they did pay any utility bills.

      d) There was nothing from the legal tenant to confirm that he knew  of
         the relationship between the appellant and his claimed partner,  or
         its durability.

14. The appellant's challenge does not  approach  the  R  (Iran)  &  Ors  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982 standard
    for interference with findings of fact and  credibility  by  the  fact-
    finding Tribunal.  There is no want of reasoning  in  paragraphs  [47]-
    [53] of the First-tier Tribunal decision, save for the Sala/Virk error.



15. On  the  contrary,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  provided  proper,
    intelligible and adequate reasons for the  conclusions  reached,  which
    were soundly based on the evidence before  him.  On  any  view  of  the
    evidence, it seems to me (albeit obiter dicta)  that  this  appeal  was
    bound to fail under Regulation 8 also.



DECISION

16. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.

    The appeal under Regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations is dismissed.

    There is no valid appeal before the Upper Tribunal under  Regulation  8
    of the EEA Regulations.


Date:    7 November 2016   Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
     Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
