
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22027/2014
                                                               IA/22092/2014
                                                               IA/22103/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) Birmingham         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th September 2015                |On 21st September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                               MUHAMMAD SAJJAD
                               MAHREEN AKHTER
                                SAMEEN SAJJAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Jassab, counsel, instructed by Law Lane
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The second and third appellants (wife and daughter)  are  dependant
         upon  the  first  appellant.  I  shall  be  considering  the  first
         appellant's appeal in this determination, his wife  and  daughter's
         appeal standing or falling with his.

      2. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal but  it
         is difficult to understand what the First-tier Tribunal judge meant
         by the terms of grant.

      3. The grounds seeking permission, dated 5th April 2015, assert:

             "The FTTJ arguably erred in failing to consider the fact  that
             the  Appellant  completed  his  five  years   as   an   exempt
             official/overseas government employee in November 2013 and the
             only reason he could not make an  application  for  Indefinite
             leave to remain soon after the completion for his  five  years
             was that he was still exempt official and was not entitled  to
             make an application as per IDI Chapter 14  Section  1  (please
             see the attached). The Appellant was only entitled to make  an
             application for further leave to remain after he ceased to  be
             exempt from the Immigration Control.  In  November  2013,  the
             Appellant was still required by the Pakistani High  Commission
             and would have  succeeded  in  his  application,  had  he  not
             followed the respondent's IDIs. The Appellant was  unfortunate
             that the  Pakistani  High  Commission  had  to  outsource  the
             services he  was  providing  to  them.  The  services  he  was
             providing in the Pakistani  High  Commission  and  in  Gerry's
             Offshore Incorporation Ltd were exactly the same. The  purpose
             of those services was also the same and these circumstances it
             was appropriate for the FTTJ to find the  Appellant  is  still
             required for his job in  the  UK  and  therefore  he  met  the
             requirements of Para 167."

    Background

      4. The appellant had applied for indefinite leave to remain in the  UK
         on 7th February 2014 as an  Overseas  Government  Employee,  having
         entered the UK with such entry clearance  on  23rd  November  2008.
         That application was refused because the appellant could  not  meet
         the relevant criteria set out in paragraph 167  Immigration  Rules:
         in particular he could not show that he remained  employed  by  the
         Pakistani  High  Commission  and  was  still  required   for   that
         employment, as certified by the High Commission.

      5. The appellant had ceased working for the High  Commission  on  15th
         January 2014 as set out in the High Commission  letter  dated  21st
         January 2014 which was attached to his application  for  indefinite
         leave to remain.

    Error of Law

      6. It seems  that  the  appellant  is  arguing  firstly  that  he  had
         understood  the  guidance  issued  by  the  respondent  for  exempt
         migrants to mean that he could not apply for  indefinite  leave  to
         remain whilst he was employed at the High Commission  and  secondly
         that Gerry's Offshore Incorporation Ltd ("Gerry's") was the same as
         the High Commission or at the very least he was  carrying  out  the
         same work and therefore should be treated as the same.

      7. In his oral evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, as recorded by
         the First-tier Tribunal Judge and not the subject of  challenge  in
         the proceedings before me, the appellant  said  that  he  had  been
         contacted  by  Gerry's  prior  to  his  employment  with  the  High
         Commission coming to an end and that after his employment ended  he
         had contacted them and they had employed him. He described  Gerry's
         as being 'semi-dependant' upon the High Commission.  There  was  no
         evidence that Gerry's was a branch or 'arm' of the High Commission.

      8. The First-tier Tribunal judge found that the  appellant  could  not
         meet the specific requirement of the  Immigration  Rules  that  the
         appellant continue to be employed by the High  Commission  and  was
         still required  for  that  employment.  Gerry's  is  not  the  High
         Commission. It is plain that the judge made the correct finding  on
         the evidence before him: the appellant was not employed by the High
         Commission either at  the  date  of  application  or  the  date  of
         decision and nor  was  he  required  for  employment  by  the  High
         Commission. There is no error of law in that finding.

      9. Although Mr Jassab argued that the decision was  a  breach  of  the
         Immigration Rules he was unable to direct me to any applicable Rule
         save for paragraph 128A which he submitted could apply in the  case
         of this appellant because he had been in  the  UK  lawfully  for  a
         period of more than four years. He referred to the guidance  issued
         by the respondent which states that if  a  person  is  exempt  from
         Immigration Control then they cannot be in the  UK  unlawfully  and
         thus any period of time spent in the UK whilst exempt  was  lawful.
         Paragraph 128A, 128 and 134  of  the  Immigration  Rules  reads  as
         follows, as submitted by Mr Jassab as relevant to this appellant:

             'General requirements for indefinite leave to remain

             128A.  For  the  purposes  of  references  in  this  Part   to
             requirements for indefinite leave to remain:

             (a)  "continuous period of 5 years or 4 years lawfully in  the
             UK" means, subject to paragraph (aa), residence in the  United
             Kingdom for an unbroken period with valid leave, and for these
             purposes a period shall not be considered to have been  broken
             where:

                  (i)  the applicant has been  absent  from  the  UK  for  a
                  period of 180 days or less in any of the five  consecutive
                  12 calendar month periods (or four consecutive 12 calendar
                  month  periods  where  the  applicant  received  a  Highly
                  Skilled Migrant Programme approval letter  issued  on  the
                  basis of an application made before 3 April 2006, and  was
                  subsequently granted entry clearance or leave to remain on
                  the basis of  that  letter)  preceding  the  date  of  the
                  application for indefinite leave to remain; and

                  (ii) the applicant has existing limited leave to enter  or
                  remain upon their departure and return, except that  where
                  that leave expired no more than 28 days prior to a further
                  application for  entry  clearance,  that  period  and  any
                  period pending the determination of that application shall
                  be disregarded; and

                  (iii)    the  applicant  has  any  period  of  overstaying
                  between periods of entry  clearance,  leave  to  enter  or
                  leave to remain of  up  to  28  days  and  any  period  of
                  overstaying pending the determination  of  an  application
                  made within that 28 day period disregarded.

             (aa) ...

             (b)  Except for periods when the  applicant  had  leave  as  a
             highly skilled migrant, a self-  employed  lawyer,  a  writer,
             composer or artist, an innovator or on the grounds of  his  UK
             Ancestry, and subject to paragraph (ba):

             (ba) ...

                  (i)  the applicant must  have  been  employed  in  the  UK
                  continuously throughout the five years, under the terms of
                  his work permit or in the  employment  for  which  he  was
                  given leave to enter or remain, except that any breaks  in
                  employment in which he applied for leave as a work  permit
                  holder or as an  employee  under  any  provision  of  this
                  section to work for a new employer  shall  be  disregarded
                  provided this  is  within  60  days  of  the  end  of  his
                  employment with his previous employer.

                  (ii) any absences from the UK must have been for a purpose
                  that  is  consistent   with   the   continuous   permitted
                  employment in (i), including  paid  annual  leave  or  for
                  serious or compelling reasons.

             Requirements for leave to enter the United  Kingdom  for  work
             permit employment

             128. A person coming to the UK to seek or take employment must
             be otherwise eligible  for  admission  under  these  Rules  or
             eligible for admission as a seaman under contract  to  join  a
             ship  due  to  leave  British  waters.  The  requirements  for
             applications for work permit employment set out in  paragraphs
             128 to 133 of these Rules were deleted  on  6  April  2012  by
             Statement of Changes HC 1888 except  insofar  as  relevant  to
             paragraphs 134 to 135.

             Indefinite leave to remain for a work permit holder

             134. Indefinite leave to remain may be granted on  application
             provided the applicant:

                  (i)  has spent a continuous period of 5 years lawfully  in
                  the UK, of which the most recent  period  must  have  been
                  spent with leave as a work permit holder (under paragraphs
                  128 to 133 of these rules), and the remainder must be  any
                  combination of leave as a work permit holder or leave as a
                  highly skilled migrant (under paragraphs 135A to  135F  of
                  these rules) or leave as a self-employed lawyer (under the
                  concession that appeared in Chapter 6, Section 1  Annex  D
                  of the Immigration Directorate Instructions), or leave  as
                  a writer, composer or artist (under paragraphs 232 to  237
                  of these rules);

                  (ii) has met the requirements of paragraph 128(i)  to  (v)
                  throughout their leave as a work permit  holder,  and  has
                  met the requirements of paragraph 135G(ii) throughout  any
                  leave as a highly skilled migrant;

                  (iii)    is still required for the employment in question,
                  as certified by the employer; and

                  (iv) provides certification from  the  employee  that  the
                  applicant is paid at or above the appropriate rate for the
                  job as stated in the Codes of Practice in Appendix  J,  or
                  where the applicant is on maternity, paternity or adoption
                  leave at the time of the application and  not  being  paid
                  the appropriate rate, the date that leave started and that
                  they were paid at the appropriate rate immediately  before
                  the start of that leave.

                  (v)  provides the specified documents in paragraph  134-SD
                  to evidence the employer's  certification  in  sub-section
                  (iv), and the reason for the absences set out in paragraph
                  128A, and

                  (vi) has demonstrated sufficient knowledge of the  English
                  language and sufficient knowledge about life in the United
                  Kingdom, in accordance with Appendix KoLL; and

                  (vii)    does not  fall  for  refusal  under  the  general
                  grounds for refusal; and

                  (viii)   must not be in the UK in  breach  of  immigration
                  laws except that any period of overstaying for a period of
                  28 days or less will be disregarded.'

     10. There are two difficulties with this submission. First it  did  not
         form any part of the application or the appeal  before  the  First-
         tier Tribunal and secondly it had not been cited  as  a  ground  of
         appeal and no application had been made to  amend  the  grounds  of
         appeal. In so far as Mr Jassab sought to amend his ground of appeal
         I refused that application because there had been no notice of such
         application to the respondent and this issue had not been raised in
         any way at all either to the respondent in the  application  or  in
         the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. In any event, in can be seen
         that even if that ground had been argued,  the  appellant  did  not
         meet those Rules - he had not been given leave to enter as  a  work
         permit holder or other category enabling work within the Rules - he
         was exempt from control and I any  event  his  employer  no  longer
         employed or required him.

     11. It cannot be an error of law for the First-tier Tribunal  judge  to
         fail to consider in dealing with an appeal, an application that was
         never made, a decision that was never made and  a  submission  that
         was never made.

     12. In so far as the submission in the grounds that the  appellant  had
         misunderstood the guidance and thought  he  could  only  apply  for
         indefinite leave after he had  left  the  employment  of  the  High
         Commission, it is difficult to see how he could have  misunderstood
         the guidance,  particularly  as  he  had  legal  advisors  and  his
         application was submitted by them on  his  behalf.   The  appellant
         made an application after his employment with the  High  Commission
         ceased. Even if that application had been made prior to the  expiry
         of his employment with the High Commission it is difficult  to  see
         how the  outcome  would  have  been  any  different.  There  is  no
         entitlement to indefinite leave to remain merely  because  of  five
         years lawful residence; an  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
         remain would be considered only  after  the  person  ceases  to  be
         exempt and then in accordance with the  normal  immigration  Rules.
         The application made does not identify how the appellant  would  or
         could have met the normal immigration rules  for  settlement  after
         five  years  lawful  residence.   The  First-tier  Tribunal   judge
         considered  the  appellant's  and  his  family's   application   in
         accordance with the relevant immigration rules and under Article 8.
         There has been no challenge  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge's
         findings  on  the  Article  8  grounds  of  appeal.  There  is   no
         identifiable error of law.

     13. There is no error of law by the First-tier Tribunal.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


     Date 18th September 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
