
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/22271/2012
                                                               IA/22272/2012
                                                               IA/22273/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3rd March, 2014                            |On 25th March 2013           |
|(Given extempore)                             |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                              ERDENESUKH NERGUI
                           OYUNGEREL BAYARSAIKHAN
                              ERKHES ERDENESUKH

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Not present and not represented
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The first named appellant is a 31 year old citizen  from  Mongolia  who
    was born on 12th June, 1981.  The second appellant is his wife and  she
    is also a citizen of Mongolia, having been born on 26th October,  1980.
    The third appellant is the child of the first  and  second  appellants.
    He is also a citizen of Mongolia and was born on 30th September, 2003.

2.   In this case the appellants, who were the appellants before the  First-
    tier  Tribunal,  are  referred  to  in  this  determination   as   "the
    appellants" and I continue to refer to the Secretary of State  as  "the
    respondent".

2.   The first named appellant entered the United Kingdom with  valid  leave
    to enter as a student.  On 4th April,  2012,  he  applied  for  further
    leave to remain as a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant  within  the
    currency of his valid leave.  On 26th September, 2012, the Secretary of
    State refused that application.   The  refusal  decision  pointed  out,
    inter alia, that in order to score points under the relevant provisions
    of the Immigration Rules the first named appellant was required to show
    that he had been awarded a relevant eligible qualification  within  the
    12 month period directly prior to the application, whereas the position
    was  that  the  first  named  appellant  had  not  been   awarded   his
    qualification, which was a Master of  Arts  degree  awarded  by  Anglia
    Ruskin University until after that date (a date in July, 2012).

3.   The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appellant's  appeal.   Permission
    to appeal was granted to the Upper Tribunal and on 31st  January,  2013
    Mr Clifford Mailer, sitting as a Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge decided on
    the basis of the Khatel & Ors. (s85A; effect of continuing application)
    [2013] UKUT 00044 (IAC) that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law,
    that his decision should be set aside and that  he  should  remake  the
    decision allowing the appeal.  In response to the determination  of  Mr
    Mailer, the Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal to  the
    Court of Appeal.


4.   On 25th June, 2013, the Court of Appeal gave judgment in Raju &  Others
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  754.   In
    October 2013, the Upper Tribunal  reported  its  decision  in  Nasim  &
    Others (Raju: reasons not to follow) [2013] UKUT 601 (IAC).  In January
    the Upper Tribunal reported  its  follow-up  case  of  Nasim  &  Others
    (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 24 (IAC).  It will be convenient if I refer  to
    these cases below as Nasim (1) and Nasim (2) consecutively.

5.   In the light of these developments the Upper Tribunal  sent  directions
    in this case.  These gave notice that issues to be  considered  at  the
    hearing included (1) whether the determination of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    made by reference to the determination in Khatel should be set aside in
    the light of the judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in  Raju  &  Others.
    Reference was then made to Nasim (1) and (2) if so, whether  there  was
    an error of law in the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  such
    that the determination  should  be  set  aside.   The  directions  also
    required the appellant to serve on the Tribunal and  the  Secretary  of
    State not later than seven days  before  the  forthcoming  hearing  all
    written submissions and written evidence including  written  statements
    on the issue of Article 8 of the ECHR upon which they seek to  rely  at
    the hearing where necessary complying with Rule 15(2A) of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

6.   The head note to Nasim (1) states as follows:

         "1.  It is not legally possible for the First-tier Tribunal or  the
             Upper Tribunal to decline to follow the  judgment  in  Raju  &
             Others v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2013]
             EWCA Civ 754 on the basis that the Secretary of State's Tier 1
             (Post-Study Work) policy of July 2010 concerning the  approach
             to be taken to 'late' submission of certain educational awards
             continued to apply  in  respect  of  decisions  taken  by  the
             Secretary of State on  or  after  6th  April,  2012  when  the
             Immigration Rules were changed by abolishing the Tier 1 (Post-
             Study Work) route.

         2.   The Secretary of State was under no duty  to  determine  Post-
             Study Work applications made before that date by reference  to
             that policy the rationale for which disappeared  on  6  April.
             In particular:

             (a)  a person making such an  application  had  no  vested  or
                  legitimate expectation  to  have  his/her  application  so
                  determined;

             (b)  it was not legally unfair of the Secretary  of  State  to
                  proceed as she did;

             (c)  the de minimis principle cannot be invoked to counter the
                  failure  of  applications  that  were   unaccompanied   by
                  requisite evidence regarding the granting of the award;

             (d)  the Secretary of State's May  2012  Casework  Instruction
                  did not gloss or modify the Immigration Rules  but  merely
                  told caseworkers how to apply those Rules;

             (e)  evidential flexibility has no bearing on the matter;

             (f)  an application  was  not  varied  by  the  submission  of
                  evidence of the conferring of  an  award  on  or  after  6
                  April, 2012; but even if it were,  the  application  would
                  fail on the basis that it would have  been  decided  under
                  the Rules in force at the date of variation; and

             (g)  an application under the Immigration Rules  falls  to  be
                  determined by reference to policies in force at  the  date
                  of  decision,  not  those  in  fore   at   the   date   of
                  application."

         (3)  The date of  obtaining  the  relevant  qualification  for  the
             purposes of Table 10 of Appendix A to the Immigration Rules as
             in force immediately before 6 April 2012 is the date on  which
             the university or other institution responsible for conferring
             the award (not the institution where the appellant  physically
             studied, if different) actually conferred that  award  whether
             in person or in absentia.

         (4)  As held in Khatel  and  Others  (s85A;  effect  of  continuing
             application)  [2013]  UKUT  44  (IAC),  section  85A  of   the
             Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  precludes  a
             tribunal, in a points-based appeal, from considering  evidence
             as to  compliance  with  the  points-based  Rules,  where  the
             evidence was not before the Secretary of State when  she  took
             her decision; but the section does not prevent a tribunal from
             considering evidence that was before the  Secretary  of  State
             when she took the  decision,  whether  or  not  that  evidence
             reached her  only  after  the  date  of  application  for  the
             purposes of paragraph 34F of the Immigration Rules."
Submissions

7.   There was no appearance by or on behalf  of  the  appellant.   For  the
    respondent, Ms Johnstone told me that she sought to rely on Nasim 1 and
    2.

My Assessment

The Power to Set Aside

9.   I deal first with the power to set aside.  As noted  earlier  prior  to
    this case being listed for hearing, the Secretary of State had  applied
    for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal.  However  the  Courts,
    Tribunals Enforcement  Act  2007  and  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 made hereunder  clearly  contemplate  that  it  is
    within the  jurisdiction  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  set  aside  its
    decision, in particular limited circumstances - see Section 10(4C)  and
    Rules 45 and 46.  Logically, a decision as to whether to exercise  such
    a power must take place before any consideration of whether or  not  to
    grant  permission  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  and  indeed  Rule  45(1)
    stipulates that on receiving an application for  permission  to  appeal
    the Upper Tribunal may review the decision in accordance with Rule  46.
    If the decision of the Upper Tribunal is set aside  then  there  is  no
    longer any statutory basis for considering  whether  or  not  to  grant
    permission to appeal.  The decision sought  to  be  appealed  has  been
    rendered null and void.

10.  Rule 45(1A) provides that the Upper Tribunal may review a  decision  of
    the Upper Tribunal if "since the Upper Tribunal's decision a court  has
    made a decision which is  binding  on  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  which
    adequately made before the Upper Tribunal's decision could have  had  a
    material effect on its decision".  As noted earlier,  since  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision in Khatel there has been the judgment of the  Court
    of Appeal in  Raju  &  Others  which  constitutes  binding  overturning
    Khatel.  Hence, I am entirely satisfied that it is within my powers  to
    proceed to consider whether to set aside  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal and I also consider that to  do  so  furthers  the  overriding
    objective of the Rules, namely to deal with  cases  justly  and  fairly
    under Rule 4.  In this regard I note that the procedure adopted by  the
    Tribunal of notifying the parties in advance of  the  hearing  that  it
    would consider whether to exercise its powers to  set  aside  affording
    both parties ample  opportunity  to  respond  and  address  the  point.
    Whilst it is true in the abstract that I  am  not  bound  to  follow  a
    reported decision of this Chamber.  I would only consider doing  so  if
    there were compelling reasons; quite simply there are  none  here.   In
    any event, for the most part, Nasim (1) gives effect to  the  Court  of
    Appeal authority in Raju & Others, in particular by which of  course  I
    am bound.  As to the Immigration Rules the appellant was  not  able  to
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules under Appendix A because
    they required that he  had  been  awarded  his  eligible  qualification
    within the twelve month period prior to the date  of  the  application.
    At the date of application the appellant had not yet been  awarded  his
    eligible qualification.  It had been awarded by the  date  of  decision
    but that does not  assist.   While  Section  85A  of  the  Immigration,
    Nationality and Asylum Act  2002  does  not  prevent  a  Tribunal  from
    considering evidence that was before the Secretary of  State  when  she
    took her decision, even if post application the  Rule  in  question  in
    this context required such evidence to relate  to  an  event  that  had
    happened prior to the date of the application.

Article 8

11.  The First-tier Tribunal considered the  applicant's  Article  8  appeal
    even though he had not raised a human rights appeal in his  grounds  of
    appeal.  It concluded that the  decision  of  the  respondent  did  not
    constitute a disproportionate interference and dismissed the appeal.

12.  Upper Tribunal Judge Lane, in the  directions  mentioned  earlier,  had
    directed that any further evidence or submissions relating to Article 8
    should be sent to me seven days  before  the  hearing.  Notwithstanding
    that direction the appellant's representatives  failed  to  submit  any
    further evidence  in  accordance  with  the  directions.   Miss  Hashmi
    submitted, however, that since the appellant had  applied  for  further
    leave to remain on the basis that he had now been offered employment by
    the Pakistani High Commission, I should allow the appellant's Article 8
    appeal.  I am satisfied  (bearing  in  mind  the  advice  contained  in
    paragraph 17 of Razgar v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2004] UKHL 27) that the appellant's Article  8  circumstances  do  not
    justify a conclusion that  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    amounts to a disproportionate interference with the appellant's Article
    8 rights.

Section 47

13.  In this case the Secretary of State has made a simultaneous Section  47
    decision.  Although neither the First-tier Tribunal Judge nor the Upper
    Tribunal Judge dealt with the Section 47 issue it is settled  law  that
    such a decision was not in accordance with the law.

Disposal

18.  It follows from what has been said  above  that  the  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal is contrary to binding Court  of  Appeal  authority  and
    cannot stand.  I hereby set it aside.  Applying the principles set  out
    in Raju and others and subsequently in Nasim 1 and 2, I  conclude  that
    the decision I should re-make is to dismiss the appellants' appeals.

19.  Accordingly:

     The decision of the Upper Tribunal is set aside.

     The decision I re-make is to dismiss the appellants' appeals except  in
    relation to the  Section  47  decision  which  I  hold  to  be  not  in
    accordance with the law.  However, this may be academic because I  have
    now been told that it appears that the appellants may have all departed
    the United Kingdom.

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
