
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/22954/2012
                                                               IA/22955/2012
                                                               IA/22956/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th June 2014                               |On 3rd July 2014           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH

                                   Between

                            MARIUM TEHSEEN MIRZA
                             TEHSEEN AZHAR MIRZA
                            AMEENA TEHSEEN MIRZA
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr R Martin instructed by Malik Law
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The history of this appeal is somewhat complex.  The  first  Appellant,
    who is from Pakistan, applied on 4th April 2012 for  further  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant.  The second Appellant  is
    her husband and the third Appellant their  daughter.   The  application
    was refused on 28th September 2012  as  the  first  Appellant's  degree
    certificate had been awarded on  6th  July  2012,  after  the  date  of
    application.  An appeal against that refusal was  dismissed  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge A W Khan, in a  determination  promulgated  on  2nd
    January 2013, both under the  Immigration  Rules  and  with  regard  to
    Article 8 ECHR.  The Appellants applied for permission to appeal, which
    was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill.  The appeals came before  the
    Upper Tribunal (Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden) on 19th April  2013.   In
    the light of the then recent determination by a panel  chaired  by  the
    President, Blake J, of Khatel and others (s85A;  effect  of  continuing
    application) [2013] UKUT 44 (IAC) Judge  Moulden  allowed  the  appeals
    under the Immigration Rules.  The Respondent then sought permission  to
    appeal to the Court of Appeal.

 2. On 18th July 2013, in response  to  that  application,  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Peter Lane issued directions.   He  referred  to  the  subsequent
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in Prasad Raju and others v SSHD [2013]
    EWCA Civ  754,  which  had  overturned  the  determination  in  Khatel.
    Pursuant to Upper Tribunal Procedure Rule 45(1)(b) it was proposed  (a)
    to set aside the determination of the Upper  Tribunal  in  the  present
    case; and (b) to substitute a fresh decision to dismiss the Appellants'
    appeal against the variation decision but allow the appeal against  the
    Section 47 removal decision; and (c ) to do so without an oral hearing.
     The directions continued by stating that any party wishing  to  object
    to the proposed action was to do so in writing within ten days.

 3. In response to those directions, which had been sent to the  Appellants
    and their then solicitors on 19th July 2013, the first named  Appellant
    replied in person  objecting  to  the  decision  being  set  aside  and
    commenting that  she  understood  that  the  issue  was  being  further
    appealed to the Supreme Court, that the  Respondent's  policy  had  not
    been clear and that some Applicants had been granted leave  in  similar
    circumstances.  The matter was listed and  came  before  me.   Although
    technically the Respondent remains the  party  seeking  to  appeal  the
    decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden in the interests of continuity
    and simplicity I will continue to refer to the parties  by  the  titles
    ascribed before the First-tier Tribunal and at the hearing before Judge
    Moulden.

 4. At the commencement of the hearing it became apparent that the decision
    of Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden had not in fact been set aside and  the
    application for permission to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal  remained
    outstanding.  I was referred o Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules  45(1)(b)
    and (2).  It appeared from the Tribunal  records  that  the  directions
    made by Upper Tribunal Judge Lane on 18th July 2013  had  been  wrongly
    recorded as setting aside the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden.
     There followed a discussion between the representatives.  Mr Martin on
    behalf of the Appellants said it appeared inevitable  to  him,  in  the
    light of the case law binding on the  Tribunal  that  the  decision  of
    Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden should be set aside.  The  representatives
    agreed that the Tribunal, in exercise of the power  of  review,  should
    set aside that decision and the appeal should be re-decided.



 5. Mr Martin on behalf of the Appellants said that there had in fact  been
    no further appeal from the decision from the judgment of the  Court  of
    Appeal in Raju to the Supreme Court and it was  difficult  for  him  to
    argue that the award of a degree after the making  of  the  application
    should carry any weight.  There was an initial issue of  the  treatment
    of other persons in the same  position  but  there  was  no  persuasive
    evidence before me in that respect.  The remaining matter was Article 8
    ECHR.  Mr Smart for his part said that the application  for  permission
    to appeal to the Court of  Appeal  had  not  referred  specifically  to
    Article 8.  However I noted that this issue had been dealt with  by  Mr
    Khan and had been the subject of  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   When  she  had  granted  permission  to
    appeal Judge Gill had also granted permission in respect of Article  8.
    As the decision of Judge Moulden had now been set aside I came  to  the
    view that Article 8 was still potentially in issue. I was  now  looking
    at whether the determination of  Judge  Khan  revealed  any  errors  on
    points of law.

 6. I had before me the Respondent's bundle and the bundle put  in  by  the
    Appellants' solicitors under cover of a letter of 6th June 2014,  which
    included a statement made in November 2012 by the first Appellant.   Mr
    Martin argued that the decision under appeal was defective as there had
    been no reference to the best interests of the third Appellant, a child
    born in this country on 26th May 2011.   He  argued  that  the  refusal
    notice had been defective because it had not referred to the child  and
    the  matter  should  be  sent  back  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
    consideration.

 7. In response Mr Smart said there was no material error in  the  judgment
    in the determination of  Judge  Khan.   He  referred  to  the  Tribunal
    determination in T (s.55 BCIA 2009 - entry  clearance)  Jamaica  [2011]
    UKUT 00483 (IAC) to the effect that it was for the  judge  to  consider
    issues regarding the child. Judge Khan had mentioned the child  several
    times; she had been only 18 months old at the time of his determination
    and her best interests were to be with her two parents.  There had been
    no  argument  put  forward   regarding   legitimate   expectation   and
    allegations of lack of fairness or inconsistent  decision  making  fell
    far short of establishing material errors of law.  He relied  upon  the
    reported Tribunal determinations of Nasim and others (Raju: reasons not
    to follow?) [2013] UKUT 00610 (IAC) and Nasim and  others  (Article  8)
    [2014] UKUT  00025  (IAC).   He  accepted  that  the  removal  decision
    purportedly made under  Section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006 could not be sustained.

 8. There have been varying decisions on the issue of the relevance of  the
    award of a qualification under the Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant
    category.  Judge Khan based his decision on NO (Post-Study Work - award
    needed by date of  application)  Nigeria  [2009]  UKAIT  00054.   Upper
    Tribunal Judge Moulden relied on Khatel.   The  binding  authority  now
    appears in Raju.  In the light of those changing elements  of  guidance
    it is not surprising, although it is unfortunate  for  the  Appellants,
    that there had been differing decisions.  In the light of Raju  I  have
    no doubt that in fact the decision reached by Judge  Khan  was  correct
    and Mr Martin was unable to put any material before me which could have
    affected that view.  The argument  on  legitimate  expectation  and  on
    alleged inconsistency of decision making are both dealt with  in  Nasim
    and others (paragraphs 28 to 36) and for the reasons set  out  in  that
    determination cannot assist the Appellants.

 9. With regard to Article 8 Mr Martin referred to the  best  interests  of
    the young child born on 26th May 2011.  Judge Khan dealt with Article 8
    fairly briefly.  He had referred earlier in his  determination  to  the
    birth of the child. When  finding  the  decision  under  appeal  to  be
    proportionate to the legitimate aim of  immigration  control  he  found
    there would be no breach of family life because that would  be  resumed
    in Pakistan and the child would return with her parents.  There was  no
    indication either in the first Appellant's  statement  or  in  argument
    that the child would in any way be placed at disadvantage by  returning
    with  her  parents  to  Pakistan.   Her  mother  is  a   well-qualified
    professional person.

10. It is now clear from various determinations and judgments that the best
    interests of children will normally be with their parents. I  refer  by
    way  of  example  to  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions   affecting
    children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC) and to the judgment  of
    the Supreme Court in Zoumbas v SSHD [2013]  UKSC  74.   Although  Judge
    Khan did not expressly refer to the best interests of the child being a
    primary consideration in his deliberations there was no evidence before
    him to indicate that returning with her parents would be anything other
    than in her best interests.  There is similarly  no  evidence  to  that
    effect before me now.  As at the date of the hearing before Judge  Khan
    the child was only 18 months old and even now she is only 3 years  old.
    I accordingly come to the view that there was no material error in  the
    determination of Judge Khan with regard to  the  Immigration  Rules  or
    Article 8 ECHR.

11. Mr Smart accepted that the  removal  decision  purportedly  made  under
    Section 47 of the 2006 Act, having been made before  that  section  was
    amended, was not in accordance with the law  and  to  that  extent  the
    decision of Judge Khan is set aside.

Decisions

(1)  As proposed by Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane  in  his  directions  of
    18th July 2013 and with the agreement of the parties the  determination
    of Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden is set aside.

(2)  For the reasons as set out above the determination  of  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Khan did not contain a material error of law in  respect  of  his
    decision dismissing the appeals under the Immigration Rules  and  under
    Article 8 ECHR.







   3) The removal decision under Section 47 of the Immigration,  Asylum  and
      Nationality Act 2006 was not in accordance with the law  and  to  that
      limited extent the appeal is allowed.

   4)  As  the  substantive  appeal  was  dismissed  a  fee  award  is   not
      appropriate.






Signed                              Dated 01 July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

