
S-T
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/22522/2014
                                                               IA/22523/2014
                                                               IA/22524/2014
                                                               IA/22525/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 14 August 2015                    |On 18 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MARIA ESTER GONZALEZ (1)
                       OSCAR DANIEL AMARILLA ROJAS (2)
                    MIRANDA ANABEL AMARILLA GONZALEZ (3)
                      ANNE NICOLE AMARILLA GONZALEZ (4)
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Sirikanda, Solicitor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondents to this appeal are citizens  of  Paraguay  born  on  13
    February 1973, 10 January 1969,  27  July  1997  and  26  January  2007
    respectively. They are a family and therefore their appeals  have  been
    linked and heard together. The appellant is the Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department, who has appealed with the permission of the First-
    tier Tribunal against a decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Monaghan, allowing the respondents' appeals against  decisions  of  the
    Secretary of State, dated 8 May  2014,  to  remove  them  to  Paraguay,
    having refused their applications for leave on  human  rights  grounds.
    The Secretary of State refused the applications for leave, having found
    the respondents could not succeed under Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE
    of  the  Immigration  Rules,  HC395,  and  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances for the  purposes  of  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention.

 2. It is more convenient to refer to the parties as they were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. I shall therefore refer  to  the  members  of  the
    Gonzalez family from now on as "the appellants" and  the  Secretary  of
    State as "the respondent".

 3. I was not asked and saw no reason to make an anonymity direction.

 4. The appellants' immigration history is not contested and is set out  in
    Judge Monaghan's decision. In short, the first  and  second  appellants
    arrived as visitors and in due course overstayed. The  third  appellant
    joined them on 23 December 2005, aged 8. The fourth appellant was  born
    in the UK on 26 January 2007.

 5. After a hearing on 15 January 2015 Judge Monaghan allowed the  appeals.
    She  directed  herself  that,  with  respect  to  the   children,   the
    determinative issue was whether it would be reasonable to  expect  them
    to leave the UK given that they were both under the age of 18  and  had
    lived  continuously  in  the  UK  for  seven   years   (see   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv)). In the case of both children, she  concluded  it  would
    not be reasonable for them to leave the UK. She then dealt briefly with
    the position of the parents. Applying section 117B(6) of the 2002  Act,
    she noted there was no public interest in removing them. She  concluded
    that it would be disproportionate to remove them.

 6. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal,  arguing  that
    the judge erred in her assessment of the position of  the  parents.  In
    particular, the judge had failed to consider the other  factors  listed
    in section 117B. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 7. I heard argument on the question of whether Judge  Monaghan's  decision
    is vitiated by material error of law.

 8. Ms Fijiwala was unable to provide a clear copy of  the  grounds,  which
    are poorly copied in the  file.  She  focused  attention  on  what  she
    considered the inadequate proportionality balancing exercise  conducted
    by the judge in relation to the parents. Section 117B(6) should not  be
    considered as a stand lone  provision.  Additionally,  she  argued  the
    judge had not given clear reasons for finding this was a case worthy of
    consideration outside the rules given the parent route in  Appendix  FM
    was not met. In relation to the  children,  the  judge  had  failed  to
    engage adequately with the reasonableness test. Her main point was that
    the judge had not considered the parents' immigration history. However,
    she did not argue the judge's decision was irrational or perverse.

 9. Ms Sirikanda helpfully provided a skeleton argument which she built  on
    in her submissions. It is not necessary to set them out as I  indicated
    at the end of the hearing that I would be dismissing the appeal because
    I did not find any material error of law in Judge Monaghan's  decision.
    My reasons are as follows.

10. Whether or not it is reasonable to expect the children to leave the  UK
    is a question of fact for the judge. Judge Monaghan was  plainly  aware
    of the relevant facts in reaching her  decision.  Whilst  it  might  be
    anticipated that some judges might have reached a different  conclusion
    on these facts, it cannot be  said  the  judged  erred  in  making  her
    decision. In other words, it was a decision which it was  open  to  the
    judge to make. She did not  misdirect  herself  in  law.  She  did  not
    misunderstand the evidence or fail to take account of relevant matters.
    She gave adequate reasons for her decision in order to explain it.

11. In EV (Philippines) & Ors v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 Lewison  LJ  found
    on the facts of that case that, where the parents  had  no  independent
    right to remain in the UK, it was "entirely reasonable" to  expect  the
    children to go with  them.  The  desirability  of  the  children  being
    educated in the UK at public expense  could  not  outweigh  their  best
    interests, which was to remain with their parents. The  judge  had  not
    shown it was unreasonable for the children to return. The judge had not
    taken into account the need for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  control
    immigration. The case was commonplace. In  short,  the  judge  had  not
    given adequate reasons for his decision.

12. However, reliance on that guidance is  misplaced  here.  The  Court  of
    Appeal  was  concerned  with  the  best  interests  question  and   the
    proportionality balancing exercise which went  with  it.  In  contrast,
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the rules simply states as follows:

         '(iv) is under the age of 18 years and has  lived  continuously  in
         the  UK  for  at  least  7  years  (discounting   any   period   of
         imprisonment)  and  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
         applicant to leave the UK;'

13. It would arguably have been an error of  law  for  the  judge  to  have
    conducted a  balancing  exercise  and  to  have  weighed  the  parents'
    immigration history against the children's interests  in  remaining  in
    the UK. The rule is a pure test of what is reasonable and  the  judge's
    approach cannot be faulted.

14. Ms Sirikanda  argued  the  respondent  had  not  appealed  against  the
    decision in respect of the children and permission to  appeal  had  not
    been granted to argue the points taken by Ms Fijiwala. She  might  well
    be right but, as said, my papers are not clear and it is helpful to let
    the parties know my views of this point in any case.

15. I pressed Ms Fijiwala to say whether the appeal could be maintained  in
    the event there was no error by the judge in respect of the  children's
    appeals. This was, in effect, a case of the parents 'piggy-backing'  on
    their children's rights. Ms Fijiwala confirmed she thought there was  a
    material error of law nonetheless.

16. I agree Judge Monaghan  has  erroneously  treated  section  117B(6)  as
    decisive rather than as one element in the  assessment  of  the  public
    interest (see Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC)). However, it
    seems to me that any such error could not be  material  because  it  is
    difficult, if not impossible, to see how the judge could  have  arrived
    at any other conclusion on the proportionality issue in  the  light  of
    her finding in respect of the children. If  it  is  not  reasonable  to
    remove the children then the logic of that position is that they are to
    be treated as having been granted leave to remain. They were 17  and  8
    years of age respectively at the date of hearing and both lived at home
    with their parents. Both attended school. Plainly they  required  their
    parents  to  look  after  them  and  section  117B(6)  would  be  given
    preponderant weight. On  the  basis  of  the  judge's  findings  it  is
    inconceivable she could have found the provisions in sections  117B(1),
    (2), (3), (4) and (5) would have defeated the parents' claim to have  a
    right to enjoy family life in the UK with their children after treating
    their best interests as a primary consideration. The evidence shows the
    parents are willing to work and would not be likely to become a  burden
    on the state. They were not  relying  on  the  private  life  they  had
    established.

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  a  material
    error of law of the kind contended by the  respondent.  Accordingly  it
    shall stand and the respondent's appeal is dismissed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal did not make a material error on a point of law
    and its decision allowing the appeals on Article 8 grounds shall stand.

    No anonymity direction has been made.






                               Signed   Date 17 August 2015


                               Judge Froom, sitting as a Deputy Judge of
                               the Upper Tribunal
