
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22407/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 9 August 2016                           |On 18 August 2016                |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                saima mahmood
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Davison of Counsel instructed by Adam Bernard
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 10 January 1985.

2.   On 26 December 2013 she applied  for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student but this application was refused on 2 June 2015.  The
    reason for the refusal was that  the  Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for
    Studies (CAS) submitted with the appellant's application was no  longer
    valid following a check on the sponsor register on 16 March 2015.   The
    appellant had been informed about this on that date and allowed 60 days
    to obtain a new  sponsor  and  CAS.   However  the  appellant  had  not
    provided a new CAS within that period.  Accordingly the application was
    refused.

3.   The appellant appealed and her appeal came before  a  First-tier  Judge
    on 5 January 2016.  The appellant was not represented then.  The  judge
    directed herself by reference to the correct  burden  and  standard  of
    proof.   She  took  account  of   the   appellant's   lack   of   legal
    representation but the appellant confirmed  that  she  was  content  to
    represent herself and the judge was  satisfied  that  she  could  speak
    English and properly engage with the appeal.  She records that she  had
    assisted her in giving her evidence.  The judge set out her conclusions
    in respect of the point taken by the respondent in relation to the  CAS
    in the following extracts from her determination:

         "10. There as no dispute that the appellant had received the letter
             from the respondent informing her that she needed to obtain  a
             new CAS.  Her evidence is that she was unable to do so because
             of the  timing  of  the  letter;  she  had  been  informed  by
             different institutions that educational sessions run  twice  a
             year in January/February or  August/September.   Further,  the
             appellant's evidence is that because the respondent had  taken
             so long to process her application (because of  a  query  with
             her English Language Test Certificate) when she did manage  to
             secure an offer from the School of Business and Law they later
             said that they would not issue her with a CAS without a  valid
             visa because of the query that had been raised  regarding  her
             English Language Test Certificate.

         11.  The appellant accepts that she was aware that  she  needed  to
             obtain a new CAS.  I am not satisfied that  she  has  suffered
             any unfairness based on either the timing of the  respondent's
             'sixty day'  letter,  or  the  earlier  query  raised  by  the
             respondent  in  relation  to   her   English   Language   Test
             Certificate.   I  am  satisfied  that   the   respondent   has
             maintained  contact   with   the   appellant   regarding   her
             application and has given her the opportunity  to  respond  to
             any concerns.  I am not satisfied that, based on the  evidence
             before me, that educational institutions will not issue a  CAS
             mid-year, and the appellant's oral evidence is  that  in  fact
             the reason that she could not obtain a CAS from the School  of
             Business and Law was because of concerns regarding her English
             Language Test Certificate, and not the timing of her  request.



         12.   Without  a  valid  CAS  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
             requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  therefore  the
             refusal is correct.  Further, for the reasons given above I am
             satisfied that  the  respondent  has  acted  fairly  and  that
             therefore the decision is in accordance with the law."

     The judge accordingly dismissed the appeal.

4.   The appellant applied  for  permission  to  appeal  and  permission  to
    appeal was granted by a First-tier Judge on 27 June 2016.  Paragraph  3
    of the grant of permission reads as follows:

         "The appellant was unable to obtain a  fresh  CAS  because  of  the
         delay in processing her application and because of the  query  that
         had been raised regarding her English  Language  Test  Certificate,
         albeit that had been resolved.  Consequently, this is  not  a  case
         where the appellant's own actions have caused difficulty but is  in
         fact one where delay has genuinely had implications.   However,  as
         the  judge  did  not  consider  the  case  of  Marghia  (procedural
         fairness) [2014] UKUT 366 (IAC), or indeed expressly refer  to  any
         other case, it is arguable that by omitting to consider this or any
         other relevant cases, that there has been a procedural irregularity
         in reaching his [sic] decision."

5.   The respondent filed a response on 25  July  2016.   It  was  submitted
    that the grounds had no merit and  that  the  judge  had  rejected  the
    argument that educational institutions will not issue a CAS  mid  year.
    While the delay was regrettable the respondent had  given  reasons  for
    it.  Delay had no material bearing on the appeal.  Mr Davison relied on
    the grounds and pointed out that an application made in  December  2013
    had taken some eighteen months to process.  The respondent had  written
    to the  appellant  on  7  February  2014  raising  concerns  about  the
    appellant's ETS test.  She had  got  caught  up  in  the  ETS  problems
    unfairly.  She had responded a fortnight later with a satisfactory test
    score.  There was  no  suggestion  she  had  been  fraudulent.   Having
    delayed matters the respondent issued the 60 day notice in March  2015.
    The appellant had given details of the types of places she  was  trying
    to get admitted to but the university calendar was open for  admissions
    in September or January and to issue a  60  day  letter  in  March  was
    completely useless.  She could have applied to a less reputable college
    but that would have placed her  in  a  "catch  22"  situation.   Having
    delayed matters for eighteen months for no good reason the decision had
    been taken at a time when no university  would  accept  the  appellant.
    The Secretary of State had waited until  the  college  licence  was  no
    longer valid and then had issued a worthless 60  day  notice.   Counsel
    took issue with the respondent's reply which claimed that the delay had
    had no bearing on the appeal.

6.   Mr Avery submitted that he was struggling to find any error of  law  in
    the arguments advanced.  There had been no unfairness.  The  judge  had
    not accepted that the timing of the 60 day notice had posed fundamental
    problems for the appellant.  He referred to the case of Marghia,  there
    was no absolute duty to make decisions which were substantively "fair".
     The respondent had not been Wednesbury  unreasonable.   The  appellant
    could have taken a short course or could indeed have  returned  to  her
    home country.  There was nothing to demonstrate any unfairness or  that
    the judge had failed to take into account the issues raised.

7.   Mr Davison in reply submitted that the  Home  office  had  sat  on  the
    matter and then they had given the appellant an ineffective remedy.  If
    the appellant had taken a short course to fill in time she  would  have
    been subject to criticism.  Why should she go home when the  respondent
    had  messed  matters  up.   She  had  been  a  victim   of   everyone's
    incompetence.  She had suffered unfairness.  The question of unfairness
    would  of  course  depend  on  the  particular  circumstances  of   the
    individual case.

8.   At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I can  of
    course only interfere with the judge's decision if  it  was  materially
    flawed in law.  I have taken careful account of the points made by  the
    parties.

9.   As I have said, the appellant was not  represented  before  the  First-
    tier Judge but the proceedings were conducted entirely fairly and it is
    plain that the judge gave close attention to what she  was  saying  and
    the complaints that she made.  She had in mind the issue of  delay  but
    was not able to agree that the appellant had suffered any unfairness in
    relation to the timing of the  60  day  letter  or  the  earlier  query
    regarding the appellant's English language test  certificate.   Contact
    had been maintained with the appellant.  Importantly the judge rejected
    the appellant's argument that educational institutions would not  issue
    a CAS mid year.

10.  The appellant argued in her grounds of appeal that it was not  possible
    for the appellant to get admission in the  middle  of  the  educational
    year "and the respondent knew this important fact and the decision  was
    unfair".

11.  Of course if the respondent had deliberately manipulated the system  in
    order to frustrate the appellant's chances  of  obtaining  a  CAS  that
    would be unfair.  However, that  was  not  what  the  First-tier  Judge
    found.  The judge found there was no unfairness based on the timing  of
    the 60 day letter.  Secondly,  the  judge  was  not  satisfied  on  the
    evidence that a CAS would not be issued mid year.  That was  a  finding
    of fact open to her on the evidence.

12.  The respondent sent  the  appellant  the  standard  60  day  letter  in
    accordance with her policy.  That letter  gave  the  appellant  various
    options. She could appeal, which she had done,  she  could  invite  the
    respondent to reconsider the decision on the basis of new or additional
    information or she could submit a fresh application.  Alternatively, as
    Mr Avery said, she could return home.

13.  On the judge's finding the argument that the respondent having  delayed
    matters gave the appellant a worthless remedy is not made out.  As  the
    judge succinctly puts it, without a valid CAS "the appellant could  not
    meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  therefore  the
    refusal is correct.   Further,  for  the  reasons  given  above,  I  am
    satisfied that the respondent has acted fairly and that  therefore  the
    decision is in accordance with the law".  I am not satisfied  that  the
    judge's decision was flawed in the light of  Marghia.   Despite  giving
    careful attention to the points made by Mr Davison I am  not  satisfied
    that the First-tier Judge misdirected herself or overlooked any salient
    aspect of the appellant's case or otherwise materially  erred  in  law.
    Her factual analysis was open to her.

Decision

14.  Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.  The decision of the  First-tier
    Judge is confirmed.

15.  The First-tier Judge made no anonymity order and I make none.

Fee Award

16.  The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.



Signed                                  Date 17 August 2016

G Warr
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

