
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/22979/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd January 2017                          |On 08 February 2017           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                               mr Hamza Akacha
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Bajwa, A Bajwa & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appealed with permission against a decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge R Chowdhury promulgated on 1st  August  2016  dismissing
    the appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules and  dismissing  the
    appeal under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 2. Mr Hamza Akacha, the appellant, submitted his application for leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as the  unmarried  partner  of  a  British
    citizen and on the length of residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    Secretary of State refused that application in  her  decision  on  11th
    June 2015.  It was that decision which was appealed to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and refused.

 3. The grounds for permission to appeal are that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge in paragraph 27 stated that the  appellant  could  not  fall  for
    consideration under the partner route under the  Immigration  Rules  as
    he could not satisfy the  immigration  status  requirement  as  he  had
    entered the UK illegally and had subsequently  withdrawn  a  claim  for
    asylum.  The  appellant  relies  on  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    finding in paragraph 26 that this couple had in fact cohabited for  two
    years prior to the appellant's  application  to  the  respondent.   The
    application was made on  31st  March  2015  and  it  would  appear  the
    appellant and his partner have undergone a religious marriage.

 4. It is accepted by  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the  appellant  was
    therefore, treated by the judge, as an unmarried partner of  a  British
    citizen living in the United Kingdom as defined under  the  Immigration
    Rules GEN.1.2(iv) and therefore  the  judge  should  have  applied  the
    Immigration Rules and made reference to EX1(b).  There should have been
    a finding on the genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a  partner,
    whether the appellant was a partner of someone who is in the UK and  is
    a British citizen, and whether there are  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life with that partner continuing outside the UK.

 5. Specifically at the hearing before me it  was  stated  that  there  was
    further medical evidence which should have been produced and should the
    decision be found to contain an error of law, which is in fact conceded
    by the Secretary of State, the matter should be remitted  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 6. I do find an error of law.  It would appear that the  judge  failed  to
    determine the case in respect of the Immigration Rules and  EX1.   This
    is not considered, in error, on the basis that  the  appellant  entered
    the UK illegally.

 7. As such, and because of the  nature  of  the  further  evidence  to  be
    considered, and the findings to be made (and I note there would  appear
    to be no directions sent out by the Tribunal), the decision  should  be
    set aside and the matter remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    full hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed           Helen Rimington                   Date 7th February 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
