
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/22620/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 July 2015                      |On 13 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 SHIVA MALLA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Mr M Blundell, counsel, instructed by Malik &
Malik, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before us for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Metzer ("the FTTJ") promulgated on 15 January  2015,  in
    which he allowed the Respondent's (hereinafter "the Claimant's") appeal
    against the refusal of his application for leave to remain as a Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrant on 6 May 2014.

 2. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier  Tribunal  and  there
    are no issues giving rise to a requirement for such a direction now.

Background

 3. In support  of  his  application  for  leave  to  remain  the  Claimant
    submitted  various  documents,  including  a  screen-print   from   the
    Companies House website showing he was a  director.  This  screen-print
    was printed on 13 October 2013.

 4. Paragraph 41-SD(e)(v) of Appendix A of the Immigration  Rules  provides
    as follows:

         "(2) if claiming points for being a director of a UK company at the
         time of his application, a printout of a Current Appointment Report
         from Companies House, dated no earlier than three months before the
         date of the application, listing the applicant as a director of the
         company, and confirming the date of his  appointment.  The  company
         must be actively trading and not struck-off,  or  dissolved  or  in
         liquidation.  Directors  who  are  on  the  list  of   disqualified
         Directors provided by Companies House will not be awarded points."

 5. The FTTJ noted in his decision that "the  [Claimant]  accepted  that  a
    current appointment report from Companies House was not  provided  with
    the application". Furthermore, the FTTJ noted that the application  was
    made in April 2014 and the report provided by the Claimant was  printed
    on 13 October 2013; it was  therefore  dated  more  than  three  months
    before the date of application.  He also observed  that  the  Appellant
    (hereinafter "the Secretary of State") had stated in  her  reasons  for
    refusal that "the only reason the [Secretary of State] did not  contact
    the [Claimant] to request the correct document under paragraph 245AA of
    the Immigration Rules was that  she  had  refused  the  application  in
    respect of the investment as  a  result  of  which  the  submission  of
    further evidence would not have led to the application being  granted".
    The Judge had found that the refusal of the application in  respect  of
    the investment was in breach of the Immigration Rules and he  therefore
    found that the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  not  to  request
    additional  documentation  or  consider  the  application   under   the
    provisions of Paragraph 245AA was not in accordance with the law.

 6. Mr Avery, for the Secretary of State, submits that decision is an error
    of law because the Claimant had  not  provided  a  Current  Appointment
    Report from Companies House dated no earlier than three  months  before
    the application.  The requirement  in  paragraph  41-SD(e)(v)  was,  he
    said, specific and the Claimant had not complied with it. He  submitted
    that, whilst paragraph 245AA gave flexibility in certain circumstances,
    it did not cover the failure to provide a specified document at all. He
    submitted that the Secretary of State had been under no  obligation  to
    seek the missing document. Nor was this a  case  of  a  document  being
    provided in the wrong format: it was out of date.  The  Claimant  could
    not, he submitted, take advantage of paragraph 245AA.

 7. Mr Blundell, for the Claimant, submitted that whilst  it  was  accepted
    that the  Claimant had not provided the right document, he had provided
    similar information to that  which  would  have  been  in  the  Current
    Appointment Report; it was a starting point.   He  submitted  that  the
    Claimant's  circumstances  were  covered  by  paragraph   245AA(b)(ii).
    Alternatively, the Claimant had  provided  a  document  which  did  not
    contain "all  of  the  specified  information"  pursuant  to  paragraph
    245AA(b)(iv).  He noted that the term "specified information"  was  not
    defined in paragraph 245AA, 245DD or paragraph  6  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Mr Blundell submitted it was for us to decide what is meant  by
    "specified information" in this context and he referred us to the terms
    of paragraph 46-SD(g)(ii).  He  submitted  there  were  two  applicable
    discretions available to the Secretary of State under 245AA:  to  write
    to the Claimant or to make her own enquiries. He  submitted  that,  the
    only other ground for refusal having been found  to  be  unlawful,  the
    appropriate course had been for the application to  remain  outstanding
    and for the Judge to send the matter back to the   Secretary  of  State
    for her  to  consider  exercising  her  discretion  (as  had  been  his
    submission in the FTT for the Claimant).

Discussion

 8. The Claimant accepts that he had not  provided  a  Current  Appointment
    Report from Companies House dated no earlier than three  months  before
    the date of application.  We accept that the screenprint dated  October
    2013 which he did provide contains similar information  to  what  might
    have been in a Current Appointment Report, had it been provided to  the
    Secretary of State with the application.  However, we consider that  is
    not the issue before us.  The purpose of paragraph 41-SD(e)(v)(2) is to
    ensure the applicant provides contemporaneous confirmation, by way of a
    Current Appointment Report dated no earlier than  three  months  before
    the date of application, of the status of the Claimant as a director of
    the company and of the company itself.

 9. We are satisfied that  the  document  was  one  in  the  wrong  format;
    however, it was also more than that: it was a document  which  did  not
    contain the requisite information, namely details of the  Claimant  and
    the company as at a date no earlier than three months before  the  date
    of application.   We  do  not  consider  therefore  that  the  document
    provided by the Claimant falls into the category of a document  in  the
    wrong format pursuant to paragraph 245AA(b)(ii): there was more than  a
    formatting error in the document which was provided because it was  out
    of date, according to the criteria in paragraph 41-SD(e)(v)(2).

10. We have also considered whether the document provided by  the  Claimant
    is one which falls within the criteria in paragraph 245AA(d)(iv).   The
    full provision is as follows:

           "(b) If the applicant has submitted specified documents in which
           ... [(iv)] A document does not  contain  all  of  the  specified
           information"

    However, we consider that the fact the document was out of  date  means
    it cannot be considered a "specified document"; nor can it be described
    as one which does not contain all of the specified information  because
    all the information it contained was out of date. Put another way, none
    of it  was  the  specified  information  for  the  required  date.  The
    relevance of the date of  the  document  is  to  demonstrate  that  the
    information contained in it is contemporaneous to the application.   We
    are unable to find that the remedy at 245AA(d)(iii)  was  available  to
    the Claimant in this case.

11. For  these  reasons  we  do  not  consider  the  Judge's  findings  are
    sustainable.  We are satisfied that the FTTJ erred materially in law in
    finding that the decision  of  the   Secretary  of  State  was  not  in
    accordance with the law under s85 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 for the   Secretary  of  State's  failure  to  consider
    exercising her discretion under paragraph 245AA.  We are satisfied that
    paragraph 245AA has no application in this case.

12. We set aside the decision of the FTTJ  and  remake  it  dismissing  the
    Claimant's appeal on the grounds that the Claimant,  having  failed  to
    provide  a  Current  Appointment  Report  issued  within  the  required
    timeframe, had not demonstrated that he fulfilled the criteria  in  the
    paragraph 41-SD(e)(v)(2).

Decision

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  an
    error on a point of law.

14. We set aside the decision.

15. We re-make the decision by dismissing the Claimant's appeal against the
    Secretary of State's decision.


Signed      Date 12 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black



Fee Award

The FTTJ made a fee award. We set that award aside: the  Respondent  is  not
entitled to a fee award, the appeal having been dismissed.


Signed      Date 12 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black
