
[pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/22142/2014
     ia/22148/2014
     ia/22153/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 September 2014                         |On 6 November 2014            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                      mr folorunsho michael omoloju (1)
                          mrs anna tola omoloju (2)
                     miss jemima amadosibina omoloju (3)
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr J Jamil a Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwncyz a Home Office Presenting Officer



          DECISION AND REASONS FOR FINDING A MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW


Introduction

1.   The appellants are Nigerian.  The first appellant ("Michael") was  born
    on 19 February 1956.  His wife ("Anna") was born on 19 August 1957  and
    his daughter ("Jemima") was born on 11 July 2000.

2.   The present appeal  is  by  the  appellants  against  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse  to  vary  leave  to  remain  and  to  make  removal
    directions.   The  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Hands   ("the
    Immigration Judge") dismissed their appeals and refused to  vary  their
    leave to remain as highly skilled migrants and, in the case of Anna and
    Jemima, dependants thereof, because he found that Michael's appeal  had
    to be treated as abandoned under Section  104(4)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("2002 Act") because he  had  left  the
    UK. Consequently, the Immigration Judge held that the  appeals  by  his
    dependants could not succeed either.

3.   Immigration Judge Brunnen considered that there  were  arguable  errors
    of law in the  Immigration  Judge's  decision.   Accordingly,  he  gave
    permission to appeal on 6 August 2014.

4.   The respondent submitted a Rule 24 response dated 22 August 2014  which
    asserts that the Immigration Judge had been correct to treat the appeal
    as abandoned without consideration of the merits.

5.   Directions were  given  on  29  August  2014  stating  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal would not consider evidence which was not  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal unless the Upper Tribunal  had  specifically  decided  to
    admit that evidence.

Background

6.   This is set out extensively in  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In summary, Michael first entered the UK as a highly skilled
    migrant on 17 April 2008 with entry clearance until 12  February  2010.
    He then applied to remain  as  a  Gateway  highly  skilled  worker  and
    received leave on 17 March 2010 valid until 17 April  2013.   Michael's
    most recent application was considered by the respondent and refused on
    2 May 2014.  Michael gave notice of appeal against that refusal  on  19
    May 2014 and the appeal came before the Immigration Judge  on  21  July
    2014.

7.   The Immigration Judge decided to  treat  the  appeal  as  abandoned  by
    virtue of the fact that the appellant had left the UK on 30 April 2013.



The Hearing

8.   At the hearing I heard oral representations by both  parties.   It  was
    pointed out that Michael had been away from the UK for  more  than  180
    days but the matter before the Tribunal was whether  he  had  abandoned
    his appeal.  Section 104(4) of the 2002 Act provides that:

         "An appeal under Section 82(1) brought by a person while he  is  in
         the United Kingdom shall be treated as abandoned if  the  appellant
         leaves the United Kingdom".


    It was pointed out that the issue therefore was whether  the  appellant
    was "in the United Kingdom" at the time he applied for leave to remain.
     Although the appellant was in the UK at the date  of  his  application
    (according to the application form dated 28 March 2013) he had left the
    UK on 30 April 2013.  Therefore, at the date of the  notice  of  appeal
    that was filed (19 May 2014) the appellant had not been in the  UK  for
    over a year.  Therefore, this was not an "in-country"  type  appeal  to
    which Section 104(4) was intended to apply.  The appellant was  out  of
    country but his family remained in the UK.  At the time he left the  UK
    he did so with valid leave but, unfortunately, that leave  subsequently
    expired and he could not return.  He  made  an  application  for  entry
    clearance as a visitor to attend the hearing  but  that  had  not  been
    successful.  The appellant submitted that the Tribunal should have gone
    on and considered the  appeal  on  its  merits  rather  than  summarily
    disposing of it as an abandoned appeal.


9.   Mr Diwncyz pointed out that the form the  appellant  had  completed  in
    order to lodge his appeal with the First-tier  Tribunal  (form  IAFT-1)
    gave an address in the UK.  However, he  accepted  that  the  appellant
    would not have been in the UK in order to bring an appeal, although  he
    did have an English address.   Mr  Diwncyz  raised  this  point  as  he
    considered it may be arguable that the fact that the appellant  had  an
    English address would bring him within the category of an  "in-country"
    appellant.

10.  I consider that the decision of the  Immigration  Judge  to  treat  the
    appeal as abandoned appeared to be contrary to Section  104(4)  of  the
    2002 Act.  In fact it seems that the appellant was in the  UK  when  he
    applied for leave to remain but not in  the  UK  when  he  brought  his
    appeal.

11.  Having  decided  that  there  was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    Immigration Judge's  treatment  of  section  104  I  went  on  to  hear
    submissions on the merits.

12.  The appellant referred me to his skeleton  argument  contained  in  the
    bundle dated 15 July 2014 prepared for the First-tier Tribunal hearing.
     Paragraph 2 of that document (at page 19 of the  bundle)  states  that
    the respondent's decision had erroneously  been  made  under  paragraph
    135G of the Immigration Rules when  it  should  have  been  made  under
    paragraph 245CD(c) of those Rules.  Secondly, as the appellant had paid
    taxes in the UK during the period of his  employment  abroad  and  this
    would count towards the  "unbroken  period"  of  residence  in  the  UK
    required by paragraph 135G of the Immigration Rules.  Additionally, the
    respondent's published policy should have applied  to  the  appellant's
    application and this meant that her decision to refuse  was  erroneous.
    Relying  on  paragraph  245CD  a  continuous  period  of  four   years'
    continuous lawful residence in the UK sufficed since the appellant  had
    applied under the Highly Skilled Migrant Programme between 3 April 2006
    and 7 November 2006 and received an approval letter to that effect.  He
    had come to the UK on the basis of that  letter  and  his  most  recent
    period of leave had been as a Tier 1 (General)  Migrant.   Accordingly,
    he qualified under paragraph 245CD (d).   The  skeleton  argument  then
    went on to deal with the human rights aspect and the rights of a child,
    i.e. Jemima.  The appellants did not accept  that  they  had  to  bring
    themselves within paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules in order to
    fulfil the requirements of Article 8 of  the  ECHR.   The  respondent's
    decision was incompatible with the "spirit" of that Convention.

13.  The respondent submitted by way of response that the 180 days for  each
    twelve month period was specified in the Rules.  I was referred to  the
    case of BD (Work permit - "continuous period") Nigeria [2010] UKUT  418
    (IAC).  That case allowed the Tribunal to construe  matters  reasonably
    and decide whether or not the absences were for the purposes  of  work.
    The Secretary of State had taken a reasonable approach.

14.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision on the merits which  I
    will now consider.

Discussion

15.  Grounds of appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal  were  wide-ranging.
    They included:

    (1)  the assertion that the appellant was absent from the  UK  for  the
         purposes of work, remained domiciled in the UK  and  therefore  for
         the purposes of calculating the continuous period of  residence  of
         "not more than 180 days" in the five  consecutive  twelve  calendar
         monthly periods, those periods of absence could be ignored;


    (2)  the respondent is alleged to have ignored her own published policy
         guidance relating to applications for  settlement  under  paragraph
         245CD;


    (3)  the fact the  correct  period  of  continuous  residence  for  the
         purposes of calculating the first appellant's  qualification  under
         the rules should be four years and not five years;


    (4)  the purpose and period of absences was relevant;


    (5)  the application of BD allowed the respondent  a  discretion  which
         should be exercised in the first appellant's favour;


    (6)  alternatively, human rights were engaged.


16.  A number of these grounds were not pursued when I returned to  consider
    the substantive merits of the appeal.  In particular, I  understand  it
    no longer to be maintained that the first appellant qualifies for leave
    to remain after a four year period.  It was accepted that the five year
    period was the correct one.

17.  This is an application  under  paragraph  134-135  of  the  Immigration
    Rules for indefinite leave to remain as a highly skilled  migrant.   It
    is not a claim under part 6A of the Immigration Rules,  which  includes
    requirements for indefinite leave to remain by  points-based  migrants.
    Thus, I do not  fully  understand  the  assertion  in  the  appellant's
    skeleton argument that Michael's application should be considered under
    paragraph 245CD(c).  It seems that the only reason why  Michael  wishes
    to bring  his  application  within  that  is  because  of  the  shorter
    continuous period of residence required (which is conceded anyway)  and
    because of the disregard of periods abroad of a  certain  character  in
    that part of the Immigration Rules.  I  will  treat  this  application,
    therefore, as did the respondent, as an application which must  satisfy
    the requirements of paragraph 134-135 of the Immigration Rules.

18.  The case of BD (included in the appellant's bundle  at  133)  suggested
    that where an application under 134 is being considered the  respondent
    should apply a flexible approach to any periods of  absence  so  as  to
    take account of the strength of a person's ties to the UK, the  reasons
    for his absences and all the circumstances of the case.  The respondent
    is expected to exercise her discretion "sensibly" in the light of these
    factors.

19.  Notwithstanding the requirement of flexibility in  this  guidance  from
    the Upper Tribunal, Macdonald's Immigration Law comments (at  paragraph
    5.14) that the normal "benchmark" is  a  period  of  absence  of  three
    months in any twelve month period will be ignored but longer periods of
    absence  will not be.  However, it appears necessary  to  look  at  the
    extent of the applicant's connections to the UK  over  this  five  year
    period and ask whether Michael intended to make  his  home  in  the  UK
    during that period.

20.  According to his witness statement Michael states that  he  has  had  a
    series of employers (beginning in December 2008) who have required  him
    to work overseas.  As far as I can see he cannot point to  any  periods
    during the five years since he came to the  UK  when  he  was  actually
    required to work on a regular basis in the UK.  The  payment  of  taxes
    and national insurance contributions in the UK is only one factor to be
    looked at. The appellant's domicile for tax purposes is another  factor
    but is not necessarily decisive. Inevitably, during the period referred
    to, the appellant's wife and child have settled in the UK.   Anna,  has
    worked in the health sector and his daughter Jemima has been at  school
    here. These facts are  also relevant.

21.  Correspondence from Michael's employers suggest that  he  was  required
    to work "from time to time" in Nigeria, for example, in the  year  2009
    he was required to work between 31 March and 14  May,  3  June  and  18
    July, 1 and 3 August, 11 August to 9 October, 14 October to 2 November,
    17 November to 2 January 2010 (see page 69).  In fact, his total period
    of absence during the period 24 November 2008 to 3 January 2010 was  no
    less than 291 days.  This can hardly accurately be described  as  "from
    time to time".

22.  These periods of absence  mean  that  Michael's  residence  in  the  UK
    cannot be described  as  a  "continuous"  in  any  meaningful  way.   I
    consider that his  absences  were  so  significant  as  to  render  his
    residence in the UK secondary to his residence in Nigeria.

23.  The respondent left it to the Tribunal to decide whether the  Secretary
    of State had actually "reasonably and sensibly" within the terms of BD.
     I have found this a difficult question to decide  for  it  involves  a
    matter of judgment in the light of all relevant circumstances.   Having
    taken into account those circumstances, however, I  am  satisfied  that
    the respondent correctly concluded that the appellant did  not  qualify
    for leave to remain on the basis of his period of continuous  residence
    within the UK.

24.  Human rights are also raised in the grounds of appeal before the First-
    tier Tribunal and since I am now considering the merits it is necessary
    to consider whether there was any error in the approach adopted by  the
    First-tier Tribunal in relation to that claim.  The  appellant  asserts
    the respondent has failed in her statutory duty to  consider  the  best
    interests of Jemima as she is required to do under Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. That Act gives statutory
    effect to the UK's international obligations as  a  result  of  the  UK
    signing up to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.
     It is claimed that the respondent's decision offends human rights  law
    in that the respondent must act compatibly with Section 6 of the  Human
    Rights Act 1998.  That Act  incorporates  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights (ECHR) into UK law.  Article 8 requires the respondent  to
    respect the appellant's  right  to  a  private  or  family  life.   The
    respondent's decision is said to  be  disproportionate.   However,  the
    decision was  made  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
    appellants are required to do no more than  they  must  have  envisaged
    that they would always have to do (i.e. return to  Nigeria  when  their
    leave expired). I cannot see that decision in  any  way  offends  their
    human rights.  Thus, Mr Jamil's decision not to press that point before
    me was a well considered and realistic view  for  him  to  have  taken.
    Accordingly, I find that the respondent's decision  to  refuse  further
    leave to remain did  not  offend  either  the  rights  of  a  child  or
    international human rights law generally.

My Decision

25.  The Upper Tribunal finds a material error of law  in  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal in treating the  appeal  by  the  appellant  as
    abandoned I set aside that decision and will re-make the decision.

26.   Having  considered  all  the  evidence,   the   appeal   against   the
    respondent's decision to  refuse  to  vary  leave  to  remain  will  be
    dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury     6 November 2014


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appellant's appeal against  the  respondent's  decision
and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury     6 November 2014


