
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22715/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at : Field House                        |Decision Promulgated         |
|On : 6 December 2016                          |On: 8 December 2016          |
|                                              |                             |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                         PRECIOUS NKEMJIKA ONYEKWERE

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Following a grant of permission to appeal against  the  decision  of  the
   First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  against   the
   respondent's decision  of  28  May  2015  refusing  his  application  for
   indefinite leave to remain on human rights grounds, it was found,  at  an
   error of law hearing on 8 November 2016, that the First-tier Tribunal had
   made errors of law in its decision.  The  decision  was  accordingly  set
   aside on a limited basis.

Background to the Appeal

2. The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria born on 5 September 1968,  claims  to
   have entered the United Kingdom in 2003. He entered and remained  without
   leave and worked using forged identities. He had two  children  with  his
   former partner Ms Iheanacho, a daughter Blessing born on 13 December 2006
   and a son Emmanuel born on 15 March 2008. On 24 January 2014  he  made  a
   human rights claim on the basis of family life with his children.  On  17
   February 2014 he was sentenced to 8 months in  prison  for  possessing  a
   false identity card and for obtaining pecuniary advantage by deception.


3. The appellant's human rights claim  was  refused  on  28  May  2015.  The
   respondent considered that he failed to meet the suitability requirements
   of paragraph R-LTRPT.1.1.(d)(i) with reference to paragraph S-LTR.1.5 and
   S-LTR.1.6 of Appendix FM of the immigration rules due to having  produced
   and used false documents relating to multiple identities for the  purpose
   of committing immigration offences. For that reason, and since he did not
   have sole responsibility for his children and they did not live with him,
   he could not meet the  eligibility  requirements  in  Appendix  FM.  With
   regard to paragraph  276ADE,  the  appellant  also  failed  to  meet  the
   criteria due to the suitability provisions, and the respondent considered
   in any event that  there  were  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
   integration into Nigeria  and  that  it  was  reasonable  to  expect  his
   children to leave the UK with him. The  respondent  considered  that  the
   appellant's  children's  mother,  with  whom  he  was  no  longer  in   a
   relationship, could return with the children, as she only  had  leave  to
   remain until 23 July 2015 on her EEA visa.


Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal


4. The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard in the  First-tier
   Tribunal on 3 March 2016 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Farmer,  who  heard
   oral evidence from the appellant and the mother of his two  children,  Ms
   Iheanacho. The judge, having found that the appellant could  not  benefit
   from  Appendix  EX.1.  since  he  could  not  satisfy   the   suitability
   requirements  in  Appendix  FM,  went  on  to  consider  whether  it  was
   reasonable to expect the children to leave  the  UK  in  the  context  of
   assessing whether there were any significant obstacles  to  the  children
   relocating to Nigeria under paragraph 276ADE, and found that it was.  The
   judge noted that the children's mother had a son, Daniel, from a previous
   relationship who was an EEA national and who resided with them. The judge
   found that the appellant could not meet the criteria in Appendix  FM  and
   paragraph 276ADE and  that  the  appellant's  removal  would  not  breach
   Article 8 outside the immigration rules. She dismissed the appeal.

5. The  appellant  sought,  and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  that
   decision to the Upper Tribunal.


Appeal in the Upper Tribunal


6. At a hearing on 8 November 2016 I found errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
   decision and set it aside, as follows:

                            "DECISION AND REASONS


      1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 5 September 1968. He
         has been given permission to appeal against the decision of  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge  Farmer,  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
         respondent's decision to refuse his application for leave to remain
         in the UK on human rights grounds.


      2. The appellant claims to have entered the United Kingdom in 2003. He
         entered  and  remained  without  leave  and  worked  using   forged
         identities.  He  had  two  children  with  his  former  partner  Ms
         Iheanacho, a daughter Blessing born on 13 December 2006 and  a  son
         Emmanuel born on 15 March 2008.On 24 January 2014 he made  a  human
         rights claim on the basis of family life with his children.  On  17
         February 2014 he was sentenced to 8 months in prison for possessing
         a false identity card and  for  obtaining  pecuniary  advantage  by
         deception.


      3. The appellant's human rights claim was refused on 28 May 2015.  The
         respondent considered  that  he  failed  to  meet  the  suitability
         requirements of  paragraph  R-LTRPT.1.1.(d)(i)  with  reference  to
         paragraph S-LTR.1.5 and S-LTR.1.6 of Appendix FM of the immigration
         rules due to having produced and used false documents  relating  to
         multiple identities  for  the  purpose  of  committing  immigration
         offences.  For  that  reason,  and  since  he  did  not  have  sole
         responsibility for his children and they did not live with him,  he
         could not meet the eligibility requirements in  Appendix  FM.  With
         regard to paragraph 276ADE, the respondent  considered  that  there
         were no very significant obstacles to the  appellant's  integration
         into Nigeria and that it was reasonable to expect his  children  to
         leave  the  UK  with  him.  The  respondent  considered  that   the
         appellant's children's mother, with whom he  was  no  longer  in  a
         relationship, could return with the children, as she only had leave
         to remain until 23 July 2015 on her EEA visa.


      4. The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard in the First-
         tier Tribunal on 3 March 2016 by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Farmer,
         who heard oral evidence from the appellant and the  mother  of  his
         two children, Ms  Iheanacho.  The  judge,  having  found  that  the
         appellant could not benefit from Appendix EX.1. since he could  not
         satisfy the suitability requirements in Appendix  FM,  went  on  to
         consider whether it was reasonable to expect the children to  leave
         the  UK  in  the  context  of  assessing  whether  there  were  any
         significant obstacles to the children relocating to  Nigeria  under
         paragraph 276ADE, and found that it was. The judge noted  that  the
         children's mother had a son, Daniel, from a  previous  relationship
         who was an EEA national and who resided with them. The judge  found
         that the appellant could not meet the criteria in Appendix  FM  and
         paragraph 276ADE and that the appellant's removal would not  breach
         Article 8 outside the immigration rules. She dismissed the appeal.


      5. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  that  decision  to  the
         Upper Tribunal on various grounds, including  the  failure  by  the
         judge to consider whether the EEA national child, Daniel, could  be
         removed  from  the  UK,  and  the  implications  of  that  on   the
         removability or reasonableness of relocation of the appellant's two
         children and their mother. The grounds asserted  further  that  the
         judge erred in her assessment of the best interests of the children
         and  failed  to  consider  section  117B(6)  of  the   nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum 2002 Act.


      6. Permission to appeal was initially refused, but was granted  on  16
         September 2016, on all grounds, but specifically on the ground that
         it was arguable that the judge had not considered reasonable in the
         context of section 117B(6).


      7. The  appeal  came  before  me  on  8  November  2016  and  I  heard
         submissions on the error of law. The appellant was not  represented
         but appeared in person with Ms Iheanacho, his  ex-partner  and  the
         mother of his two children. Evidence was produced that Ms Iheanacho
         had since been granted permanent residence in the  UK  and  it  was
         also claimed that the couple had reconciled, although that was,  of
         course, not directly relevant to the error of law issue.


      8. Mr Clarke submitted that it was clear from MA (Pakistan) &  Ors,  R
         (on the application of) v Upper Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
         Chamber) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705 that the considerations in EX.1
         and section 117B(6) were the same and that reasonableness had  been
         properly considered by the judge, as had the best interests of  the
         children.


      9. Whilst the appellant's submission was that no proper  consideration
         had been given to his close bonds with the children,  Ms  Iheanacho
         submitted that the judge had failed to consider that  she  was  the
         primary carer of a German national child and how that affected  her
         ability to return to Nigeria with her other two children.


     10. In my view the judge's decision contains a material error  of  law.
         Ms Iheanacho raised a significant point which formed  part  of  the
         initial  grounds  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,   namely   the
         implications of her being the primary  carer  of  an  EEA  national
         child.  That was a matter which the record of proceedings shows was
         raised by the appellant's legal representative in  his  submissions
         before the First-tier Tribunal but which the judge appears  not  to
         have addressed. Although the judge took Daniel  into  account  when
         considering reasonableness of relocating to Nigeria, at  [14],  she
         did not give any proper consideration to the  implications  of  him
         being an EEA national. The judge considered Ms Iheanacho's  ability
         to return to Nigeria with her two children on the  basis  that  she
         had no leave to remain in the UK, but yet also made a clear finding
         at [14] that she was the primary carer of an  EEA  national,  which
         she failed to factor into the question of reasonableness of return.
         Had the judge given consideration to such relevant matters, it  may
         well be that she would have concluded that it was not reasonable to
         expect the two children to leave the UK when their mother  arguably
         had an entitlement to remain  in  the  UK  (which  has  since  been
         confirmed in the subsequent grant  of  permanent  leave)  with  her
         other EEA national child. Such a conclusion may then  have  had  an
         impact on her decision on proportionality under Article  8  outside
         the rules, in  particular  with  respect  to  the  public  interest
         consideration in section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act. It is relevant to
         note at this point that the judge considered reasonableness in  the
         context  of  paragraph  276ADE,  omitting  to  consider  that   the
         exclusion as a  result  of  the  suitability  provisions  was  also
         relevant to paragraph 276ADE.


     11. Accordingly, the judge's decision simply cannot stand and  must  be
         re-made. I therefore set aside  the  decision  in  respect  to  the
         conclusions on reasonableness of return and  proportionality  under
         Article 8.


     12. Whilst Mr Clarke had  no  objection  to  the  suggestion  that  the
         decision could be re-made on the  evidence  already  available,  it
         seems to me on  reflection  that  the  matter  would  benefit  from
         further submissions  being  made,  in  particular  in  relation  to
         section  117B(6)  and  the  implications  of  the  decision  in  MA
         (Pakistan). Furthermore, I  note  that  the  position  of  the  two
         children is unclear, particularly given that their mother  has  now
         been granted permanent residence in the UK. Whilst they  have  been
         named in the refusal decision, the appeal  is  in  the  appellant's
         name only, and it is not clear if the respondent intends to  pursue
         removal action against the children.


     13. Accordingly the appeal will be listed for a resumed hearing for the
         decision to be re-made on the question of whether it is  reasonable
         to expect the  children  to  return  to  Nigeria  and  whether  the
         appellant's  removal  is  proportionate.  I  make   the   following
         directions:


         Directions


             No later than 14 days before the date of the next hearing:


             1) the respondent is  to  clarify  the  position  of  the  two
                children in light of the grant of  permanent  residence  to
                their mother


             2) any additional documentary evidence relied upon  by  either
                party is to be filed with this Tribunal and served  on  the
                opposing party


             3) The respondent and, if legally represented,  the  appellant
                are to file with the Tribunal  and  serve  upon  the  other
                party a skeleton argument setting  out  their  position  in
                regard to section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, with  particular
                reference to the decision in MA (Pakistan)."


Resumed Hearing

7. The appeal then came before me again on 6 December  2016.  The  appellant
   remained unrepresented.

8. In response to my enquiry, Ms Iheanacho informed me that her  son  Daniel
   was in contact with his father and saw him on average twice a  week.  His
   father was a German national living in the UK. In response to Mr Melvin's
   questions, she said that her relationship with the appellant had  resumed
   and he had moved in with her and the children in September 2016. They had
   discussed marriage but had not yet made any  arrangements.  It  would  be
   very difficult for her if the appellant were to leave the UK.

9. In his submissions, Mr Melvin submitted that the appellant  could  return
   to Nigeria and make an application for entry clearance from there.  There
   was scant evidence about Daniel's  nationality  and  about  Ms  Iheanacho
   being his primary carer.  The  appellant  could  not  succeed  under  the
   immigration rules. It  was  not  accepted  that  he  had  a  genuine  and
   subsisting relationship with  Ms  Iheanacho.  There  were  no  compelling
   circumstances  outside  the  immigration  rules.  With  regard   to   the
   reasonableness test and section 117B(6), Mr  Melvin  submitted  that  the
   children were entitled to permanent  residence  on  the  basis  of  their
   mother's residence and that it was difficult to assert that it  would  be
   reasonable for the family to  go  to  Nigeria.  However  the  appellant's
   interests did not outweigh the public interest, considering his  lack  of
   lawful basis of stay and his criminality, and on the basis that there was
   little to show that he played a full and active role  in  the  children's
   lives. Mr Melvin disagreed with my interpretation of  MA  (Pakistan),  as
   discussed below, but in any event submitted that it was not  demonstrated
   that  there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  between  the
   appellant and his children.


10. In response  Ms  Iheanacho  submitted  that  there  was  a  genuine  and
   subsisting relationship between the appellant and herself and between the
   appellant and their children.

Consideration and findings

11. Mr Melvin sought to re-open the issue of  Ms  Iheanacho's  role  as  the
   primary carer of an EEA national and the nationality of her  son  Daniel,
   submitting that there  was  evidence  of  neither  before  the  Tribunal.
   However the First-tier Tribunal made a clear finding in  that  regard  at
   [14], which the respondent did not seek to challenge  in  a  cross-appeal
   and did not raise in the rule 24 response. At the error of law hearing on
   8 November 2016, the Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Clarke,  did  not
   seek  to  challenge  those  findings  and  indeed,   on   the   contrary,
   specifically  accepted  that  there  was  no   dispute   about   Daniel's
   nationality. Accordingly it was not open to Mr Melvin to seek to  re-open
   those matters.


12. It was, furthermore, clear that the judge's finding that  the  appellant
   could not meet the requirements of the immigration rules  was  preserved,
   although I made clear in my decision at [10] that that was on  the  basis
   that the appellant was excluded from Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE(1)
   under the suitability provisions in S-LTR.1.5 and S-LTR.1.6.


13. The error of law identified in the judge's decision  was  in  regard  to
   the  consideration  outside  the  immigration  rules,  in   relation   to
   proportionality  and  section  117B(6).  Accordingly,   as   specifically
   expressed in my decision of 10 November 2016  at  [11],  the  basis  upon
   which the decision in the appellant's appeal was to  be  re-made  was  in
   relation to proportionality, and in particular the question of whether it
   was reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK.


14. In MA, the Court of Appeal decided that the question  of  reasonableness
   did not simply focus  on  the  child  but  incorporated  a  wider  public
   interest consideration including the conduct of the applicant. At [45] of
   MA, Lord Justice Elias said "In my judgment, if  the  court  should  have
   regard to the conduct of the applicant and any other matters relevant  to
   the public interest  when  applying  the  "unduly  harsh"  concept  under
   section  117C(5),  so  should  it  when  considering  the   question   of
   reasonableness under section 117B(6)."

15. However, it seems to me, given  the  particular  circumstances  of  this
   appellant's case and the family ties involved, that even  taking  account
   of the appellant's adverse immigration history and  his  criminality  and
   any other adverse public interest factors, and despite any concerns as to
   the genuineness of the claim that the appellant  and  Ms  Iheanacho  have
   resumed their relationship, it still cannot be concluded that it would be
   reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK and go to Nigeria.  The
   circumstances in this case  differ  from  those  in  MA,  which  involved
   "standard", uncomplicated family units and where the children's  ties  to
   the UK were expressed in terms of  length  of  residence,  education  and
   general integration. In this case, the children's mother has been granted
   permanent residence in the UK and is the primary carer of an EEA national
   child who in turn has regular contact with his EEA national father who is
   permanently resident in the UK. Accordingly there are strong family  ties
   to the UK. It would plainly not be reasonable to  separate  the  children
   from their mother, their primary carer. Neither would it be reasonable to
   expect their mother to accompany them to  Nigeria  to  avoid  separation,
   when she has permanent residence in the UK and is the  primary  carer  of
   another child who cannot be expected to leave the UK, as an EEA national,
   or to leave his father.

16. It was for that reason that I indicated in my error of  decision  of  10
   November 2016 at [10] that if the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  factored
   into the question  of  reasonableness  of  return  the  finding  that  Ms
   Iheanacho was the primary carer of an EEA national child, "it may well be
   that she would have concluded that it was not reasonable  to  expect  the
   two  children  to  leave  the  UK  when  their  mother  arguably  had  an
   entitlement to remain in the UK (which has since been  confirmed  in  the
   subsequent grant of permanent leave) with her other EEA national  child."
   Indeed, Mr Melvin stated in his written submissions at [33] that "it  may
   be unreasonable to expect the children to  return  to  Nigeria  with  the
   appellant..." and at the hearing he accepted that since the children were
   entitled to permanent residence on the basis of their mother's status  it
   would be difficult to assert that it would be reasonable for  the  family
   to go to Nigeria. Accordingly, it seems to me that  the  only  conclusion
   can be that it would be unreasonable to expect the children to leave  the
   UK.


17. Mr Melvin submitted that,  despite  such  a  conclusion,  the  appellant
   could nevertheless not succeed in his application and appeal, when taking
   account  of  the   public   interest   factors   which   outweighed   the
   reasonableness question, namely his criminality and  adverse  immigration
   history, the limited role he played in the children's lives and the  fact
   that it was open to him to make an application for entry  clearance  from
   outside  the  UK.  However,  my  understanding  of  the  judgment  in  MA
   (Pakistan) was that those were  matters  which  the  Court  found  to  be
   relevant to the question of reasonableness and  not  thereafter,  once  a
   finding on reasonableness had been made. That is clear  from  [21],  [45]
   and [101]. It seems to me that once it has been established that it would
   be unreasonable to expect the children to leave the UK,  section  117B(6)
   makes it clear that the public interest does not require  removal.  I  do
   not agree with Mr Melvin's submission that section 117B(6) is not a self-
   contained provision, once unreasonableness has been established. That  is
   made clear in MA at [17] to [19] as follows:
   1. "Subsection (6) falls into a different category  again.  It  does  not
      simply identify factors which bear upon the public interest  question.
      It resolves that question in the context  of  article  8  applications
      which satisfy the conditions in paragraphs (a) and (b). It does so  by
      stipulating that once  those  conditions  are  satisfied,  the  public
      interest  will  not  require  the  applicant's  removal.   Since   the
      interference with the right to private or family  life  under  article
      8(1) can only be  justified  where  there  is  a  sufficiently  strong
      countervailing public interest falling within  article  8(2),  if  the
      public interest does not require removal, there is no other  basis  on
      which removal could be justified. It follows,  in  my  judgment,  that
      there can be no doubt that section 117B(6) must be  read  as  a  self-
      contained provision in the sense that Parliament has  stipulated  that
      where the conditions specified in the sub-section are  satisfied,  the
      public interest will not justify removal. It is not legitimate to have
      regard to public interest considerations  unless  that  is  permitted,
      either explicitly or implicitly, by the subsection itself.
   1. Ms  Giovannetti  QC,  counsel  for  the  Secretary  of  State,  argued
      otherwise. She contended that there may be  circumstances  where  even
      though the provisions of paragraphs (a) and (b) are satisfied and  the
      applicant is not liable for deportation, the Secretary  of  State  may
      nonetheless refuse leave to remain on wider public  interest  grounds.
      But as she had to accept,  that  analysis  requires  adding  words  to
      subsection (6) to the effect that where the conditions are  satisfied,
      the public interest will not normally require removal, because on  her
      approach, sometimes it will. I  see  no  warrant  for  distorting  the
      unambiguous language of the section in that way.
   1. In my  judgment,  therefore,  the  only  questions  which  courts  and
      tribunals need to ask when applying section 117B(6) are the following:


      (1) Is the applicant liable to deportation? If  so,  section  117B  is
      inapplicable and instead the relevant code will usually  be  found  in
      section 117C.
      (2)  Does  the  applicant  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
      relationship with the child?
      (3) Is the child a qualifying child as defined in section 117D?
      (4) Is it unreasonable  to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the  United
      Kingdom?
   1. If the answer to the first question is no,  and  to  the  other  three
      questions is yes, the conclusion must be that article 8 is infringed."


18. Mr Melvin, in response, submitted that it  was  not  accepted  that  the
   appellant had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his two
   children and that, in accordance with  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge at [17], the contact which he had with the children  after
   coming out of prison in May 2014, had  been  made  with  the  purpose  of
   bolstering his claim rather than being  genuine.  However,  as  with  his
   previous arguments, I do not consider that that is an  argument  open  to
   him to make at this stage. The refusal decision of 28 May  2015  had  not
   raised any issue on the  genuineness  of  the  relationship  between  the
   appellant and his children and, on the contrary, at [21], [33] and  [34],
   proceeded on the basis that there was a  relationship.  Likewise,  whilst
   Judge Farmer at [17] rejected the appellant's claim to have  had  a  full
   and active role in the children's lives prior to coming  out  of  prison,
   she did not at any point make a finding that there was no current genuine
   and subsisting relationship. Neither was such  an  issue  raised  by  the
   Presenting Officer at the error of law hearing, who was content, at  that
   time, for the decision to be re-made on the evidence already available to
   the Tribunal, which did not include  any  challenge  to  the  appellant's
   claimed relationship with his children. In any event I found the evidence
   given by Ms Iheanacho as to the relationship between  the  appellant  and
   his children to be a credible one.

19. Accordingly, applying section 117B(6) as set out at  [19]  and  [20]  of
   MA, and on the basis that the answers to the  four  questions  posed  are
   that the appellant is not liable to deportation, he  has  a  genuine  and
   subsisting  parental  relationship  with  children,  the   children   are
   qualifying children and it is unreasonable  to  expect  the  children  to
   leave the UK, the conclusion must be that Article 8 is infringed.  Whilst
   I understand and appreciate the points made by Mr Melvin in regard to the
   appellant's ability to return to Nigeria to apply  for  entry  clearance,
   his criminality and his adverse  immigration  history,  I  have  to  have
   regard to the statutory provisions  approved  by  Parliament  in  section
   117B(6), according to which there is only the one  conclusion  and  which
   must, therefore, constitute  the  compelling  circumstances  required  to
   justify a grant of leave outside the immigration rules in accordance with
   the guidance in The Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  v  SS
   (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387.


20. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal must be allowed on  the  basis  that
   the appellant's removal to  Nigeria  would  be  disproportionate  and  in
   breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.


DECISION

21. The original Tribunal was found to have made an error of law. I  re-make
   the decision by allowing the appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds.



                               Signed                                  Date
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
