
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22835/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 26 October 2017                       |On 3 November 2017                  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                  A E M A E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Krushner, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    of 15 April 2015 refusing him leave to remain on human rights grounds.




Background

2.   The background to this appeal can briefly  be  summarised  as  follows.
    The appellant is a citizen of Egypt born on [ ] 1983. He came to the UK
    in 2012 with a transit visa as  part  of  a  karate  team.  Instead  of
    travelling on from the UK, he remained unlawfully.

3.   He first met his current partner in September 2013. She came to the  UK
    from the Philippines in November  2004  as  a  student  nurse  and  was
    granted indefinite to remain in 2010. She became a British  citizen  in
    2014 and she has a child from a previous relationship, a son born on 17
    October 2010. The appellant and his partner were engaged  in  September
    2014 and they married on 20 December 2014. They now have a young child,
    a daughter, born on 20 May 2016.

4.   On 21 February 2015, the appellant made a human rights application  for
    leave to remain on the basis of his marriage. The  respondent  was  not
    satisfied that  his  relationship  with  his  partner  was  genuine  or
    subsisting or that he could meet the requirements of appendix FM and in
    particular  para.  EX.1.  Further,  she  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    application raised any exceptional circumstances which merited a  grant
    of leave outside the requirements of the Rules.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

5.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the judge  accepted  that
    the marriage was subsisting and that the appellant had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with the two children of  the  family.
    He found that it would not be reasonable for the appellant's stepson to
    go to Egypt but that it would be reasonable for the children to  go  to
    the Philippines. He accepted that to remove the appellant would have  a
    considerable impact upon his wife, stepson and daughter and noted  that
    his wife had lived in the UK for the previous 12 years and had put down
    strong roots. She was a nurse and  so  performed  an  important  public
    service but the judge commented that she was  clearly  aware  that  the
    appellant did not have status in the UK from an early  stage  in  their
    relationship and  he  found  that  the  appellant's  removal  would  be
    proportionate to a legitimate aim.

The Grounds of Appeal.

6.   In the grounds of appeal, it is argued that  the  judge  had  erred  by
    finding that it would be reasonable for  the  children  to  go  to  the
    Philippines when the only differences between Egypt and the Philippines
    were familiarity with the  local  language  and  the  existence  of  an
    extended family in the Philippines. It is further argued that the judge
    was wrong to find that the stepson's first language was Tagalog  simply
    on the basis of a comment that this was the language spoken at home and
    he had erred  in  finding  that  his  wife's  extended  family  in  the
    Philippines were in a position to support them if they returned there.

7.   Mr Krushner submitted that the judge had erred  in  his  assessment  of
    reasonableness by applying too stringent a test when he  said  at  [19]
    that matters did not point so overwhelmingly in favour of both children
    remaining, that he could be satisfied that it  was  not  reasonable  to
    expect them to leave the UK. He further submitted that  the  judge  had
    erred by regarding Tagalog as the stepson's first  language  when  that
    was not in fact the case and he had also failed to  take  into  account
    the fact that the appeal raised specific issues arising from it being a
    mixed language marriage.

8.   Mr Deller did not seek to resist the  appeal.  He  commented  that  the
    judge had found that it would not be  reasonable  for  the  appellant's
    stepson to  return  to  Egypt  but  he  had  failed  to  give  adequate
    consideration to whether it was reasonable in the light of her  British
    citizenship for the appellant's daughter to go to the  Philippines.  He
    accepted that there had been no adequate analysis of the best interests
    of the children or of whether it would be reasonable for them to  leave
    the UK in their particular family circumstances.

The Error of Law

9.   I am satisfied that Mr Deller's concession is properly  made  and  that
    the judge has accordingly erred  in  law  by  failing  to  take  proper
    account of the British citizenship of the appellant's daughter and  the
    relatively unusual family background.  It  follows  that  a  number  of
    relevant matters have been left out of account when  assessing  whether
    it would be reasonable for his stepson and daughter to leave the UK and
    whether removing the appellant in the light of the family circumstances
    as a whole would be proportionate within article 8(2).

10.  Both representatives accepted  that  the  errors  were  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside and that the proper course  would  be  for
    the appeal to be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  full
    rehearing. I am satisfied that this is the proper course to take in the
    circumstances of this appeal.

Decision

11.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the  decision  is  set  aside.
    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full  rehearing
    by a different judge.


Signed:                           H           J           E           Latter
                 Date: 30 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

