
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22412/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2nd May, 2014                              |On 15th May 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              mr yousheng zhen
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Dinwycz, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Oryon of Counsel


                         FINDING OF AN ERROR OF LAW
                                     and
                     REMITTAL TO THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL


1.   The Secretary of State is the appellant in these proceedings,  but  for
    the avoidance of confusion I shall refer to her as "the claimant".  The
    respondents are all citizens of the People's Republic of  China.   They
    comprise mother, father and two children whose dates of birth are  23rd
    January, 1973, 7th June 1974, 13th December, 2001, and 28th March, 1994
    respectively.  The first respondent entered the United Kingdom on  28th
    January, 2008 with a multi-entry work  permit  visa  valid  until  26th
    February, 2013.  His wife and children then joined him  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 9th December, 2008 and were given leave in  line  with  his.
    On 13th February, 2013 the respondents applied for indefinite leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom, the second, third and fourth respondents'
    applications being reliant upon the first respondent's application.

2.   The claimant refused the respondent's application.  On 28th  May,  2013
    the claimant gave directions for the first respondent's  removal  under
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act, 2006, in the
    same notice.

3.   Having refused to vary the respondent's  leave,  the  respondents  gave
    notice of appeal and their appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge A K Simpson who, in a determination promulgated on  24th  January
    2014 allowed the Appellants' appeals on immigration  and  human  rights
    grounds.  The judge said, of the claimant's decision to give directions
    for the respondent's removal  under  Section  47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 that it, "is not merited".

4.    The  claimant's  grounds  assert  that  the  judge's  findings   under
    paragraph 134 of HC 395,  as  amended,  are  inadequate  as  there  was
    insufficient evidence to support the first  respondent's  claims.   The
    challenge points out that the Immigration  Rules  require  satisfactory
    documentary evidence to confirm that the Immigration  Rules  have  been
    satisfied, but such evidence was not produced by the respondents.   The
    second challenge suggests that the  judge  concludes  that  the  appeal
    engages  all  four  respondents'  rights  under  Article  8,  but   the
    determination  does  not  disclose  anything   exceptional   in   their
    circumstances that would require the  appeal  to  be  allowed  on  this
    basis.  Given  that  the  second,  third  and  fourth  respondents  are
    dependent upon the first respondent  where  his  application  has  been
    refused they would all be removed as a family and their right to family
    life would not therefore be breached.

5.   An examination of the  determination  shows  that  the  judge  did  not
    actually indicate that the appeal was being  allowed  on  human  rights
    grounds  under  Article  8,  she  simply  said  at  the  end   of   her
    determination under  the  heading  "decision",  "all  the  appeals  are
    allowed on immigration and human rights grounds".

6.   Mr Dinwycz pointed out that at paragraph 2  of  the  determination  the
    judge noted that the employer provides accommodation the appellants but
    has not taken that benefit in kind  into  account  in  calculating  the
    first respondent's earnings.  He sought to amend the grounds because he
    now had evidence that he wished to adduce  which,  he  claimed,  showed
    that the first respondent's employer had not disclosed the benefits  in
    kind to HM Revenue and Customs.  This, he suggested,  showed  that  the
    first respondent's employer was not somebody who should have been found
    to be credible.

7.   I refused to amend the grounds of appeal.  There  had  been  more  than
    ample time for the Secretary of State to raise this point as  an  issue
    in writing before  the  hearing  so  that  the  respondents  and  their
    representatives were placed on  notice.   I  did  not  believe  in  the
    circumstances that it would be just to allow the grounds to be amended.

8.   I handed to the representatives a copy of what I  believed  to  be  the
    current Immigration Rule paragraph 134 and the current immigration rule
    134SD.  I asked them to confirm that they were the  relevant  Rules  in
    play at the date of the claimant's decision.  Mr Oryan  confirmed  that
    they appeared to be in identical format to the Rules  at  the  relevant
    date.  He referred me  to  paragraph  134(v)  and  suggested  that  the
    documents which were submitted were as  required,  but  they  were  not
    certified and he confirmed that the bank statement did not  corroborate
    the wage slips which were submitted.

9.   I indicated that I  was  satisfied  that  the  documents  submitted  in
    connection  with  the  respondent's  application  did  not   meet   the
    requirements of paragraph 147.  The bank statements  were  required  to
    corroborate wage slips but did not do so.  The judge erred  in  finding
    that the first respondent met all the requirements of paragraph 134 and
    I set aside that determination.

10.  I indicated to both representatives that in view of the length of  time
    the parties would have to wait for the matter to be relisted before  me
    in Manchester it might be more appropriate that I remit the  appeal  to
    be heard by a First-tier Tribunal other  than  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Simpson.  Neither representative had any objection.

11.  I am satisfied  that  this  is  a  case  which  falls  squarely  within
    paragraph 7 of the Senior President's  Practice  Statement,  given  the
    length of time the parties would have to wait  for  the  matter  to  be
    relisted before me in Manchester and  that  it  could,  conversely,  be
    heard relatively speedily by the First-tier Tribunal.  In view  of  the
    overriding objective informing the onward conduct of this appeal I have
    decided that the appeal be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    hearing afresh before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Simpson.

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
