

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                   Appeal Number:
IA/22494/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Determined at Field House                   |Promulgated               |
|On 12 March 2014                            |On 13 March 2014          |
|                                            |                          |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                              Mwamuzi Mbilinyi
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                           Respondent

                          Determination and Reasons

For the appellant:           No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


Details of appellant and basis of claim

   1.       This case comes before the Upper Tribunal following the grant of
      permission to appeal on 10  December  2013  by  Designated  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge J M Lewis and the decision of 31 January 2014 of  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Chalkley that First-tier Tribunal Judge  Raymond  erred
      in law when dismissing the appeal on 20 November 2013.

   2.       The appellant, a Tanzanian national born  on  26  October  1983,
      seeks a residence card as the spouse of Nicole  Catherine  Sylvain,  a
      French national.   His application was refused because the  respondent
      considered that he had entered into a marriage  of  convenience.  This
      conclusion was based on the fact that a visit had  been  made  by  two
      immigration officers to his  alleged  place  of  residence  where  the
      occupants  had  denied  any  knowledge  of  him.  A  report  from   an
      immigration officer appears in the respondent's  bundle  (contrary  to
      what was  said  about  its  absence  when  permission  to  appeal  was
      granted). The Secretary of State also considered that there  had  been
      inadequate documentary evidence to  show  that  the  EEA  sponsor  was
      exercising treaty rights in the UK.

   3.       The appellant did not attend his appeal hearing before the Upper
      Tribunal. In a brief determination,  Judge  Chalkley  found  that  the
      First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  erred  because  he  had  failed   to
      demonstrate that  he  had  examined  the  evidence  submitted  by  the
      respondent, failed to comment on the appellant's explanation for  what
      the UKBA staff (i.e. the immigration officers)  were  told  when  they
      made their house visit and failed to consider Article  8  despite  the
      fact that the Secretary of State had dealt with this in  the  refusal.



   4.       I have to say that in my view these alleged errors were not made
      out. The respondent did not submit evidence that was disregarded,  the
      appellant's explanation appeared for the first time in his application
      for permission to appeal and so was not before the First-tier Tribunal
      Judge and the Secretary of State did not consider  Article  8  as  she
      specifically found that the appellant had not made any valid Article 8
      application.  However,  as  a  decision  has  been   made   that   the
      determination should be set  aside,  I  proceed  to  hear  the  appeal
      afresh.

Appeal Hearing

   5.       There was no appearance by the appellant or his sponsor  at  the
      hearing on  12  March  and  no  explanation  for  non  attendance  was
      received. Given that he had also failed to  attend  the  two  previous
      hearings and having satisfied myself that the Notice  of  Hearing  was
      properly served, I proceeded with the appeal in his absence.

   6.       Mr Tarlow made submissions on behalf of the Secretary of  State.
      He asked that I uphold the respondent's finding that the appellant had
      entered into a sham marriage. He referred  me  to  the  visit  of  the
      immigration officers to the  appellant's  residence  and  to  the  two
      reports of the officers that he submitted. He pointed out  an  anomaly
      in the addresses supplied by the appellant. Finally he submitted  that
      no Article 8 claim had been made but even if  it  had,  it  could  not
      succeed given the fact that the appellant had married for convenience.


Findings and Conclusions

   7.       The reports of the two immigration officers to  the  appellant's
      address on 20 February 2014 led the Secretary  of  State  to  conclude
      that the appellant had entered into  a  sham  marriage.  The  officers
      encountered two Ghanaians who confirmed that they  did  not  know  the
      appellant and that he did not live there. In his permission to  appeal
      application the appellant offered an explanation; he stated that  they
      were visitors and so did not know him. No such explanation was offered
      in support of his original  hearing  even  though  a  report  from  an
      immigration officer was contained in the respondent's bundle and  this
      issue was highlighted in the refusal. Even if these  individuals  were
      visitors, I do not accept that they would not know  there  were  other
      residents there. The appellant could have adduced documentary evidence
      to show he resides at that address but he has failed to adduce a shred
      of documentary evidence linking him directly to that address.  I  have
      seen no tenancy agreement, no bills, letters or bank statements naming
      the appellant.  The appellant could  have  taken  the  opportunity  of
      attending his appeal and given oral evidence but he has failed  to  do
      so on three occasions.

   8.       I further note that at the time when the appellant and his  wife
      gave their address as a street in  Birmingham  (in  November  2012  on
      their marriage certificate), the sponsor's bank statements  (at  least
      from October 2012) showed her address as Reading. Again, at a time she
      claimed to be living in Birmingham, her business accounts  showed  the
      Reading address. Her bank statements show  extremely  modest  deposits
      and it is difficult to accept that she could live off the  very  small
      amounts she pays in each month. No evidence has been  put  forward  to
      show that the appellant is employed or helps with domestic costs.

   9.       The respondent has requested further evidence from the appellant
      but this has not been adduced. There is no evidence that his  wife  is
      even in the UK, let alone cohabiting with him. No statement  from  her
      has been submitted at any stage.

  10.       Given all these matters and having considered the  very  limited
      evidence as a whole, I find that the  respondent  has  discharged  the
      burden upon her to establish that the marriage is one of  convenience.
      I find that the appellant entered into a sham marriage solely for  the
      purpose of deceiving  the  immigration  authorities  and  obtaining  a
      residence card.

  11.       I note that no Article 8 claim has been made. Even if it had, it
      could not hope to succeed given my findings on  the  marriage  and  no
      details of any private life the appellant may  have  established  here
      have ever been put forward.


Decision

  12.       The First-tier Tribunal Judge was found to have made an error of
      law. I now re-make the decision and dismiss the appeal.

      Signed:





      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal


      12 March 2014


