
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22676/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 July 2015                      |On 22 July 2015                      |
|Oral judgment at hearing             |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                   Mrs Deborah Oyovwe Hillyar Nee Oyabugbe
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Ficklin, Counsel instructed by Paragon Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Onoufriou)(FTT), who allowed the  Claimant's
    appeal under the Rules with reference to EX.1  of  Appendix  FM.   That
    decision was promulgated on 1 April 2015.   The  background  facts,  in
    brief, are that the Claimant came to the UK in 2007 to join her partner
    who was a UK citizen.  The relationship became physically and  mentally
    abusive.  Since then the Claimant  has  suffered  from  serious  mental
    health difficulties which  continue  with  long  term  depression  with
    suicidal tendencies.  Some time later she met and married her  husband,
    Mr Hillyar, a British citizen.  Her Nigerian family are mainly  settled
    in the UK and she gains considerable support from her brother Emmanuel.

Grounds of application

 2. In ground 1, the Secretary of State  argued  that  the  FTT  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons for findings made as  to  the  possibility  of
    future employment for the Claimant at [21c]. In ground 2 the  Secretary
    of State argued that the FTT was inconsistent in its  consideration  of
    EX.1 and paragraph 276ADE, finding on the  one  hand  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to family life being continued in Nigeria, and
    on the other hand, with her husband's help the Claimant's  there  would
    be no insurmountable obstacles to integration in Nigeria[3].

Permission to appeal

3.    Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Nicholson on 3 June 2015 in the following terms;

         "Ground 2 contends that the  judge  erred  in  making  inconsistent
         findings in relation to insurmountable obstacles under Appendix  FM
         and integration under paragraph 276ADE.

         At paragraph 21.1.c the judge found, on the one  hand,  that  there
         were insurmountable obstacles  to  the  appellant  and  her  spouse
         enjoying family life in Nigeria and, on the other, that there would
         be significant obstacles to integration.

         Whilst the two tests are not the same it is difficult  to  see  how
         obstacles which are  not  very  significant  could  nonetheless  be
         considered insurmountable and permission is granted in  respect  of
         ground 1."

Submissions

4.    Mr Ficklin relied on the Rule 24 response and in essence  argued  that
    these are two separate tests. There  may  be  some  similarity  in  the
    threshold but  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    decisions that it did as regards the substance of those tests.

5.   Ms Holmes argued that the inconsistency arose more in  respect  of  the
    language or the wording used in the Decision and Reasons of the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  The  tenor  in  consideration  of  the  two  tests  was
    distinct, as shown in the FTT decision.

Discussion and decision

6.   I am satisfied that there was no error of law and  that  ground  1  has
    not been made out.  The evidence before the FTT was strong and it  made
    clear  findings  which  were  adequately  supported  by  reasons.    In
    particular the FTT had a report from consultant psychiatrist Dr Winton,
    whose opinion was that the Claimant was dependent on both  her  husband
    and her brother, she had difficulties in making decisions due  to  some
    cognitive impairment and would be  vulnerable  to  exploitation.   That
    report specifically concluded that the Claimant was not in  a  position
    to be able to work.

7.   As to the second  ground,  essentially  I  am  in  agreement  with  the
    argument and submissions made by Mr Ficklin and as set out in the  Rule
    24 response.  There was no challenge to the findings made. It is  clear
    to me that these are two different tests and  although  there  is  some
    overlap in terms of the threshold,  the  substance  of  the  tests  are
    fundamentally different. In  this  instance  the  FTT  has  made  clear
    findings and given reasons with regard to those tests separately.    EX
    1 provides that  very significant difficulties faced by  the  applicant
    or their partner in continuing family life together outside the UK  and
    which could not be overcome or would entail very  significant  hardship
    for the applicant or her partner. This  test  applies  equally  to  the
    applicant or their partner. EX.1 considers if there are  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life on return to the country of origin  and  I  am
    satisfied that the findings and reasons of the FTT are  sound.  It  was
    open to the FTT to make those findings on the evidence before  it  with
    reference  to  employment  difficulties  and   limitations,   financial
    support, the fears of  her  husband,  the  family  connections  of  the
    husband in the UK, the Claimant's mental health  difficulties  and  her
    support network in the UK [21. 1b & c].

8.   The FTT correctly considered Paragraph 276 ADE separately [21.3].   The
    relevant issue of private life does not focus on family life but  looks
    at the question of integration, which covers  the  applicant's  social,
    cultural and family ties in the country of origin.  Here the FTT  found
    that the Claimant could feasibly  reintegrate  with  the  help  of  her
    husband.  It found that she could not reintegrate alone because of  her
    mental health difficulties and lack of support in Nigeria.  In my  view
    that is not the same as the  finding  that  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life which the FTT found would not be  able  to  be
    pursued on return to Nigeria.  I find no inconsistency in the  findings
    and reasons given by the FTT. In the event that there was an  error  of
    law regarding paragraph 276ADE, it would  not  be  material  given  the
    findings and conclusion under Ex 1.

9.   Accordingly I find no material error of law.  The  determination  shall
    stand and the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law.

The decision and reasons shall stand.

Appeal is allowed on immigration grounds under appendix FM.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 21.7.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee award.



Signed   Date 21.7.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

