
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/22995 /2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 August 2017                     |On 4 September 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                nelly chakota
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms K Tobin, of Counsel, instructed by Bespoke
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant challenges the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Hunter dismissing her appeal against the respondent's refusal
         on 5 June 2015 to grant her leave to remain on  the  basis  of  her
         private and family life. The appeal  was  dismissed  by  way  of  a
         determination promulgated on 12 December 2016 following hearings at
         Hatton Cross on 9 June and 10 October 2016.  The first hearing  was
         adjourned part heard to enable the appellant to submit  documentary
         evidence of her partner's ability to maintain her but this evidence
         did not materialise.


      2. The appellant is a Zambian  national  born  on  22  July  1974  who
         arrived here with a visit visa on 17 March 2002 and overstayed.  It
         was not until 30 December 2008 that she sought  to  regularize  her
         stay. Her application was refused on 10  May  2010.  The  appellant
         then waited until 18 May 2002 to make a  second  application  which
         was refused on 12 July 2013. After another delay, this time of some
         12 months, a further application was made on 7 July 2014, and on 27
         March 2015 the appellant responded to a section 120  notice  issued
         in March 2015. Further information was submitted to the  respondent
         on 10 April 2015.



      3. The grounds do not seek to challenge the judge's findings under the
         Immigration Rules but take issue  with  the  judge's  approach  and
         findings to the article 8 assessment outside the rules.  Permission
         to appeal was initially refused by Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Murray on 23 May 2017 but was granted upon renewal  by  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Plimmer on 29 June 2017 on the basis that the  judge
         arguably failed to address article 8.



      4. At the hearing on 24 August 2017,  I  heard  submissions  from  the
         parties.



      5. Ms Tobin submitted that in view of the respondent's concession that
         there had been an error in the judge's approach to article  8,  the
         issue was whether the error was material. She submitted that  there
         had not been a holistic assessment of article 8 outside  the  rules
         and that whereas the judge had looked at factors  individually,  he
         should have viewed them cumulatively and  then  decided  whether  a
         grant of discretionary leave was warranted. It was not possible  to
         speculate on what the outcome  would  have  been  had  the  correct
         approach been followed.



      6. In response, Mr Avery submitted that there was no  material  error.
         The judge had considered all the factors and properly  applied  the
         rules which  were  Parliament's  expression  of  where  the  public
         interest lay. Even if a full assessment had been carried  out,  the
         judge would have taken the rules as  his  starting  point  and  the
         outcome  would  have  been  the  same.  There  were  no  compelling
         circumstances at all. With respect to the delay  between  2008  and
         2010, the Secretary of State was considering the claim; there  were
         developments throughout that period.  The  case  had  no  redeeming
         features at all.


      7. Ms Tobin replied. She agreed that in most cases the rules addressed
         all the relevant factors but nevertheless judges had  to  undertake
         an assessment and one could not speculate on the  outcome  in  this
         case if that assessment had been properly undertaken. The inability
         to meet the requirements of the rules was not determinative and nor
         was a lack of insurmountable obstacles. The  judge  had  looked  at
         factors  in  isolation  when  he  should   have   considered   them
         holistically. The matter needed to be re-heard and  fresh  evidence
         would be called.



      8. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination  which
         I now give.



         Discussion and Conclusions




      9. No challenge is raised in respect of the findings of the  judge  on
         the Immigration Rules. The grounds and Ms Tobin's submissions focus
         on the failure to holistically consider all the factors put forward
         when assessing whether a grant of discretionary leave on article  8
         grounds was warranted. The  judge  is  criticized  for  looking  at
         factors  individually  and  then  discounting  them  as  not  being
         exceptional.


     10. The respondent conceded in her Rule  24  response  that  the  judge
         erred in his approach; however, she argues, and this  was  expanded
         upon by Mr Avery  in  his  submissions,  that  there  has  been  no
         material error as the circumstances of the case are  such  that  no
         other outcome could have been possible. Ms Tobin's response is that
         one cannot speculate as to what the outcome would have been as  the
         judge did not undertake a holistic assessment.



     11. The first issue I must, therefore, consider is  whether  the  judge
         had made an error of law. I concur with  the  submissions  of  both
         parties that he did in that he failed to consider all  the  matters
         cumulatively in order to decide  whether  discretionary  leave  was
         warranted on article 8 grounds.



     12. The next issue is whether this error is material. To put it another
         way, could any other outcome have been possible on the known  facts
         which are, largely, accepted. In order to  make  that  decision,  I
         must consider what those factors are.



     13. I would state at the outset that the grounds and the submissions at
         the hearing did not suggest that there were any matters, other than
         a contention of delay, that had not been considered when the  judge
         undertook his assessment under the rules. Nor was there any attempt
         to identify any other matters which might be said to  fall  outside
         the parameters of the  rules  and  which  could  only  be  assessed
         outside them. I, therefore, proceed on the basis that the  relevant
         factors are those which the appellant relied upon before the First-
         tier Tribunal Judge  and  which  were  considered  under  paragraph
         276ADE along with the issue of the delay in decision making. I  set
         out these matters in no particular order of priority.



     14. The appellant was born in July 1974 and is a  national  of  Zambia.
         She entered the UK as a visitor in March 2002. Her visa expired  in
         August 2002 and she then overstayed for over 6 years before  making
         an unsuccessful application for leave to remain  in  December  2008
         which was refused in May 2010. She has not returned to Zambia since
         her arrival.



     15. The appellant maintains that she was disadvantaged by the delay  in
         the decision- making process between the making of her  application
         on 30 December 2008 and its refusal on 10 May 2010.



     16. The appellant continued to overstay between May 2010 and  May  2012
         when she made a human rights application which was refused in  July
         2013.



     17. The appellant has a married sister in Essex with whom she initially
         lived when she came here. Her sister is  said  to  have  come  here
         shortly before the appellant arrived.



     18. The appellant has taken employment although it  would  appear  that
         this is without  permission  from  the  respondent.  She  has  also
         studied  and  obtained  qualifications  in  areas   such   as   the
         administration of medication.



     19. The appellant met her  partner,  RP  in  2003  and  they  commenced
         cohabitation in December 2009. They  have  not  married.  He  is  a
         British national born  in  January  1961  and  is  a  self-employed
         painter  and  decorator  with  two   adult   children   and   three
         grandchildren. He has a good relationship with them.  It  would  be
         possible to maintain contact by way of visits and modern  means  of
         communication. RP has lived here all his life. He has never been to
         Zambia but the judge found he would have some  familiarity  of  the
         customs and culture through the appellant and that  his  employment
         skills could be used outside the UK.  The  judge  also  found  that
         there was the possibility that he could sell his house and business
         to raise funds to help support himself and the appellant in Zambia.





     20. The appellant meets the eligibility and suitability requirements of
         the rules.



     21. The appellant's mother died in 1989 and her father left the  family
         when she was young. She lived without parental  support  since  the
         death of her mother.



     22. Whilst there would be difficulties in moving to Zambia,  the  judge
         considered that those difficulties did not reach the  threshold  of
         insurmountable obstacles.  Nor  would  there  be  very  significant
         obstacles for the appellant to reintegrate to Zambia given that she
         had lived there for the majority of her life. The judge also  found
         that she had acquired skills here which would assist  her  to  find
         employment.



     23. The relationship between the appellant and RP was formed at a  time
         when both parties were  aware  of  the  appellant's  status  as  an
         overstayer.



     24. These factors demonstrate that the appellant's case is one of  many
         similar cases that come before the Tribunal. Even taking account of
         the  issue  of  delay,  it  is  not  possible   that   a   holistic
         consideration of these  matters  would  have  led  to  a  different
         outcome.



     25. Significantly, given that  there  has  been  no  challenge  to  the
         decision under the rules, it must be accepted  that  the  appellant
         could not meet the insurmountable obstacles test. In that  context,
         it is difficult to see how the  claim  could  succeed  outside  the
         rules.



     26. Moreover,  the  single  'exceptional'  circumstance  the  judge  is
         criticized for failing to consider holistically with all the  other
         above mentioned factors, that of the 'delay' in decision making, is
         unparticularized. Firstly, I would state that the delay of some  16
         months is modest and, as pointed out by Mr Avery, there were  steps
         taken during that time by the respondent in that  further  evidence
         was sought and  obtained  from  the  appellant.  More  importantly,
         however, the appellant fails to explain how the  delay  has  placed
         her at a disadvantage particularly in the context of her own  delay
         of over six years in making an application to regularize  her  stay
         and then a further two years before another application was made.


     27. It is, therefore, plain that even if the judge had  considered  the
         alleged delay along with all  the  other  matters  relied  on,  his
         decision would have been  the  same.  This  is  a  case  where  the
         appellant has deliberately flouted the rules and the law, has taken
         unlawful employment and has stayed put  despite  having  no  lawful
         leave for the vast majority of her stay. She has no  children  here
         and in the absence of any challenge to the judge's conclusion  that
         there are  no  significant  obstacles  to  her  reintegration  into
         Zambian society, it is difficult to see why  discretion  should  be
         exercised in her case. She can be expected to  return  either  with
         her partner, whose circumstances were fully  examined,  or  he  can
         remain here and support any entry  clearance  application  she  may
         choose to make.  Her circumstances could not possibly result  in  a
         grant of discretionary leave and the judge's error to  holistically
         consider all relevant factors in his article 8  assessment  is  not
         material. It follows  that  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
         stands.



     28. Decision


     29. The First-tier Tribunal made no material  errors  of  law  and  the
         decision to dismiss the appeal stands.



     30. Anonymity



     31. I was not asked to make an anonymity order.

    Signed





       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 1 September 2017










