
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/22081/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in Birmingham (video link               |Determination Promulgated    |
|at Field House)                               |                             |
|On 22 May 2014                                |On 5 June 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

                              mr Venu Malineni

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Mahmood, Counsel,  Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of India and his date of birth is 25  August
    1987.

2.   On 11 December 2012 he made an application to vary his leave to  remain
    in the UK as a Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant.   His  application  was
    refused by the Secretary of State in a decision of 21 May 2013.

3.   The reasons given by the respondent for refusing  the  application  are
    that  the  appellant  submitted  false  documents  in  support  of  his
    application; namely, bank documents from HDFC Bank relating to sponsors
    Mr A Prabhakar and Mr V A R Kasinath.

4.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and his appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lloyd  in  a
    determination promulgated on 6 February 2014  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 27 January 2014.  The  appeal  was  dismissed  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  The appellant was granted permission to  appeal  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley in a decision of 1 April 2014.  Thus  the
    matter came before me.

The Hearing Before the First-Tier Tribunal ( "the FtT")

5.   In  support  of  his  application  the  appellant  submitted  a  letter
    addressed to the sponsor Mr V A R Kasinath  from  HDFC  Bank  dated  16
    November 2012. This letter shows a reference number used by the bank of
    162816112012/006 and it confirms Mr Kasinath's accounts.  The appellant
    with his application submitted an  affidavit  from  Mr  Kasinath  of  7
    December  2012,  a  copy  of  Mr  Kasinath's   passport   and   deposit
    confirmations relating to each account held by him.  The appellant also
    submitted with his application a letter to Mr Prabhakar from HDFC  Bank
    of 16 November 2012.  The letter shows a reference number used  by  the
    bank is 1628/16112012/007 and it confirms Mr Prabhakar's  account  with
    the  bank.  The  appellant  also  submitted  with  his  application  an
    affidavit of 1 December 2012 from Mr Prabhakar confirming  his  account
    with HDFC bank and his telephone number.

6.   At the hearing before the FtT the appellant  relied  on  the  documents
    that were submitted with his  application.  In  addition  he  submitted
    further  documents  including  his  witness  statement  and  a   second
    affidavit from Mr Prabhakar of 3 October 2013  in  which  he  indicates
    that he has not been contacted in relation to the application.  He also
    relied on a second letter from HDFC Bank to Mr Kasinath  of  1  October
    2013 confirming his bank accounts  and  the  bank  uses  the  reference
    1628/01102013/013.

7.   The respondent relied on two DVRs (document verification reports).  The
    first DVR is dated 22 April 2013.  The  report  refers  to  an  account
    number 16285930000174 in the name of Mr Prabhakar. It  refers  to  five
    accounts in the name of Mr V A R  Kasinath  and  the  reference  number
    given is 1625/161120112/006.  It refers to each of  the  five  accounts
    quoting account numbers. It discloses a current balance of Rs1.25 lakhs
    in FD and it goes on to describe the contact history indicating that on
    26 April 2013 the branch manager of the bank confirmed that the account
    numbers are invalid.

8.   The second DVR is dated 25 April. Mr A Prabhakar's  account  number  is
    identified as 16285930000174 and his balance  is  indicated  as  Rs  67
    lakhs in FD.  The contact history indicates that on 26 April  2013  the
    bank was contacted and the telephone number of Mr  Prabhakar  obtained.
    The author of the report goes on to state that the  account  holder  Mr
    Prabhaker stated that the appellant was not a family friend and he  was
    not sponsoring anyone.  The second report repeats the  contact  history
    in relation to Mr Kasinath in the first DVR.

9.   At the hearing  before  the  FtT  the  appellant  gave  evidence.   The
    grounds of appeal before the FtT argue that the decision maker had made
    an error in "jumping to conclusions".  It was further argued  that  the
    verification process was unclear and that the bank was able to  provide
    a letter explaining the existence of the sponsors.

10.  The Judge made the following findings:

         "18. I did not find the appellant credible and I do not accept  his
             evidence.  His answer to the complaint  about  Mr  Prabhakar's
             sponsorship was that he did  not  know  the  telephone  number
             given under 'contact history' in the DVR  and  the  respondent
             must have spoken to  the  wrong  Mr  Prabhakar  on  the  wrong
             number.


         19.  I do not accept this.   It  is  perfectly  possible  that  the
             sponsor had more than one telephone number but it appears from
             the DVR that the number called was supplied by the bank and so
             I think it is likely to be the correct number and in any event
             there was no evidence that the person called denied he was  Mr
             Prabhakar.  I do not find that the appellant has rebutted  the
             evidence in the DVR about this financial  sponsor.   The  only
             additional evidence was  another  updated  copy  of  the  bank
             balance  confirmation  certificate   which   gave   the   same
             information all over again but with a new date.  There was  no
             letter from the bank or evidence from the financial sponsor to
             take matters any further.


         20.  The position with Mr Kasinath's financial sponsorship was less
             clear as his accounts were described as incorrect or  invalid.
             The appellant's representative submitted that  the  respondent
             had used the wrong account, ending 0174 when  enquiring  about
             Kasinath but I think this misrepresented a misreading  of  the
             DVR-0174 related to the Prabhakar enquiry  to  the  same  bank
             recorded on the DVR.  I find  that  the  bank  was  given  the
             correct account numbers for Kasinath's accounts  -  they  were
             listed correctly in the DVR.  In any event, the bank  did  not
             confirm that Kasinath had those accounts nor the funds  and  I
             find that the paperwork was not genuine."

The Grounds Seeking Permission to Appeal and Oral Submissions

11.  The grounds seeking leave to appeal can be summarised.   The  reference
    number on the DVR relating to Mr Kasinath is incorrect.  The  reference
    used on the DVR of 22 April  2013  is  1625/16112012006;  however,  the
    letter of 16  November  2012  from  HDFC  Bank  shows  a  reference  of
    1628/16112012/006.

12.  It is also raised in the  grounds  that  the  FtT  did  not  take  into
    account the evidence from Mr Prabhakar namely the  affidavits.   It  is
    argued that the DVRs are undermined as a result of the  decision  maker
    having failed to produce written information to confirm the details  of
    the telephone conversations that took place.  The telephone number that
    the bank used to call Mr  Prabhakar's  was  not  his  number  which  is
    recorded on the affidavit of 1 December 2012.

13.  I heard oral submissions from  both  Mr  Mohammed  and  Mr  Smart.   Mr
    Mohammed expanded on the  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  and
    argued that the DVR was further  undermined  because  it  refers  to  a
    balance (Mr V A R Kasinath's account) of 1.25 lakh.  This is  an  error
    because the balance was in INR.  It was further argued that the DVRs do
    not refer to the customers' identification numbers and  the  respondent
    would need these in order to obtain the information from the bank.

14.  Mr Smart conceded that the FtT  made  an  error  of  law  in  seemingly
    having failed to  take  into  account  the  second  affidavit  from  Mr
    Prabhakar.  However,  the  error  was  not  material.   The  Judge  was
    entitled to attach weight to the DVRs which are not flawed.

Conclusions

15.  The ground of appeal relating to the discrepancy between the  reference
    number used by the bank in the letter of 16 November 2012  relating  to
    Mr Kasinath was not an issue that was raised before the FtT.  There was
    an issue before the FtT in relation to discrepancies in numbers and the
    Judge made findings about this at [20]. In any event, it is clear to me
    that  the  account  numbers  relating  to  Mr  Kasinath  are  correctly
    documented in the DVRs.  I note the reference in the  letter  from  the
    bank of 16 November 2012, but it is not clear what this  number  refers
    to.  I note that it begins with the same digits as the number  used  by
    the bank in the letter of the same date to Mr Prabhakar. The ground  is
    an attempt to reargue the appellant's case and it has no merit.

16.  There is no merit in the argument that the wrong telephone  number  was
    used by the bank in order to make  contact  with  Mr  Prabhakar.   This
    issue was satisfactorily dealt with by the FtT at  [18]  and  [19].  In
    relation to the issue of currency, this was not raised before the  FtT.
    It was raised for the first time by Mr Mahmood before me. In any event,
    if there is such an error in the DVR it is minor and not material.

17.  There was no protocol brought to my attention (or to the  attention  of
    the FtT) that insists on the respondent  seeking  written  confirmation
    from the bank relating to the telephone conversation with Mr Prabhakar.
      I  appreciate  that  the  DVRs  indicates  "written  confirmation  is
    required;" however, in my view the DVRs amount to written  confirmation
    of the respondent's case and the telephone conversations  are  detailed
    in them.  There is no persuasive argument before  me  that  there  have
    been any  "internal  breaches  of  procedure"  as  referred  to  in  Mr
    Mahmood's skeleton argument  of  22  May  2014  (because  there  is  no
    confirmation in writing of  the  claimed  contact  with  the  bank  and
    individuals by the  caseworker  acting  for  the  SSHD).  There  is  no
    evidence that the bank would not disclose information to UKBA without a
    customer identification number.

18.  The Judge did make  an  error  of  law  because  it  appears  that  the
    affidavits from Mr Prabhakar were not taken into account and I refer to
    [19] where the  Judge  notes  that  there  was  no  evidence  from  the
    financial sponsor.  The affidavit of 3 October 2013, at page 81 of  the
    appellant's bundle, from Mr Prabhakar, states  that  he  has  not  been
    contacted regarding the appellant.  The document was  produced  by  the
    appellant in order to prove that the evidence  he  submitted  with  his
    application was genuine and was thus admissible (section  85A(4)(c)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002). The issue is whether
    this error was material to the outcome and  in  my  view  it  was  not.
    There was no  persuasive  evidence  before  the  FtT  that  there  were
    material errors contained in the DVRs. The FtT was entitled  to  attach
    significant weight to them. In addition there was also the issue of the
    five bank accounts held by Mr Kasinath.  Having  heard  him  give  oral
    evidence, he found the appellant to be lacking in credibility and  that
    the documents produced by him in support of his  application  were  not
    genuine.  It is clear to me that had the Judge turned his attention  to
    the  affidavits  he  would  have  reached  the  same  conclusion.   The
    respondent's evidence was contained in the two DVRs and the  weight  to
    be attached to this evidence was a matter for the  FtT  which  properly
    identified the standard and burden of proof in relation to the properly
    identified Immigration Rule paragraph 322(1A).  There is no  suggestion
    that the FtT did not direct itself properly on the law.

19.  If I were to set aside the decision on the basis of the  error,  in  my
    view considering the evidence as a whole (including that  submitted  by
    the appellant under  Rule  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 (which amounts to two further affidavits  from  Mr
    Kasinath and Mr Prabhakar both dated 8 May 2014 and  a  further  letter
    from the HDFC Bank relating to Mr Kasinath's accounts of 7 May  2014)),
    I would reach the same conclusion as the FtT. The covering letter  from
    the solicitors enclosing the additional evidence indicates that  it  is
    "not materially different to the evidence provided  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  It purely elaborates the fact that the  investors  were  not
    contacted by any Home Office official and  that  the  funds  are  still
    available." Having considered the evidence, as a whole, the  respondent
    has discharged the burden of proof.  The Judge made an  error  of  law,
    but in the circumstances this error was not material.

20.  The appeal is dismissed and the decision of  the  FtT  to  dismiss  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules is upheld.






Signed            Joanna McWilliam                    Date 4 June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
