
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22520/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th June 2015                     |On 6th August 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                             MR NABIL Bourouisa
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lamb, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Algeria born on 15th October  1983.   The
    Appellant's immigration history was that on  24th  March  2010  he  had
    sought a certificate of approval which was issued.  Thereafter  on  7th
    April 2014 the Appellant sought a  derivative  residence  card  as  the
    primary  carer  of  a  British  citizen  resident  in  the  UK.    That
    application was refused by the Secretary of State on 13th May 2014.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal  came  before  Immigration  Judge
    Veloso sitting at Richmond Magistrates' Court on 30th January 2015.  In
    a decision promulgated on 11th February 2015 the Appellant's appeal was
    allowed under the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006.

 3. The Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    on 17th February 2015.  The grounds are curious.  They  state  that  at
    paragraph 28 of his determination the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  found
    that if the Appellant were required to leave the  United  Kingdom  this
    would impact on his son Adam born on 16th June 2009 to the extent  that
    he would not be able to reside in the  United  Kingdom.   In  the  same
    paragraph the judge concluded that the Appellant's wife had  stated  in
    her evidence that she would follow the Appellant to Algeria because the
    alternative would be for her to quit her job and go  on  benefits.   It
    was submitted by the Secretary of State that the judge had  misdirected
    himself by allowing the appeal under Regulation 15(4a)(c) as the  child
    would still be able to reside in the UK with his  mother  even  if  she
    were to make the decision to give up work and go on benefits.

 4. On 1st April 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox granted  permission  to
    appeal.  On 15th April 2015 the Appellant's legal representatives filed
    a response to the grounds of permission pursuant to Rule 24.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  This is, I note, an appeal by  the  Secretary  of
    State.   To  ensure  continuity  through  the  appellate  process   the
    Secretary of State is referred to  herein  as  the  Respondent  and  Mr
    Bourouisa as the Appellant.  The Appellant appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel Mr Lamb.  Mr Lamb is familiar with this matter having  appeared
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  The Secretary of State appears by  her
    Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Walker.

 6. This appeal is greatly assisted by the approach adopted by Mr Walker on
    behalf of the Secretary of State.  He acknowledges that the grounds are
    "a bit misguided".  He acknowledges that what is effectively  suggested
    in the Grounds of Appeal is tantamount to encouraging  the  Appellant's
    spouse to  give  up  full-time  employment  and  to  go  onto  benefits
    something which he further acknowledges  cannot  equate  to  government
    policy.  He acknowledges the findings of fact and that the  Appellant's
    spouse has been in long-term employment.

 7. Mr Lamb submits that there is no material error of  law  and  that  the
    grounds for appealing are putting them  even  at  their  highest  level
    unattractive and certainly disclose no errors of law.

The Law

 8.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

10. The First-tier Tribunal decision allowing the appeal was based  on  the
    Appellant's family circumstances namely that the Appellant's  wife  was
    working full-time and that his  son  Adam  was  5  years  old  and  had
    learning difficulties.  I am satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge carefully considered all the  available  evidence  and  that  her
    reasons for allowing  the  appeal  were  balanced  and  well  explained
    particularly within paragraphs 26 to 29 of her  decision.   Furthermore
    the grant of permission to appeal contends that the employment  of  the
    Appellant's wife would enable the Appellant to  bring  him  within  the
    Regulation.  I agree with the contention made by Mr Lamb in his Rule 24
    response that such an argument is perverse for  two  reasons.   Firstly
    the Appellant's wife has been working for seven years and this is not a
    matter when she suddenly found a job  deliberately  in  order  to  make
    herself unavailable to  care  for  Adam  and  secondly  it  is  totally
    unreasonable to expect her to give up her job and rely  on  benefit  in
    order to fit into the Secretary of State's argument that she could look
    after Adam.

11. In such circumstances I am completely satisfied that  the  grounds  for
    permission to appeal have no substance and that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge is both thorough and well-reasoned  and  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  determination  discloses  no  material
    error of law and the appeal of the Secretary of State  is  consequently
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State  is  dismissed  and  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

