
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA 22939 2013
      IA 22962 2013
     IA 22965 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 January 2014                            |On 28 January 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          abdul hadi shahul hameed
                                 tanya abdul
                            raje priya abdul hadi
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Hosein, Legal Representative Diamond Solicitors
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing an appeal by the present respondents, who I
    will call the claimants, against a decision of the respondent to  refuse
    them leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant or dependant  as
    the case may be.  The appellants are members of  the  same  family,  the
    first two appellants are married to each other and the  third  appellant
    is their daughter.

 2. Their application for  permission  to  extend  their  stay  was  refused
    because the Secretary of State found that they  had  not  satisfied  the
    requirements of the Rules relating  to  third  party  sponsorship.   The
    Rules relating to  leave  to  remain  as  an  entrepreneur  are  proving
    extremely complex and people are making mistakes.  A mistake was made in
    this case because a document proving third party funds  and  a  document
    proving that the other document was correctly signed was conflated on to
    the same document and this, according to the Secretary of State, did not
    meet the requirements of the Rules.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal disagreed but I am  wholly  unpersuaded  by  the
    reasons given in the determination or in submissions before me. The Rule
    appears at paragraph Rule 41 - SD(b) and its material parts require:

           (i) an original declaration from every  third  party  that  they
           have made the money available for the applicant to invest  in  a
           business in the United Kingdom, and

           (ii)  a  letter  from  a  legal  representative  confirming  the
           validity of signatures on each third party  declaration  subject
           to certain qualifications.

 4. I am quite satisfied that  the  rule  requires  the  production  of  two
    distinct documents, one from the third party showing that the  money  is
    available and one  from  a  legal  representative  confirming  that  the
    signature of the other document is valid.

 5. There is a suggestion in the skeleton argument that because  the  policy
    documents do not develop this point or do  not  make  it  clear  that  a
    second letter is required then somehow it is acceptable to do  give  all
    the information in one letter. Such a construction does  not  work.  The
    plain meaning of the Rule is that two documents are required. It is  not
    uncommon  in  recent  amendments  to  the  Immigration  Rules  to   find
    requirements that are strict and are more concerned  with  content  than
    form. Although this can sometimes appear to be infuriatingly  petty  the
    policy is clearly designed to facilitate fast decision making by  people
    who are required to check rather than to think. The rules are  published
    and applicants should do as they require.

 6. It follows therefore that on the face of things the  claimants  did  not
    meet the requirements of the  Rules  and  the  application  was  refused
    rightly and the appeal should not have been allowed at least not for the
    reason given.

 7. In this respect I entirely agree with the Secretary of State and I  find
    that the First-tier Tribunal erred materially.

 8. However matters do not end there.  The strict and potentially oppressive
    operation of the Rules is softened by paragraph 245AA of HC 395 which is
    sometimes called the evidential flexibility rule.  This makes  it  plain
    that in certain circumstances there  is  an  obligation  on  the  Border
    Agency, (as they are described in the version of the Rule before me), to
    consider documents produced with the application  and  to  seek  further
    documents in certain circumstances.  One of these is where a document is
    in the wrong format.  Mr Hosein says that the  documents  provided  here
    were  in  the  wrong  format.   The  Secretary  of  State  had  got  the
    information that  she  needed.   She  had  got  confirmation  about  the
    sponsorship and she got confirmation about the signature but she had  it
    on one document instead of on separate documents.

 9. Mr Hosein argued that in accordance  with  policy  and  Rule  245AA  the
    Secretary of State should have said to the claimants  something  to  the
    effect that they had given the necessary information  so  it  looked  as
    though the application ought to be allowed but the information  was  not
    in the right form  and  needed  to  be  put  in  that  form  before  the
    application could be decided.

10. Miss Everett argued that this is a wrong analysis. It is not  seeking  a
    document in the right format but it is seeking a  fresh  document  which
    plainly did not exist when the application was made.  I see the semantic
    attraction of that argument but I find  that  when  the  information  is
    provided in writing to the  Secretary  of  State  but  not  in  the  two
    documents required by the rules it is information provided in the  wrong
    format rather than not existing at all. I am persuaded that  this  is  a
    case where 245AA(b)(ii) applied and the Secretary of State  should  have
    made further enquiries.

11. The First-tier Tribunal anticipated this sort of argument and  purported
    to allow the  appeal  alternatively  under  the  evidential  flexibility
    policy, but, with respect the Tribunal erred in allowing the  appeal  on
    the alternative basis. If the appeal  was  to  be  allowed  because  the
    flexible evidence rule had not  been  considered  it  should  have  been
    allowed because the decision was not in accordance with the law  and  be
    sent back to the Secretary of State for a decision to be  made.   It  is
    quite plain that the rules  incorporate  a  discretionary  element.  The
    correctly formatted document will have to be inspected to see if, as  is
    expected to be the case, it satisfies the  requirements  of  the  rules.
    Such a decision is firstly a matter for the Secretary of  State  unless,
    unusually, only one outcome if  possible.  I  am  not  saying  that  the
    application ought to be allowed but that it should be decided again with
    regard to paragraph  245AA(b)(ii).  If  that  decision  is  against  the
    respondents then it too can be appealed to the Tribunal.

12. It follows therefore that I set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  I allow the Secretary of State's appeal to  the  extent
    that I rule that two documents are required by  the  Rules  and  to  the
    extent I find that the Secretary of State ought in the circumstances  to
    have applied 245AA(b)(ii) and give an opportunity to  the  claimants  to
    provide the information in the correct format and then make  a  decision
    on it.

13. I therefore substitutive a decision to that effect.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed to the extent that  the  existing
decisions are not in accordance with the law and the applications remain  to
be decided by the Secretary of State.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 22 January 2014                |



