

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/22953/2013
                                                               IA/22959/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 17 July 2014                               |On 18th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                       & UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                           SUSAN ABIODUN EMMANUEL
                       OLALUWA AYODEJI DAVID EMMANUEL
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr D Byrne, Advocate,   instructed by Drummond
Miller Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION and REASONS

   1. The appellants  are  nationals  of  Nigeria,  mother  and  son.   They
      appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  decisions   of   the
      Respondent on 3 June 2013 refusing them further leave  to  remain  and
      giving directions for  their  removal.   Judge  J  C  Grant-Hutchinson
      dismissed their appeals.  They now have permission to appeal  to  this
      Tribunal.

   2. In view of the decision we make, which we communicated at the hearing,
      we do not need to say a great deal  about  the  circumstances  of  the
      case.  The facts were the subject of exemplary treatment by the First-
      tier Tribunal judge.  She considered the claims  that  had  been  made
      based on article 3 of the ECHR and decided that she was not being told
      the truth.  She went on to consider the claim under  article  8.   She
      noted the evidence that the second appellant had not been in  any  one
      place in the United Kingdom for any considerable length of  time,  and
      she noted that the first appellant was on record as having praised the
      education system in Nigeria as essentially identical to that  in  this
      country.  She  decided  that  the  history  of  the  family,  and  the
      resilience and resourcefulness of the  second  appellant,  meant  that
      there was no good reason to say that it would be  disproportionate  to
      require the appellants to leave the United Kingdom.

   3. It is with considerable regret that we have  come  to  the  conclusion
      that her determination must be set aside for error of law.   Mr  Byrne
      raised three grounds.  The first was that the judge had failed to take
      into account the decision of this Tribunal in Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT
      197 (IAC) which, he submitted, had the effect that  a  child  with  an
      immigration history like the second appellant's should be  allowed  to
      remain in the United Kingdom  absent  compelling  circumstances.   The
      second ground was that there had been a brief window during which  the
      second appellant, had  he  made  a  proper  application  and  had  the
      application been decided within a few weeks, would have  been  granted
      leave.   The  third  ground  was   that   the   judge   had   assessed
      proportionality by reference to the  circumstances  on  return  rather
      than the undesirability of departure.  We think nothing of the  second
      and third grounds: the application was not made, and in any event  the
      suggestion that it would have been  decided  within  a  few  weeks  is
      wholly speculative and wholly implausible.  So far as concerns  ground
      three, the matters the judge took into account were clearly  relevant;
      the weight she gave to them was a matter for her.

   4. The first ground, however, has a little more  substance.   Azmi-Moayed
      is mentioned in the judge's determination: she implies that it is  not
      really relevant because in the present case there are individual facts
      and so it is not necessary to rely on any  vague  general  principles.
      However, the case purports to set out a summary of  the  jurisprudence
      on this area.  We are inclined to doubt whether its specific  guidance
      (if it gives any on its own authority) is of  very  much  value.   For
      example, the reference, which Mr Byrne pressed on us as relevant, to a
      child's having been in the United Kingdom for seven years,  may  be  a
      summary of an interpretation and application of  expired  guidance  in
      deportation cases: it is not otherwise easy to see why seven years was
      chosen rather than six or eight  (so  far  as  we  know  there  is  no
      research demonstrating the importance of the seventh anniversary of  a
      migratory event in the general development of  children).   What  that
      case does point out, however, is  that  there  are  decisions  of  the
      Tribunal and the courts in this area, and with respect it is far  from
      clear that the judge took them fully into  account.   Nevertheless  if
      that had been the only matter that caused us concern, we  should  have
      been very slow to displace the judge's decision.  This was a  case  in
      which, as so often happens, 'the best interests  of  the  child'  were
      invoked without any real consideration of proving  them  by  evidence.
      It does seem unlikely that a child's  moving  with  his  family  to  a
      different country even after seven years residence - for example if  a
      parent obtains a job in the USA - is to be regarded as contrary  to  a
      child's best interests; and it is therefore far  from  clear  why  the
      answer should be different if the removal is proposed by the Secretary
      of State.  Presumably  it  is  not  the  case  that  when  removal  is
      supported by the parents it is to be presumed to be in a child's  best
      interests but when proposed by the Secretary of State it  is  presumed
      not to be in the child's best interests; but some  of  the  decisions,
      read in the context of the general realities  of  family  life,  might
      suggest that.

   5. The judge does, however, appear to have made a mistake of fact that in
      the circumstances falls to be treated as an error of law.  In his  own
      statement the second appellant appears to be making an appeal for  his
      adult sister to be allowed to remain in the  United  Kingdom;  and  he
      appears also to be making reference to the need to continue to see his
      father.  The judge did not, so far as we are aware, make  any  enquiry
      as to the status of those two other family members.  She knew of their
      existence, and her findings of fact and  of  credibility  embrace  the
      father as well as the first appellant; but she did  not  consider  the
      possibility that they had outstanding applications or  appeals.   When
      we inquired we were told that indeed they have  appeals  pending  that
      have been sisted to await the outcome of the present appeal.

   6. It is obviously unsatisfactory that appeals of  members  of  the  same
      family, raising independent issues but  based  in  part  on  the  same
      facts, should be allowed to become or remain separated  in  this  way.
      Given the way in which the judge treated, and  needed  to  treat,  the
      evidence of the second appellant's parents' history, we are absolutely
      confident that she would have considered that all four appeals  needed
      to be heard together so that  an  assessment  could  be  made  of  the
      evidence  that  took  it  all  into  account  and  reached  the   same
      conclusions in relation to each of the four appeals.

   7. For that reason we have reached the  view  that  the  present  appeals
      should be allowed, the determination set aside,  and  that  we  should
      remit these appeals  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  determined
      afresh.   None  of  Judge  Grant-Hutchinson's  findings  of  fact  are
      preserved; but of course the evidence taken before her is evidence  in
      the appeals.   Given that all three paragraphs of First-tier  Tribunal
      rule 20 apply to the four appeals, we direct that the present  appeals
      be heard together with the appeals  of  Stephen  Emmanuel  and  Esther
      Aduragbeni Emmanuel by a judge of the First-tier Tribunal  other  than
      Judge J C Grant-Hutchinson.     Given the rifts  in  the  family,  the
      Tribunal must be prepared to make proper arrangements  to  obtain  the
      best  evidence  from  all  those  who  intend  to  give   it.    Those
      arrangements are to be made in a directions  hearing  at  the  Glasgow
      First-tier Tribunal hearing centre on 4 August 2014.


                                     C. M. G. Ockelton


                                17 July 2014


                                Vice President
