
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22315/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 October 2014                            |On 24 October 2014            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MR RAYMOND CLINT ARRINDELL
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Claimant: Mr G Lee ( Counsel instructed by First Law Partnership
Ltd)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law disclosed in the determination  before
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Rose) promulgated on 4 August 2014.  The
    Tribunal allowed the appeal against a decision refusing to  vary  leave
    to remain in the UK on human rights grounds under Article 8.

2.   For convenience I shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  follows;  to  the
    appellant in these proceedings as the Secretary  of  State  and  to  Mr
    Raymond Arrindell as "the claimant"; he  is  the  respondent  in  these
    proceedings.

3.   The claimant whose date of birth is 2 May 1972 and is a citizen  of  St
    Vincent and the Grenadines.

4.    The claimant entered the UK as a visitor on 29 October  2013  and  was
    granted six months leave to enter which expired on 29 April 2014.   His
    application for limited leave to remain as a spouse of a person present
    and  settled  in  the  UK  was  rejected  as  he  failed  to  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM.  The claimant did not qualify for leave to
    enter by virtue of E-LTRP2.1 because of his entry as a visitor.  Having
    failed the  mandatory  requirements  for  "eligibility"  he  could  not
    therefore benefit from the criteria set out in EX.1.  Private life  was
    considered under paragraph 276ADE and refused.

5.   In a determination the Tribunal confirmed that  the  claimant  did  not
    meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  having  regard  to
    eligibility  and  as  a  consequence  his  application  could  not   be
    considered under paragraph EX.1. It was  conceded  that  the  financial
    requirements  and  the  English   language   requirements   under   the
    immigration rules were met.

6.     The Tribunal went on to consider Article 8 ECHR having regard to  the
    step-by-step approach in Razgar and taking  into  consideration  public
    interest as provided in Sections 117A  and  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended)(2002 Act as amended).

7.   The Tribunal placed weight on the fact that the  sponsor  was  pregnant
    and due to give birth on 25 November 2014.  She has three children aged
    between 6 and 12 , who are British citizens and moving even temporarily
    from the UK would be disruptive to the three  children.   At  [25]  the
    Tribunal found it was not plausible  that  the  sponsor  would  not  be
    supported by her family and friends in the absence of the claimant, but
    that they could not provide the level of support expected from  him  as
    her husband.  It was found to be in the best interests of the sponsor's
    three children if the claimant  remained  living  with  them  as  their
    stepfather and that a period of eighteen weeks separation would not  be
    insignificant.  The relationships would be damaged in the  short  term.
    The Tribunal placed weight on the fact that the claimant was a non-visa
    national and did not require a visa to visit the UK .  Further  it  was
    accepted that he  did not appreciate that he would have  to  apply  for
    entry clearance as a spouse.  Relying on Sabir (Appendix FM - EX.1  not
    freestanding) Pakistan [2014] UKUT 63  (IAC)  the  Tribunal  considered
    whether there were exceptional circumstances  that  meant  the  refusal
    would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the individual  or
    their family.  The Tribunal also  had  regard  to  sub-Section  117B(1)
    (2002 Act as amended) as regards the public interest.

Grounds for Permission

7.   The Secretary of State maintained that the claimant could  not  satisfy
    the requirements under the  Immigration  Rules  at  Appendix  FM.   The
    Tribunal did not consider the guidance in  Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new
    Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC).  The Tribunal made  no
    case specific findings as to  arguably  goods  grounds  and  compelling
    circumstances, and proceeded to  undertake  a  freestanding  Article  8
    assessment.

Permission to Appeal

8.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Clayton granted permission on 27 August  2014
    in the following terms:

         "I find the judge considered the facts with  care,  concluding  the
         appellant's removal would have unjustifiably harsh consequences for
         him, his pregnant wife and children.  However, it is arguable  that
         he failed to consider the guidance laid down in Gulshan.   He  made
         no findings specific to the appellant  as  to  whether  there  were
         compelling circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the
         Rules.


         The judge arguably failed to make adequate findings as to  arguably
         good grounds and compelling circumstances  not  recognised  by  the
         Rules.  There was therefore an arguable error of law in undertaking
         a freestanding Article 8 assessment."

Error of law Hearing

Submissions

9.   Mr Kandola amplified the arguments made in the grounds of appeal.   The
    Tribunal failed to follow the law in Gulshan, there  was  no  reference
    made to the necessary steps.  The Tribunal's considerations  failed  to
    have regard to material matters.  In any event the evidence  would  not
    meet the Gulshan gateway.

10.  Mr Lee submitted that Gulshan was no longer  good  authority  following
    the Court of Appeal judgment in MM & Others v Secretary of State [2014]
    EWCA CIV 985, which was premised on a wide and detailed analysis of the
    new Immigration Rules and Article 8.  The comments re Gulshan were  not
    obiter but logical conclusions reached in the decision.  MM is  binding
    on the Upper Tribunal.

11.  There was no challenge to the Tribunal's conclusions  that  there  were
    unjustifiably harsh consequences for the claimant and his family.   The
    lack of support for the sponsor during  pregnancy  was  not  a  trivial
    factor.  Reliance was placed on Chikwamba and Hayat.  The appellant did
    not require a visa for entry to the UK and did not  know  that  he  was
    required to apply for leave to remain as a spouse, therefore  Chikwamba
    principles were applicable.

12.  Alternatively Mr Lee submitted  that  if  Gulshan  were  to  apply  the
    Tribunal had done all that was necessary save for actually  citing  the
    case. Even if it failed to explicitly  follow  the  Gulshan  test,  the
    Tribunal identified compelling and exceptional circumstances  and  took
    into account Section 117B as regards the public interest.

Discussion and Decision

14.  I have  decided  that  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination which shall stand.  The main issue raised in the  grounds
    of appeal is the failure on the part of the Tribunal to follow or  even
    refer to the recent Upper  Tribunal  determination  of  Gulshan  (cited
    above). The Tribunal correctly established that the claimant was unable
    to meet the mandatory  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  under
    Appendix FM on the grounds that he was not eligible. The Tribunal  then
    went on to make an assessment under Article 8 ECHR without reference to
    Gulshan guidance.  At this point I observe that  the  Court  of  Appeal
    judgment in MM & Others(cited above) was delivered on  11th  July  2014
    and at that date Gulshan was not  regarded as good law.  The First-tier
    determination was heard and promulgated after that date.

15.  I accept the submission made by Mr Lee  that  the  main  issue  in  the
    grounds of appeal is the Gulshan point.  There was no challenge is made
    to the actual finding or assessment that Article 8 was engaged nor  any
    challenge to the findings  that  the  removal  would  be  unjustifiably
    harsh.

16.  In that  context  I  am  not  satisfied  that  any  material  error  is
    disclosed in the determination.  Whether or not Gulshan is  or  is  not
    good law is currently under some debate by the Secretary of State.  The
    Secretary of State argues that the Gulshan gateway remains a  necessary
    step before considering Article 8.   The Tribunal did not make specific
    reference to Gulshan,  however,  I  am  satisfied  that  it  made  case
    specific findings as to factors in existence on which to conclude would
    result in "unjustifiably harsh consequences for him and  for  his  wife
    and stepchildren such that  the  refusal  of  his  application  is  not
    proportionate" [30].  In short I am satisfied that notwithstanding  any
    failure to apply Gulshan, the outcome would have been  the  same.   The
    determination is clear in terms of findings  of  fact  and  the  weight
    placed on issues of significance and the public interest has been fully
    taken into account. There were no economic or language concerns and the
    relationship was established while the claimant was in the UK lawfully.
    The failure to  meet  the  mandatory  requirements  of  the  rules  was
    mitigated by the fact that the claimant was a non visa national and  as
    a consequence his lack of knowledge as to  the  need  to  apply  for  a
    spousal visa was found to be reasonable in the  circumstances  [26-28].
    The sponsor's imminent confinement was of significance as was the  risk
    that the claimant would not be present for the birth [22  &  23].   The
    Tribunal also found that  the  best  interests  of  the  three  British
    citizen children lay in the claimant being present to look  after  them
    in the short and long term and that  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect them to relocate to St Vincent  and  the  Grenadines.  [26].  In
    terms  of  materiality  therefore  the  grounds  of  appeal   are   not
    sustainable.

Notice of Decision

I find no error of law in the determination.

The determination shall stand.


No anonymity order made nor requested







Signed                                  Date 22.10.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

The First-tier Tribunal made no order for a fee award.

Signed                                  Date 22.10.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black




