
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/22137/2012
     IA/22143/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16th August 2013                             |On 29th August 2013        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                               SAQUIB Ali khan
                               nausheen saquib
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's against  the decision  of  Judge  Shimmin  made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 23rd November 2012.

Background

 2. The Appellants are citizens of Pakistan and the second Appellant is the
    dependent wife of the first Appellant.

 3. The first Appellant was admitted to the UK to study on  25th  September
    2007.  His leave expired on 30th November 2008. On 12th  February  2009
    his application for leave to remain as a student  was  refused  but  on
    13th October 20010, following a successful appeal, he was granted leave
    to remain in the UK as a student until  16th  January  2012.   On  13th
    January 2012 he applied for leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 1 (Post-
    Study Work) Migrant.

 4. The Respondent refused the  application  on  the  basis  that  she  was
    satisfied that the Appellant had supplied false  bank  statements,  and
    that in his previous application for leave to remain he had submitted a
    postgraduate qualification in information  technology  from  a  college
    which  had  never  offered  a  legitimate  postgraduate  qualification.
    Furthermore, his award from Anglia  Ruskin  University  post-dated  his
    application.

 5. The judge considered  the  relevant  case  law  namely  NA  and  Others
    (Cambridge College of Learning) Pakistan [2009] UKAIT 00031,  TR  (CCOL
    cases) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 33, Khan and Tabia.. (CCOL  -  postgraduate
    certificates) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00249 and NO (Post  study  work  -
    award needed by date of application) Nigeria  [2009]  UKAIT  00054.  He
    concluded that the Appellant had practised clear deception with respect
    to the Cambridge College of Learning qualification,  and  he  preferred
    the evidence of the respondent with respect  to  the  bank  statements.
    Applying NO, he said that the Appellant could not meet the requirements
    of the Rules and he dismissed the appeal.

 6.   The  Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  in  lengthy  grounds,
    challenging the judge's decision and restating that he had  never  used
    any deception with respect to the Cambridge College of  Learning,   had
    established that the bank statements were genuine and had tried to keep
    the Home Office properly informed by sending  his  provisional  results
    before his visa expired.

 7. On 18th December 2012 Judge Nightingale stated that the original  judge
    had given sustainable  reasons  for  finding  that  the  Appellant  had
    previously submitted false documents.   However he noted that the judge
    had said that the Appellant bore the  burden  of  proof  and  therefore
    granted permission.

 8. On 28th December 2012 the Respondent served a reply  stating  that  the
    judge was entitled to conclude that the Appellant had  submitted  false
    documents on the evidence before him and the issue of where the  burden
    of proof lay was immaterial.

 9. This case was listed before another judge on 17th April 2013  when  the
    Appellant did not appear.  He sent his apologies and asked that written
    submissions be taken  into  account.   They  consisted  mainly  of  the
    original Grounds of Appeal and asked that the appeal be  allowed,  said
    that the Appellant that he had no intention to  deceive  and  that  his
    wife needs serious medical attention. His uncle  has  died  and  he  is
    disappointed, depressed and sad because he cannot join his family  when
    they need him. The hearing was adjourned on that occasion  because  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer on the occasion said that he had not had
    adequate time to prepare  and  the  outcome  of  the  appeal  might  be
    affected by the imminent decision by the Court of Appeal in the case of
    Khatel.

10. The Appellant was sent another hearing notice.  On 17th  July  2013  he
    wrote to the Tribunal and said that he was  not  expecting  the  notice
    because his hearing  had  been   completed.   On  18th  July  2013  the
    Tribunal wrote to the Appellant and examined that  his hearing had been
    adjourned to a future date and he was required to attend the  hearing.

11. The Appellant did not  appear  at  the  hearing,  but  I  am  satisfied
    therefore that he has received the Notice of  Hearing  and  has  chosen
    not to attend.

12.  Mrs Pettersen submitted that the appeal ought to be dismissed.

Findings and Conclusions

13. In a thorough and well reasoned determination the  judge  set  out  the
    relevant case law which he properly  applied  and  reached  conclusions
    open to him.  He said that he  did  not  find  it  plausible  that  the
    Appellant did not know the history of the Cambridge College of Learning
    and that he was unaware that the postgraduate diploma was false because
    the Appellant could not have studied for the  diploma  there  and  must
    have known that the certificate was fraudulent.  This constituted clear
    deception which he failed to declare in the application.

14. The judge noted that the Appellant had supplied a bank  statement  from
    the National Bank of Pakistan. He considered the letter from  the  bank
    to the Appellant's representatives saying that they agreed  with  their
    letter certifying that the Appellant had held a  current  account  with
    them since 9th January 1999.   However  the  judge  observed  that  the
    letter does not mention the date of the original letter  and  does  not
    show the  particular  employee's  email.  He  considered  the  document
    verification report carried out by the Respondent which concluded  that
    the statement was not genuine together  with  an  email  from  a  named
    employee of the bank stating that the account  was  fake.  He  observed
    that it would have been open to the Appellant to challenge  that  email
    by sending it to the bank but had elected not to do so.

15. The judge unfortunately included a standard paragraph stating that  the
    standard of proof was the balance of probabilities and  the  burden  of
    proof was on the  Appellant.   The  error  in  including  the  standard
    paragraph is however immaterial. Firstly, nothing in the  determination
    shows that the judge wrongly misapplied the burden in his reasoning and
    secondly, the evidence is clearly capable of showing that the burden of
    proof on the Respondent has been discharged.

16. With respect to the NO point, the Court of Appeal has recently held  in
    the case of SSHD v Raju and Others [2013] EWCA Civ 754 that  the  Upper
    Tribunal decision in Khatel was wrongly decided and that the  operative
    dater for the accumulation of points is the date of application and not
    the date of decision.

17. Nothing in the Appellant's  grounds,  which  amount  to  a  generalised
    disagreement with the decision,  establishes  an  error  of  law.   The
    Appellant had an opportunity to come to court and argue  his  case  and
    decided not to do so.

18. The reference to the Appellant's wife's medical condition may be  taken
    to a claim that he ought to be allowed to  remain  here  on  Article  8
    grounds although that has  not  been  specifically  pleaded.  There  is
    however no medical evidence as to his wife's illness and no  basis  for
    finding that there would be any breach of his Article 8 rights.   There
    is no evidence that he enjoyed family life in the UK save with his wife
    who would  be  removed  with  him.   Any  private  life  which  he  has
    established was during a period when he knew that his stay  here  would
    be temporary.  All his ties appear to be with Pakistan.

Decision

19. The judge did not err in law and his decision  stands.  The  appeal  is
    dismissed.e He



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


