
[pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |Appeal Numbers: IA/22408/2013             |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |IA/22410/2013                             |
|                                 |IA/22414/2013                             |
|                                 |IA/40183/2013                             |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18 December 2013                             |On 6 February 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                     SH
                                     DA
                                SDA (A MINOR)
                                DNA (A MINOR)

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:    Ms S Bassiri-Dezfouli instructed by One Temple Avenue
Chambers
For the Respondent: Mr K Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                             Anonymity Direction

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
these appellants have  been granted anonymity throughout  these  proceedings
and after their conclusion, absent any order to the contrary  by  the  Upper
Tribunal or any other Court seised of relevant  proceedings.  No  report  of
these proceedings, in  whatever  form,  either  during  the  proceedings  or
thereafter, shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellants  or  their
family members. Failure to comply with this order could lead to  a  contempt
of court.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants, who are citizens of Sri Lanka, appeal  with  permission
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Alis  who  dismissed
    their appeals against  the  refusal  of  the  respondent  to  vary  the
    principal appellant's leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrant and his dependent wife and children,  under  the
    Points-Based System.  The second appellant  is  the  first  appellant's
    wife; the third and fourth appellants  are  his  minor  children.   All
    their applications fell with that of the principal appellant.

 2. The respondent also  set  removal  directions  under  s.47  Immigration
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006, as amended by the Crime and Courts Act
    2013.  The First-tier Tribunal found that the notices given were lawful
    under the amended s.47.

 3. The reason why the application to vary failed was  that  the  principal
    applicant's documents  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    245DD(b) of the Immigration Rules  HC  395  (as  amended)  and  certain
    documents,  submitted  after  the  application,  did  not  fall  within
    paragraph 245AA(b), which is an exhaustive list of the circumstances in
    which late-produced documents can be accepted.  Paragraph  245AA(b)  is
    as follows:

         245AA. Documents not submitted with applications

         (a) Where Part 6A or any appendices referred to in  Part  6A  state
         that specified documents must  be  provided,  the  Entry  Clearance
         Officer, Immigration Officer or the Secretary of  State  will  only
         consider documents that have been submitted with  the  application,
         and will only consider documents submitted  after  the  application
         where they are submitted in accordance with subparagraph (b).
         (b) If the applicant has submitted specified documents in which:
             (i) Some of the documents in a sequence have been omitted (for
             example, if one bank statement from a series is missing);
             (ii) A document is in the wrong  format  (for  example,  if  a
             letter is not on letterhead paper as specified); or
             (iii) A document is a copy and not an original document; or
             (iv)  A  document  does  not  contain  all  of  the  specified
             information;
         the Entry Clearance Officer, Immigration Officer or  the  Secretary
         of State  may  contact  the  applicant  or  his  representative  in
         writing, and request the correct documents. The requested documents
         must be received at the address specified in the request  within  7
         working days of the date of the request."

 4. Paragraph 245DD(b) requires the applicant  to  show  a  minimum  of  75
    points under paragraphs 35-53 of Appendix A. In this case, points  were
    not awarded for being a director of a United Kingdom  company,  because
    the appellant  failed  to  meet  paragraph  41SD(e)(v)  and  provide  a
    printout of a current appointment report from Companies House, dated no
    earlier than three months before the date of the  application,  listing
    him as a director of  the  company  and  confirming  the  date  of  his
    application.  There were additional requirements which are not relevant
    to this appeal.

 5. In this case,  the  appellants'  solicitors'  letter  accompanying  the
    application mentioned the correct document but the document  which  was
    enclosed (if any) was not the document listed. The principal  appellant
    claimed that a 'company summary' had been  produced  instead  and  that
    discretion ought to have been exercised in his favour.

 6. The position was not corrected by the principal appellant promptly  and
    when the respondent asked for the document, four months later, it  took
    him a month to produce a later document which could not, in any  event,
    have been produced at the date of application.

 7. On that basis, the First-tier Tribunal  dismissed  the  appeal,  having
    heard oral  evidence  from  the  principal  appellant.   There  was  no
    suggestion before the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  Article  8  ECHR  or
    Appendix FM to the Rules could have assisted him. A  partial  anonymity
    direction was made in relation to  the  minor  appellants:   I  do  not
    consider that sufficient and I have of my own motion extended it to all
    four appellants.

Grounds of appeal

 8. The appellants submitted that the document omitted was part of a series
    and that its omission was a genuine  mistake.   They  argued  that  the
    respondent ought to have known that, and could easily have checked  the
    position herself on the Companies  Registry  online.   They  relied  on
    Rodriguez (Flexibility policy) [2013] UKUT 00042 (IAC).

 9. Designated Judge Zucker granted permission on the basis that  such  was
    arguable.



Upper Tribunal hearing

10. Before me, Mr Norton relied on the refusal letter and in  addition,  on
    the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Nasim & Ors (Raju: reasons not to
    follow?) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 610 (IAC), which deals with the  evidence
    regarding the date of conferring an award, which also must occur before
    the date of application.  He relied in particular on [38]-[46] and [51]
    in that determination.  The respondent had been entitled to  apply  the
    Rules as they stood at the date of decision  and  there  was  no  'near
    miss' principle.  He  expressed  some  sympathy  with  the  appellants'
    position but the rule was simply not met.

11. For the appellants,  Ms  Bassiri-Dezfouli  stated  that  the  principal
    appellant had now found the missing company summary on his laptop which
    did predate the application.  She accepted that it was not the document
    which the Rules required and that the Rules were plain.  She relied  on
    Rodriguez and on Nasim at [50]-[52].  She accepted that the grounds  of
    appeal did not challenge the finding of fact that the correct  document
    was not sent, but she asked me to look at a letter dated 19 May 2011 in
    the appellants' bundle indicating that applicants  would  be  contacted
    where mandatory evidence was missing.  If the respondent had  requested
    the evidence promptly,  the  application  would  have  succeeded.   She
    referred me to submissions in her rule 24 reply regarding the Rodriguez
    decision.

12. I reserved my determination, which I now give.   The problem for  these
    appellants is that they have never, at any time,  produced  a  document
    which meets the requirements of the Rules.  The company  summary  which
    is said to have been enclosed with the original application is  not  an
    appointment report from Companies House, printed out  in  the  required
    period of three months before the application, and the appellants  have
    still been unable to produce such  a  document.   It  follows  that  no
    matter how much flexibility as to time is applied, they  have  not  met
    the requirements of the Rules.

13. This appeal therefore simply cannot succeed. There is no material error
    of law in the First-tier Tribunal determination and I uphold it.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.

Date                       Signed
                                    Judith Gleeson
                                    Judge of the Upper Tribunal


