
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: Ia/22185/2012
     IA/22187/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 March 2013                               |On 5 April 2013              |
|Prepared on 22 March 2013                     |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG



                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                MR ROBIUL ALI HOSEN SOHIDY (FIRST APPELLANT)
                     MRS NUSRAT ISLAM (SECOND APPELLANT)

                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant (Secretary of State):  Mr J McGirr, Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr I Hossain, Legal Representative, of London Law
Associates

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's  appeal  against  a  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio.  For ease of reference, Mr  Sohidy  and
    Mrs Islam, who were the original appellants, will  be  referred  to  as
    "the claimants" and the  Secretary  of  State,  who  was  the  original
    respondent, will be referred to as "the Secretary of State."

 2. The claimants are both citizens of Bangladesh.  The first claimant  was
    born on 15 October 1975.  The second claimant, who  is  his  wife,  was
    born on 6 April 1985.

 3. The claimants appealed against the Secretary of State's decision  dated
    26 September 2012 to refuse the first claimant leave  to  remain  as  a
    Tier 1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant;  the  application  of  the  second
    claimant to be allowed to remain as his dependant was refused  in  line
    with the refusal of the first claimant.

 4. The claimants' appeal was heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Adio,
    sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  3  December  2012.   In  a  determination
    promulgated on 19 December 2012,  Judge  Adio  allowed  the  claimants'
    appeals under the Immigration Rules.

 5. The Secretary  of  State  has  appealed  against  this  decision.   The
    substantive ground of appeal was that at the time of  the  application,
    the first claimant had not been awarded  the  qualification  which  was
    required in order for him to qualify for the necessary points under the
    points-based system.  Judge Adio had considered that the relevant  date
    was the date of decision.  It was  also  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State that the first claimant appeared to have no right of
    appeal, although it was accepted within the grounds that the writer  of
    the grounds did not have the file and had not been able to  review  the
    documents fully.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan on
    8 January 2013.

The Hearing

 7. Before me, on behalf of the Secretary of  State,  Mr  McGirr  submitted
    that the first claimant's initial leave expired on  26  December  2011.
    Before that leave expired, the claimants had made  another  application
    which the First-tier Tribunal  had  found  to  have  been  made  on  24
    December 2011 (although the Secretary of State's records show  this  as
    having been received  on  27  December  2011).   This  application  was
    refused on 18 January 2012; it was found to have been  invalid  because
    the correct payment had not been made.  Mr McGirr accepted  that  there
    was an issue between the parties with regard  to  this  aspect  of  the
    appeal.

 8. The present application was made on 29 March 2012, which was a  Tier  1
    application.  This was refused on 26 September 2012.

 9. If the application made on 24 December 2011 had been  validly  refused,
    it would seem that at the time of making the current  application,  the
    first appellant had no extent leave and no outstanding application (and
    therefore did not have Section 3C leave).

10. However, Mr McGirr accepted, having discussed  this  with  Mr  Hossain,
    representing the claimants, that it was the claimants' case that  after
    the Tier 4 application had been returned, it had been resubmitted.

11. On behalf of the claimants,  Mr  Hossain  submitted  that  the  earlier
    application was still pending at the time when the present  application
    was made.  Although it had been sent back by the Secretary of State  on
    18 January 2012 (and received by the claimants on 21 January 2012)  the
    claimants relied on  the  tribunal  decision  in  Basnet  (Validity  of
    Application - Respondent) [2012] UKUT 00113.  The head  note  reads  as
    follows:

         "1.   If  the  respondent  asserts  that  an  application  was  not
             accompanied by a fee, and so was not valid, the respondent has
             the onus of proof.  ..."

12. I note that at paragraph 33 of Basnet, the Tribunal found that

         "The absence of [appropriate measures to process a fee or otherwise
         communicate promptly with an applicant to afford him an opportunity
         of correcting any mistake] may well result in  a  determination  of
         the consideration of the application as being unfair and  therefore
         not in accordance with the law."

13. In this case, Mr Hossain submitted that there was  no  evidence  before
    the Tribunal that the fee submitted was in fact incorrect.   On  behalf
    of the Secretary of State, Mr McGirr accepted  that  that  was  a  fair
    statement of the position.

14. Thereafter, in the first week of June  2012,  the  first  claimant  had
    submitted a letter of  28  May  2012  from  the  University  of  Wales,
    informing the Secretary of State that he had been  awarded  a  master's
    degree.  It is accepted in the refusal letter that "the date  of  award
    of your eligible qualification is 30 May 2012."

15. The claimants relied on the decision of this Tribunal in Prakash Khatel
    and Others v SSHD (s85A; Effect of Continuing Application) [2013]  UKUT
    00044.

16. It is the Secretary of State's case that Khatel  was  wrongly  decided.
    Permission to appeal to the  Court  of  Appeal  has  subsequently  been
    granted.

Discussion

17. In my judgment, these claimants do have  a  right  of  appeal,  as  the
    Secretary of State has not put evidence  before  the  Tribunal  showing
    that at the time these applications were made, they did not have  valid
    leave to remain.  As made clear in Basnet, the burden of proof in  this
    regard is on the Secretary of State, and it has  been  accepted  by  Mr
    McGirr that no evidence has been put before the Tribunal that  the  fee
    submitted was incorrect.

18. Accordingly, I now consider the claimants' appeal on the  merits.   The
    chronology  appears  straightforward.   This  is  a  case   where   the
    appropriate qualification was awarded  after  the  date  on  which  the
    application was made, but before the date of decision.   This  Tribunal
    has decided, in Khatel, that the relevant date is the date of decision.
     While it is appreciated that the Secretary  of  State  maintains  this
    decision was wrong, unless and until this decision is overturned  by  a
    higher court, it represents the current state of the law and both sides
    are required to abide by it.  It follows that Judge Adio was  right  to
    allow the  claimants'  appeals,  and  that  accordingly  there  was  no
    material error of law in his determination.

19. The Secretary of State's appeal must accordingly be dismissed.

Decision

The Secretary  of  State's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  Judge  Adio,
allowing the claimants' appeals, is dismissed.   Judge  Adio's  decision  is
affirmed.






Signed:                                 Date: 4 April 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig
