
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/22490/2015
     IA/22494/2015
     IA/22497/2015
     IA/22502/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                   |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 9th August 2016                              |On 15th September 2016     |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                    Mmerc
                                                             First Appellant
                                     na
                                                            Second Appellant
                                     rnc
                                                             Third Appellant
                                     rc
                                                            Fourth Appellant
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr T Shah, Solicitor of Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the avoidance of confusion and to be consistent, I  shall
    continue to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

 2. On 23rd  May  2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Shimmin  gave
    permission to the respondent to appeal against the decision of Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Ennals in which he allowed the appeal on  human
    rights grounds against the decisions of the respondent to refuse  leave
    to remain applying the provisions of Appendix FM and  paragraph  276ADE
    of the Immigration Rules.

 3. Permission was granted on the basis that it was arguable that the judge
    failed to give proper consideration to the appeal under the Immigration
    Rules and that the first and second appellants had been overstayers for
    several years so little weight had to be given to  their  private  life
    claim.  It was also considered arguable that the  judge's  approach  to
    the oldest child's medical needs as a  sufferer  from  autism  did  not
    properly consider the cost of her care and  treatment  in  UK  and  the
    public interest.

Submissions

 4. Mr Bates confirmed that the respondent relied upon the grounds.   These
    contend that the  judge  made  no  specific  findings  in  relation  to
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules although the appeal  appeared
    to have been allowed on the basis of private life.  In that respect the
    judge had failed  to  consider  that  the  children  were  not  British
    citizens and had not been living in the UK for seven years, the parents
    being significant overstayers.  It was also alleged that the judge  had
    failed to give reasons for concluding that the best  interests  of  the
    oldest child displaced the public interest.  This was in  circumstances
    where the judge had noted that there was care for autistic children  in
    Bangladesh, even if not to the same standard as in the United  Kingdom.
    The judge also failed to take into consideration the cost to the public
    of the child's care as part of the balancing exercise on the basis  set
    out in AE (Algeria) [2014] EWCA Civ 653.

 5. Mr Bates emphasised that the judge  should  have  considered  that  the
    failure of the appellants to meet the Rules was relevant  also  bearing
    in mind the judge's conclusion in paragraph 11 that the first appellant
    could not seriously have thought that he had been granted leave at  any
    point in time.

 6.  Mr  Bates  also  sought  to  identify  inconsistencies   between   the
    conclusions of the judge and the public interest criteria  set  out  in
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  In particular, the judge had found  that
    there were no very  significant  obstacles  to  the  first  and  second
    appellants' integration into Bangladesh (paragraph  17)  and  that  the
    family would not be without the means to  support  themselves  in  that
    country and there would be no significant interference with family life
    (paragraphs 18 and 19). He  also  found  that,  apart  from  the  third
    appellant's autism, there would be no circumstances that would lead  to
    a grant of leave outside the Rules. These matters  all  suggested  that
    the judge should have dismissed the appeal.

 7. Mr Bates also contended that the judge was wrong to find that the first
    appellant's ability to speak English was more than a neutral factor  as
    was made clear by the Court of Appeal in Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ  803.



 8. Mr Shah accepted that the decision did not show that the judge had made
    any reference to relevant case law but argued that the judge's findings
    were adequately reasoned  showing  full  consideration  of  the  public
    interest bearing in mind the poor immigration history of the first  and
    second appellants.  He further conceded that neither child was  in  the
    seven year category which might have  brought  into  operation  Section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act on the basis referred to by the Court of Appeal
    in MA (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705.   However,  he  thought  that
    paragraph 23 of  the  decision  showed  that  the  judge  had  properly
    considered the third appellant's best interests.

Error on a Point of Law

 9. I now give my reasons for concluding that the  decision  of  the  judge
    shows errors on points of law such that it should be set aside and  re-
    made before the First-tier Tribunal.

10. The decision shows that, apart  from  his  consideration  of  the  best
    interests of the third appellant, the judge reached adverse conclusions
    about family and private life issues both under the  Immigration  Rules
    and outside them.  Paragraph 23 of the decision summarises his thinking
    on the best interest issue where he states:

         "I have no doubt that her best interests are to remain  in  the  UK
         with access to the therapeutic and educational services that she is
         currently receiving.  It is doubtful that this  level  of  services
         would be available in Bangladesh, even if they could  be  afforded.
         I have no evidence to suggest that the appellants would actually be
         in a position to pay for those services that are available.  I also
         take  into  account  the  disruption  to  her  life  of  moving  to
         Bangladesh and change from an English speaking environment  outside
         the home, to one  based  on  Bengali,  as  well  as  the  potential
         difficulties she and her family would face due to social  attitudes
         to autism."

11. Some of the above reasoning might have been relevant to  the  situation
    for a child who had been in the United Kingdom for seven years  and  to
    whom Section 117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act  might  apply.  That  was  the
    situation considered by the Court of Appeal  in  MA  (Pakistan)  for  a
    child with autism. However, The Court  of  Appeal  concluded  that  the
    position for that child might have been  different  without  the  seven
    year residence qualification  which  could  be  "a  significant  factor
    pointing the other way".

12. In the same paragraph the judge also shows  that  he  believed  it  was
    relevant  that  the  level  of  therapeutic  and  educational  services
    available in Bangladesh  would  be  at  a  lower  level  and  that  the
    appellants would not, in his conclusion, be in a position  to  pay  for
    those services.  The test is not, in that situation, whether or not the
    services available reach those in the United Kingdom or that  they  are
    affordable.  Further, the judge did not consider the economic effect on
    public finance of letting the child remain as required by the Court  of
    Appeal in AE (Algeria) [2014] EWCA Civ 653.  Further, the judge was  in
    error in considering that the English speaking  ability  of  the  first
    appellant would count in favour of  the  appellants  in  the  balancing
    exercise when Rhuppiah makes it clear that it is no more than a neutral
    factor.

13. Having regard to the need for human  rights  issues  to  be  considered
    again with evidence to the date of  hearing,  I  conclude  that  it  is
    appropriate for the matter to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for hearing afresh.  This is in line with the Practice Statement by the
    Senior President of Tribunals  of  25th  September  2012  at  paragraph
    7.2(b).

DIRECTIONS

14. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.

15. The hearing will take place at the Manchester Hearing Centre on a  date
    to be specified by the Resident Judge.

16. A Bengali interpreter will be required for the hearing.

17. The appellants' representatives should submit a consolidated bundle  of
    documents and evidence to be presented at least seven days  before  the
    remitted hearing date.

18. The time estimate for the hearing is two hours.

Anonymity

As this  appeal  involves  the  interests  of  young  children  I  make  the
following anonymity direction:

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant.  This direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt              15th September 2016

