
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22104/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 29 September 2014                       |On 27 October 2014             |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                         MRS Elizabeth Afia Frimpong

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, a Home Office Presenting Officer


          DECISION AND REASONS FOR FINDING NO MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

1.   The present appeal is by the respondent but I will  continue  to  refer
    to the parties by their designation at the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Ghana who was born on 25 September 1989.

3.   On 19 February 2013 the appellant applied for a residence card  as  the
    spouse of a Dutch  national,  Seth  Acheampong.   The  application  was
    refused by the respondent who decided that she could not  be  satisfied
    that the appellant had entered a customary marriage under Ghanaian  law
    as required by the legislation in that country.  On 13 March  2014  the
    appellant applied for a  residence  card  for  a  second  time  but  an
    official considered that application also to be unfounded.

4.   The appellant appealed that refusal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  a
    notice of appeal dated 19 May 2014.

5.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Mrs M Gurung-Thapa ("the Immigration  Judge")
    decided that the  appellant  had  satisfied  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the  2006
    Regulations") as a member of Mr Acheampong's household  who  was  in  a
    durable relationship with  him.   Accordingly,  the  Immigration  Judge
    allowed the appeal.

Proceedings Before the Upper Tribunal

6.   The respondent applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  Her grounds were  served
    on 4 August 2014.  Those grounds allege that there was  an  absence  of
    evidence as to the validity of the proxy marriage entered into  between
    the appellant and Mr Acheampong.

7.   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  d'Imecourt  gave  permission  to  the
    respondent to appeal to the Upper Tribunal because it appeared that the
    Immigration Judge may have misdirected  herself  on  the  law  and,  in
    particular, the case of TA and Others (Kareem and Others) Ghana  [2014]
    UKUT 00316 (IAC).  On 19 August standard directions were issued.  On 27
    August 2014 (according to the fax header) the  appellant  responded  to
    the respondent's grounds of  appeal.   The  response  states  that  the
    marriage certificate had been issued by a competent authority according
    to the laws of Ghana and the Immigration Judge had correctly  concluded
    that  the  appellant   was   lawfully   married   to   Mr   Acheampong.
    Subsequently, on 15  September  2014  the  appellant's  representatives
    wrote to the  Upper  Tribunal  informing  it  that  they  were  not  in
    possession  of  sufficient  funds  to  appear  at  the  hearing.  Those
    representatives asked that the  appeal  be  determined  on  the  papers
    without an oral hearing.  However, that application was rejected by the
    Tribunal.  The appellant's representatives were therefore  informed  on
    19 September 2014 that the case  remained  in  the  list  for  an  oral
    hearing on Monday 29 September 2014 and that if the appellant failed to
    attend the Tribunal the appeal would be determined having regard to the
    written submissions made in accordance with the  directions  which  had
    been issued.

8.   At the hearing, not unexpectedly, the appellant failed  to  attend  but
    the respondent attended through Mr Diwncyz, a  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer.  He relied on the case law referred to in  the  grounds  which
    comprehensively set out the respondent's position and did not need  any
    expansion upon.  Accordingly I reserved my decision as to whether there
    was a material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



Discussion

9.   The case of TA and Others (Kareem explained) Ghana  [2014]  UKUT  00316
    (IAC)  found  that  the  question  of  whether  there  was  a   marital
    relationship for the purposes of the 2006 Regulations  must  always  be
    examined in accordance with the laws of the member state from which the
    union citizen obtains nationality.  In this  case  that  would  be  the
    Netherlands.

10.  The respondent contends that the Immigration Judge  failed  to  make  a
    proper assessment of whether the appellant satisfied the marriage  laws
    of Mr Acheampong's country of nationality, i.e. the  Netherlands.   The
    appellant contends in response that the customary marriage between  the
    appellant and Mr Acheampong was recognised under  the  laws  of  Ghana.
    Secondly, because the respondent had not  raised  any  doubt  over  the
    appellant's marriage certificate, there was no need to  show  that  the
    marriage between the  appellant  and  the  qualified  person  (i.e.  Mr
    Acheampong) had been contracted according to the national  law  of  his
    EEA country (i.e. the  Netherlands).   It  was  submitted  in  all  the
    circumstances that adequate documentary evidence had been supplied  and
    the Immigration Judge should have decided the case in  the  appellant's
    favour.  Therefore, the Immigration Judge's decision was sustainable.

11.  The first issue is whether the requirements of JA and  Others  (Kareem)
    [2014] UKUT 00024 were satisfied.  The requirements are  that  the  EEA
    national must show that his marriage to the  appellant  was  recognised
    according to the laws of his own EEA country (the Netherlands).

12.  With respect, the Immigration Judge does not appear  to  have  grappled
    with  this  point  under  the  section  of  his  determination   headed
    "consideration and reasons".  Instead, he analysed the requirements  of
    Ghanaian national law, for example in paragraph 31.  As the  respondent
    points out in  her  grounds  of  appeal,  it  was  incumbent  upon  the
    Immigration Judge to make clear findings on validity of  that  marriage
    under EEA law.  This is a material error of law so  that  part  of  the
    determination has to be set aside.

13.  The remainder of the determination, and in  particular  the  conclusion
    that the appellant is in  a  durable  relationship  with  the  sponsor,
    should stands.  The respondent suggests  in  her  grounds  that  it  is
    appropriate  to  "remit  for  the  exercise  of  the  discretion  under
    Regulation 17(4)".  Presumably this is a reference to  paragraph  17(4)
    of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006.   It  is
    open to the respondent to reconsider the application at any  stage  and
    exercise her discretion in the appellant's favour. However  it  is  not
    appropriate for the Upper Tribunal to force her to do so or  to  "remit
    the matter" for that purpose.

14.  The appropriate remedy  before  this  Tribunal  is  to  find  that  the
    requirements of the EEA Regulations were  not  met  and  therefore  the
    respondent's decision to refuse  to  issue  a  residence  card  was  in
    accordance with the law.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material  error  of  law.
Accordingly, that decision must be set aside.  I substitute the decision  of
the Upper Tribunal that the appellant's appeal against the decision  of  the
respondent to refuse to issue a residence card is dismissed.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury     29 September 2014

