

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/22210/2014
      IA/22216/2014
      IA/22218/2014
      IA/22221/2014
      IA/22223/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                  |Determination issued              |
|On 18 December 2014               |On 19 December 2014               |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                      Mr C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                       & UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

    M O ADEBAYO (first appellant) and G O, D O M, V O M, & F O M Adebayo
                        (second to fifth appellants)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Knox, of Hamilton Burns & Co., Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


  (1) NOTICE OF ABANDONMENT (re first appellant) and (2) DETERMINATION AND
                   REASONS (re second to fifth appellants)

 1. The appellants are father, mother and three children, all  citizens  of
    Nigeria.  The first appellant came to the UK firstly as  a  student  in
    2004.  He remained in that capacity and later as an  off-shore  worker.
    His family joined him in 2008.  In 2012 his third application as an off-
    shore worker  was  refused.   The  respondent  had  realised  that  the
    category did not apply.  He is employed by a company based in  Aberdeen
    to work on vessels servicing offshore installations, but  not  on  such
    installations, on a "28 days on, 28 days off"  basis.   The  appellants
    all then sought to remain on the basis  of  family  and  private  life.
    Their applications were refused (after various procedures)  on  12  May
    2014.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Montgomery dismissed their appeals  by
    determination promulgated on 4 August 2014.  They appealed to the Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. At the outset of the hearing Mr Knox (very properly) raised two  points
    not previously observed.  In course of his  work  the  first  appellant
    regularly leaves the geographical jurisdiction.   His  appeal  is  thus
    subject to statutory abandonment in terms of section  104  (4)  of  the
    2002 Act.  Secondly, the first appellant as a seaman may leave and  re-
    enter the UK without entry clearance.   Those  provisions  however  are
    designed for seamen whose ships call  on  irregular  occasions  or  for
    brief periods, not for someone whose onshore life may be based here.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal determination does not distinguish between  the
    categories of off-shore workers and seamen, but that oversight does not
    bear on the outcome now.

 4. It may be that the first appellant by virtue of his employment can find
    some other avenue through the Rules, but that would have to begin  with
    a further  application  to  the  respondent,  and  no  such  matter  is
    presently before us.

 5. We did not think that the grounds showed error of law  in  the  outcome
    reached by the First-tier Tribunal on the case put before  it  for  the
    second to fifth appellants.  In any event, now that  the  above  points
    have been observed, the  whole  basis  of  their  case  changes.  Their
    applications to the  respondent  and  their  cases  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal were as dependants of the  first  appellant.   Once  separated
    from the first appellant's appeal,  they  are  left  seeking  leave  to
    remain as dependants where no relative is a UK national or resident and
    where no party has leave.  They could not realistically  gain  anything
    from a fresh decision based on matters as they stand at the moment.  Mr
    Knox (again very properly) recognised this, and did not  seek  to  make
    any further substantive submissions in support of the grounds.

 6. The appeal of the  first  appellant  is  recorded  as  abandoned.   The
    appeals of the second  to  fifth  appellants  are  dismissed,  and  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal in those respects shall stand.

 7. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


           [pic]




           18 December 2014
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


