
IAC-AH-DP-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22936/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 14th January 2015                          |On 27th January 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                               mr hassan ahmed
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Timpson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 10th March 1996.   The
    Appellant entered the UK on 15th September 2007 on a visit  visa  valid
    until 21st  February  2008.   On  2nd  November  2011  he  applied  for
    indefinite  leave  to  remain  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.    His
    application for settlement was refused but he was granted discretionary
    leave to remain until 9th March 2014 as he was a minor with no suitable
    reception arrangements  in  Bangladesh.   On  14th  February  2014  the
    Appellant  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to   remain   outside   the
    Immigration  Rules  on  compassionate  grounds.   His  application  was
    refused by the Secretary of State by Notice of Refusal dated  19th  May
    2014.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Pickup on 5th September 2014.  In a determination promulgated  on
    19th September 2014 the Appellant's  appeal  was  dismissed  under  the
    Immigration Rules and under Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  of
    Human Rights.

 3. On 29th September 2014 the Appellant applied for permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  Permission was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cheales on 11th November 2014.  Granting permission Judge Cheales
    found that it was arguable that the judge's  findings  on  whether  the
    Appellant had ties to Bangladesh were inconsistent  in  that  he  found
    that  the  Appellant  had  no  family  friends  or  social  support  in
    Bangladesh but also found that he had significant connection to life in
    that country.  On that basis Judge Cheales considered that there was an
    arguable error of law and found that all grounds could be argued.

 4. On 24th November 2014 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds
    of Appeal  under  Rule  24.   It  was  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    considered the evidence of the appeal and made clear  findings  on  the
    issue of ties to Bangladesh/Bangladeshi culture within paragraphs 21 to
    39 of the determination and it was submitted that the findings were not
    inconsistent.

 5. It was on that basis that the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The Appellant appears by his  instructed  Counsel
    Mr Timpson.   The  Secretary  of  State  appears  by  her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Mr McVeety.

Preliminary and Definitive Issue

 6. Both legal  representatives  start  by  seeking  to  address  me  on  a
    preliminary point that they have considered.  It  is  put  to  me  that
    there is an error in the Grounds of Appeal on the basis that the appeal
    was brought under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules  and  it  should
    have been brought under the Immigration Directorate Instructions Family
    Migration Guidelines.  I am specifically referred  to  paragraph  3.3.1
    therein headed "Individuals Granted Discretionary Leave before 9th July
    2012".  The guidelines therein set out:

    Applicants who were granted leave under the discretionary leave  policy
    before 9th July 2012 will continue to be considered under  that  policy
    through to settlement provided they continue to qualify for  leave  and
    their circumstances have not changed.  (Normally the person  can  apply
    for settlement  after  accruing  six  years'  continuous  Discretionary
    Leave,  unless  Discretionary  Leave  has  been  granted  because   the
    individual  is  excluded  from  a  grant  of  asylum  or   humanitarian
    protection, in which case ten years' leave is usually required.)

 7. It is pointed out to me by Mr Timpson that leave in this  instant  case
    was granted in May 2012 when the Appellant was acknowledged as a  minor
    and a further application should be considered under the policy and not
    the Rules and therefore the application at first instance should  never
    have been considered under Appendix FM.  Mr McVeety agrees and endorses
    this.

Findings and Decision

 8. The error in this matter stems from the original consideration  of  the
    application and Notice of Refusal by the Secretary of State rather than
    due to any error of the Immigration Judge on the issues that  were  put
    before him.  The error is in the Respondent's decision  and  hence  the
    judge's decision.  It is not appropriate therefore for me to proceed to
    consider the suggested errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's
    determination.   This  matter  has  been  wrongly  addressed  at  first
    instance by the Secretary of State.

 9. I am satisfied consequently that there is a material error of  law  and
    the decision is fundamentally flawed albeit that  that  is  through  no
    fault of the Immigration Judge.  In such circumstances I set aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and I  remit  the  application  for
    fresh consideration by the Secretary of  State  under  the  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions for Family Migration - Chapter 8  Transitional
    Provisions.

10. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.  No application is made to  vary  that  order  and
    none is made.



Signed        Date 27th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee order is applied for and no order is made.



Signed        Date 27th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

