
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22884/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 31 October 2016                         |On 07 December 2016              |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Morian [B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT  MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Fripp, Counsel, instructed by Solomon
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The  appellant,  (hereafter  the  Secretary  of  States  or  SSHD)  has
    permission to challenge a decision of First-tier Tribunal  (FtT)  Judge
    Nixon on allowing the appeal of the respondent (hereafter the claimant)
    on Article 8 grounds against a decision made by the SSHD in  June  2015
    refusing her leave to remain.

2.   The SSHD advances four grounds of challenge.  Although  the  FtT  judge
    who granted permission did not consider all ground arguable,  it  is  a
    matter for me whether I agree with his limitation and, for reasons that
    will become clear, I do not.

3.   In the letter of refusal the Secretary of State identified a number  of
    concerns regarding the credibility of the claim made  by  the  claimant
    regarding her lack of ties and support network in Nigeria. e.g. on page
    4 the SSHD stated that it was "not accepted that there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to your integration in Nigeria  ...  because  you
    are over 30 years old and have spent  the  majority  of  your  life  in
    Nigeria, and have built up social and cultural ties there".  Yet in his
    decision he appears to proceed on the basis that  the  appellant's  and
    her husband's evidence was to be accepted without question, stating  at
    para 18 that:

         "However, leaving that issue on one side, I turn to the position of
         the older child, who is now 7 years old and has  lived  in  the  UK
         since her birth.  I  find  that  this  length  of  residence  is  a
         significant factor to consider not least because she has never been
         to Nigeria and is  entrenched  in  the  education  system  in  this
         country I note that, other than being born of Nigeria parents,  she
         has no links to the country and will have fully integrated into the
         UK culture and way of life. I note that the appellant has  no  ties
         remaining in Nigeria, her mother having passed away and her  sister
         living in America. Whilst I note that she does have a stepfather in
         this country I accept first that he is no blood relative  but  also
         that their relationship has been non existent since the appellant's
         imprisonment. Accordingly she will have no support network  in  the
         country and no assistance to settle  back  in  to  her  country  of
         origin as a single mother of two children."

4.   Given that the claimant was a convicted criminal (although  I  entirely
    disregard the additional reference in the grounds to benefit fraud,  as
    Mr Tarlow could provide no substantiation), I concur with the  SSHD  's
    first ground that the judge was not entitled to accept the evidence  of
    the claimant and her husband uncritically.

5.   Given that I consider  ground  1  is  made  out,  it  is  not  strictly
    necessary  for  me  to  address  the  other  three  grounds   but   for
    completeness I will do so briefly.

6.   Ground 2 alleges that the judge failed to make findings on  whether  Mr
    Ibrahim would continue to provide the claimant  with  support  back  in
    Nigeria. Although I agree that the judge did not sufficiently factor in
    the significance of continuing support from Mr Ibrahim  when  assessing
    whether the return of the claimant with her children would give rise to
    very significant  obstacles  (the  judge  described  in  para  19  only
    identified "difficulties circumstances"),  I  cannot  say  the  judge's
    finding was not within the range of reasonable responses.  Hence  I  do
    not find this ground made out.

7.   The third ground contends that  the  judge  failed  to  make  a  proper
    rounded assessment of the best interests of the  children.  I  consider
    this ground is made out as well. The established case law on  the  best
    interests of the child makes clear that the judge must  not  treat  the
    issue of a child's best interests as a simply matter  of  providing  as
    yes or no answer but must consider all factors for  and  against  their
    interests being to remain in the UK rather than return to  the  country
    in question: see EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ  864  and  Zoumbas  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  UKSC  74.   Perusing
    the judge's treatment of this issue, it is not possible to say he  made
    an adequate assessment. At the  end  of  para  16  there  is  simply  a
    statement that because they have a relationship with  their  father  in
    the UK, "it would be detrimental to their best interests to remove them
    from having such frequent contact with their father'".

8.   Nowhere in what follows is there any reference to the fact  (which  was
    one of the factors that had to be weighed in the balance when assessing
    best interests) that the children were familiar with  Nigerian  culture
    and traditions. It must also be said that when it came to  the  overall
    proportionality assessment, the judge appears to have left to one  side
    the fact, mentioned  in  para  17  but  then  left  hanging,  that  the
    claimant's  immigration  status  was  precarious.    Given   that   the
    immigration status of  both  parents  was  precarious  and  so  it  was
    reasonable to expect both parents to live in Nigeria, it  was  perverse
    of the judge to assess the appeal on the basis of a need to permit  the
    children to retain "frequent contact from their father" (para 16).

9.   For the above reasons, I conclude that the judge  materially  erred  in
    law and her decision is set aside.

10.  In light of my finding that the judge erred  in  failing  to  base  his
    assessment on properly made findings of fact, I cannot  agree  with  Mr
    Fripp's suggestion that if I decided to set aside the  decision  (as  I
    have) I should preserve the judge's findings of fact. In light of  this
    error I consider the proper course is to remit the case to be heard  by
    the FtT Tribunal, not before Judges Nixon or   Dineen.  Mr  Fripp  said
    that the claimant wished the case, if remitted,  to  be  heard  in  the
    London region, not Birmingham. I shall instruct that this  be  arranged
    if at all practicable.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed        [pic]                          Date


Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal                                     07  December
    2016
