

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/22855/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 April 2014                              |On 9 May 2014                |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     ARD
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Al-Khayat instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

   2. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Judge A E Walker)  which  allowed  ARD's  appeal  against  a
      refusal to grant her leave as the dependant  of  a  Tier  1  (General)
      Migrant under para 319H of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as  amended).
      The Judge allowed the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR but dismissed
      the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

   3. For convenience, I  will  refer  to  the  parties  hereafter  as  they
      appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

   4. The appellant is a citizen of Mauritius who was  born  on  24  January
      2010.  Her father has leave to remain as a Tier  1  (General)  Migrant
      until 20 August 2014.  The appellant's mother had leave as a dependant
      also until 20 August 2014.

   5. The background to the appeal is as follows.   The  appellant's  mother
      and father came to the UK on 3 October 2005, her father as  a  student
      and her mother as his dependant.  The appellant was born in the UK  on
      24 January 2010 in Swindon. The appellant's father and  mother  had  a
      second child who was born in the UK on 4 October 2011.

   6. On 28 January 2011 the appellant was granted leave to remain in the UK
      as a Tier 1 (General) Dependant Child of her father until 2 June 2012.
       The appellant's leave expired on that date.

   7. In October 2012, the  appellant  and  her  father  visited  her  dying
      grandmother in Mauritius where they were joined  subsequently  by  the
      appellant's mother.  Whilst in  Mauritius,  her  father  went  to  the
      British Embassy because he realised that her leave  had  expired.   He
      was told that the Embassy was closed for making applications and  that
      all such applications were being met by the Embassy in  South  Africa.
      In any event, on re-entry to the UK, an  immigration  officer  granted
      the appellant leave as a visitor for a period of six months  and  told
      her father that he needed to make an in-country  application  for  the
      appellant to remain as his dependant.  That application was made on 19
      March 2013 but was refused in the respondent's decision of 30 May 2013
      on the basis that the appellant, as she had last been granted leave to
      enter as a visitor, could not establish under paragraph 319H(h) of the
      Immigration Rules that she had or had last been granted leave to enter
      or remain in the UK as the child of a Points Based System  migrant  or
      as the child of a parent who had leave under another category  of  the
      Immigration Rules.

   8. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  It appears to have
      been accepted before Judge Walker that the appellant could not succeed
      under the Immigration Rules on the basis that she was not permitted to
      "switch" from being a visitor to a dependant of  a  Tier  1  (General)
      Migrant.  However, Judge Walker allowed the appellant's  appeal  under
      Article 8 perhaps not surprisingly given that the appellant was  three
      years of age and that her parents and sibling were lawfully in the  UK
      on the basis that the  appellant's  father  was  a  Tier  1  (General)
      Student and having regard to the fact that the Immigration Officer had
      led the appellant's father to believe that an  in-country  application
      to switch was open to the appellant.

   9. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds, put
      in a nutshell, that Judge Walker had failed to take into account  that
      the appellant's parents had entered the  UK  on  the  basis  that  her
      father was a student and  that  there  was  no  expectation  that  her
      parents could therefore remain in the UK and that the  effect  of  the
      decision would be to separate the appellant from her parents.

  10. On 14 January 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (DJ Appleyard) granted the
      appellant permission to appeal.

  11. Thus the appeal came before me.

  12. At the outset of the hearing, I drew to the representatives' attention
      the wording of para 319H(h) which was the provision relied upon by the
      respondent to refuse the appellant's application under the Rules.   At
      the date of decision, the requirement in para 319H(h) was as  follows:



           "An applicant who is applying for leave to remain must have,  or
           have been granted leave as the child of, or have  been  born  in
           the United Kingdom to, a parent who had leave under any category
           under these Rules." (My emphasis).

  13. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr  Richards  conceded  that  the
      appellant met this requirement in that  she  had  been  "born  in  the
      United Kingdom" on 24 January 2010.  Mr  Richards  accepted  that  the
      respondent's decision was,  therefore,  not  in  accordance  with  the
      Immigration Rules.  In addition, Mr Richards did not seek  to  advance
      any  grounds  to  challenge  Judge  Walker's  decision  allowing   the
      appellant's appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

  14. Mr Al-Khayat, who represented the appellant invited me  to  allow  the
      appellant's appeal under the Immigration  Rules  and  to  dismiss  the
      Secretary of State's appeal against Judge Walker's decision  to  allow
      the appeal also under Article 8 of the ECHR.

  15. For whatever reason, the appeal before Judge Walker wrongly  proceeded
      on the basis that the appellant  could  not  succeed  under  paragraph
      319H.  It was accepted before Judge Walker that the appellant met  all
      the requirements of paragraph 319H except for the requirement in  para
      319H(h).  In fact, the appellant clearly did meet the  requirement  in
      para 319H(h).   She was entitled to succeed in her appeal  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal under the Immigration Rules.  In the light of  the
      submissions made to me, I am satisfied that Judge Walker's decision in
      relation to the Immigration Rules involved the making of an  error  of
      law, in the proper application of the Immigration  Rules,  and  cannot
      stand.  I set that decision aside and remake the decision allowing the
      appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules, namely para 319H.

  16. In addition, in the light of Mr  Richards  not  seeking  to  challenge
      Judge Walker's decision to allow the  appeal  under  Article  8,  that
      decision shall also stand.

  17. Consequently, the appellant's appeal is allowed under the  Immigration
      Rules and under Article 8 of the ECHR.


                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:




















