
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22591/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 August 2015                    |On 21 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                         RAmakrishna reddy sakrimola
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop, Counsel, instructed by Shri
                    Venkateshwara Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Robinson dismissing his appeal against the decision
    of the respondent dated 15 May 2014 to refuse his application for leave
    to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.

2.   FtTJ Robinson decided the appeal on the papers at the  request  of  the
    appellant.

3.   The respondent refused the appellant's application on  the  basis  that
    he had not submitted any evidence to demonstrate that he had registered
    with HM Revenue  and  Customs  as  self-employed  or  registered  as  a
    director of a new or existing business, as detailed  in  paragraph  41-
    SD(e)(v).  The  document  the  Secretary  of  State  required  was  the
    Companies House Current Appointments Report.

4.   It was not disputed by Mr Balroop that  when  the  appellant  made  his
    application on 1 April 2014 he did not submit  with  it  the  Companies
    House Current Appointments Report.  The appellant  submitted  a  letter
    from Companies House dated 14 March  2014  congratulating  him  on  his
    recent appointment as a company director.  This document as far as  the
    respondent was concerned  did  not  comply  with  the  requirements  in
    Appendix A.

5.   The appellant submitted an appeal statement in  which  he  stated  that
    before the expiry of his  leave  under  post-study  work,  he  made  an
    application under Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant category along  with  a
    team  partner,  Mr  Durgaprasad   Veerapalli.    His   team   partner's
    application was approved by the Home Office  but  his  application  was
    reused for not providing the Current Appointments Report, which he  was
    now  submitting  with   his  appeal  statement  in   support   of   his
    application.

6.   He stated that in a letter dated 6 August  [sic]  2014  the  respondent
    sent him a letter stating that they were  prepared  to  reconsider  his
    application.  The letter from the  Home  Office  Sheffield  Development
    Team 5 identified what was described as "a minor  omission  regards  to
    the evidence that has been submitted"  and  invited  the  appellant  to
    submit the Companies House Current  Appointments  Report  within  seven
    days.  The judge noted that the  report  was  included  in  the  papers
    appended to the notice of appeal but there was no indication of when it
    was lodged with the Home Office.   The report was "created:  21/05/2014
    15:48:15".

7.   The judge noted as follows:

         "10. Paragraph 41-SD(e)(v) of Appendix A provides that:

             '(2)(a) if claiming points  for  being  a  director  of  a  UK
             company at the time  of  his  application,  a  printout  of  a
             Current Appointments Report from  Companies  House,  dated  no
             earlier than three months before the date of the company  that
             is  actively  trading  and  not  dormant,  or  struck  off  or
             dissolved on in  liquidation  and  showing  the  date  of  his
             appointment as director of the company, and ...'

         11.  It is not in  dispute  that  the  appellant  did  not  produce
             documentary evidence from Companies House in  accordance  with
             the preceding paragraph.  He claims that the Home Office wrote
             to him pointing this out and giving  him  the  opportunity  to
             send the documents within 7 days.   A  letter  from  the  Home
             Office dated 2 May 2014 was included in documents sent to  the
             Tribunal. On 15 May 2014 the application was refused.

         12.  It is apparent from documents  submitted  by  Companies  House
             that  the  Current  Appointments  Report  was   generated   on
             21/5/2014 15:48:15.  This is clearly printed on the first page
             of the document. It  follows  that  the  Current  Appointments
             Report was not submitted by the appellant with the application
             which was dated 1 April 2014 and was not submitted within  the
             7 day period given by the Home Office. It  was  not  generated
             until after the decision was made.

         13.  I have carefully considered the documentary evidence filed  in
             support of the appeal.

         14.  At the time he made  the  application  he  did  not  have  the
             required evidence from Companies House....  I  take  the  view
             that  the  evidence  referred  to  was  not  filed  with   the
             application and was not considered by the respondent  who  had
             contacted the appellant in writing and gave him an opportunity
             to rectify his omission. I take the view, following the  Upper
             Tribunal's  decision  in  Ahmed  (see  below)  and  that   the
             additional evidence received after the date  of  decision,  is
             not evidence that I am entitled to take into account.

         16.  I have considered the appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  and  I
             conclude that his application for leave to remain as a Tier  1
             (Entrepreneur) is based in part,  on  evidence  that  did  not
             exist on the date of the application or the date of  decision.
             I have  noted  that  the  respondent  gave  the  appellant  an
             opportunity to send in  the  missing  document,  however,  the
             document was not 'missing', it did not exist at the  time  the
             application was made. It is apparent that  the  appellant  did
             not satisfy the relevant requirements of  the  Rules  but  was
             unable to do within the time scale  given.   His  appeal  must
             fail.

8.   Permission to appeal the judge's decision  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Levin as follows:

         "It is arguable however that the judge erred in law by  failing  to
         consider in his decision the letter from Companies House  dated  14
         March 2014 at page C of the respondent's bundle and  which  clearly
         predated the appellant's application and which congratulated him on
         his appointment as a director of the company.   This  evidence  was
         clearly material to the issue in the appeal and the judge's failure
         to consider it and to make a finding on whether  it  satisfied  the
         requirements of paragraph 41-SD(v)  of  Appendix  A  amounts  to  a
         material error of law."

9.   The basis for the grant of permission was wrong because the  respondent
    had that letter and considered that it was not  the  required  document
    for the purposes of Appendix A.  That was why  the  respondent  invited
    the appellant to submit that Companies House Current Appointment Report
    within seven days.  The judge's failure to consider that letter did not
    amount to an error of law

10.  Mr Balroop submitted that the appellant was part of an  entrepreneurial
    team.  The appellant's partner's application  was  granted  on  24  May
    2015, nine days after the appellant's application was refused.  He said
    they had made the application together.  The  appellant's  partner  had
    submitted the Companies  House  Current  Appointment  Report  with  his
    application to the respondent.  As the  appellant's  partner  had  been
    named in the appellant's application and vice  versa,  the  information
    required was before the respondent.

11.  The issue before me is whether  FtTJ  Robinson  erred  in  law  in  his
    decision.  I find that he did  not.

12.   The  judge  was  not  to  know  why  the  appellant's  team   member's
    application was approved by the respondent.  He did not know  that  the
    appellant's team member  had  submitted  the  Companies  House  Current
    Appointments Report with his application. There was also no explanation
    before him as to why the appellant did not submit the document with his
    application and no indication that the appellant  was  relying  on  the
    document submitted by his team member to support his application.

13.  Mr Balroop submitted that the Secretary of State could  have  exercised
    her discretion to  exceptionally  grant  the  appellant's  application.
    This was not an argument that has been raised before by the  appellant.
    The Rules require that the appellant submit with  his  application  the
    required documents.  He did not  submit  the  Companies  House  Current
    Appointments Report with his application and the  respondent  gave  him
    seven days to submit it.  He failed to  do  so.   His  application  was
    refused.  When the appellant lodged grounds  against  the  respondent's
    refusal he merely gave general  grounds.   One  of  them  was  that  he
    submitted an application for leave to remain in the  UK  under  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) within the valid period of application  that  is  before
    the expiry of his previous leave to remain in the UK under Tier 1 (Post-
    Study Work).  There was no explanation by him in his  grounds  that  he
    had a team member who had submitted  the  required  document  with  his
    application and that document had his name in it.  There was  therefore
    nothing in his grounds linking his application with that  of  his  team
    member apart from the application form.

14.  In the absence of the Companies House Current  Appointments  Report  at
    the time the respondent made her decision, I find that  the  judge  did
    not err in law in his decision.

15.  The judge's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

