
[pic]
IAC-PE-AW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22772/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 3 November 2014                           |On 5 November 2014             |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR


                                   Between

                          Mr Atanga Atajuh Tembeng
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr Peter Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State is the appellant to this  appeal  but,  for  the
    sake of consistency, I refer to her as the respondent (as  she  was  in
    the First-tier Tribunal) and to the original appellant as such.

2.   The Secretary of State has appealed against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Archer who, in a determination promulgated  on  28  July
    2014, allowed the appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  refusal
    to grant an EEA residence card  to  him  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.  The basis of the claim is that the appellant is  the
    spouse of a French citizen exercising treaty rights in the UK.

3.   The First-tier Tribunal decision had been made on  the  papers  at  the
    request of the appellant.  There had thus been no oral hearing. At  the
    hearing before me, although due notice of the hearing  had  been  given
    both to the  appellant  and  his  legal  representatives,  neither  the
    appellant nor his representative attended and  I  therefore  heard  the
    appeal in thier absence.

4.   It is apparent from the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  decision  that  it
    was claimed that the appellant and his sponsor were married by proxy in
    Cameroon on 19 October 2013.  They claim to have lived together at  the
    same address in the UK since 2012.

5.   At paragraphs [13]  and  [14]  of  the  determination,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge quoted the headnote from the case of Kareem [2014]  UKUT
    00024 and said this at [14]:

         "In this case, the appellant has  submitted  marriage  certificates
         (pages  22-23  of  the  appellant's  bundle)  and  a   registration
         certificate for the marriage issued by Tiko Council.  There  is  no
         evidence that any of the documents are not genuine.   There  is  no
         evidence that proxy marriages are not lawful in Cameroon.   I  find
         that the appellant has proved the issues covered at b-d above  [the
         headnote of Kareem], in the absence of any  further  evidence  from
         the respondent." [my underlining]

6.   The grounds submitted by the Secretary of State argue  that  the  judge
    has misinterpreted Kareem by failing to take into account  that  Kareem
    requires the judge to be satisfied that French law  -  the  country  of
    nationality of the sponsor - recognises proxy  marriages  in  Cameroon.
    The judge made no such enquiry and no such finding.  In  addition,  the
    appellant had failed to provide any independent documentary evidence to
    establish that he is in a durable relationship  with  the  sponsor  and
    entitled to a  residence  card  as  an  extended  family  member  under
    Regulation 8.

7.   The grounds seeking permission to appeal are correct.  The  judge  made
    a clear error of law in not taking  into  account  that  there  was  no
    evidence that French law recognises a Cameroon proxy marriage.   I  was
    also for the appellant to show  that  proxy  marriages  are  lawful  in
    Cameroon and not as stated in [14] as  above.  The  determination  must
    therefore be set aside.

8.   In remaking the decision, based on all the  evidence  that  was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge, I must dismiss the original  appellant's
    appeal for two reasons.  Firstly,  as  stated  above,  Kareem  requires
    evidence that the country of  nationality of the EEA sponsor recognises
    a Cameroon proxy marriage.  There is no such evidence.  Secondly, there
    is and was no independent evidence (other than from the  appellant  and
    the  sponsor  themselves)  as  to  their  claim  to  be  in  a  durable
    relationship.  I note in particular that the  Secretary  of  State  had
    indicated in the refusal letter of 12 May 2014 that further evidence as
    to the durable relationship would be required.  None was forthcoming.

9.   On all the evidence the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  refusal  to
    grant him a residence card (whether as  a  spouse  or  as  an  extended
    family member) must be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and that decision is accordingly set aside in full.  I remake  the  decision
by dismissing the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

No anonymity direction has been sought and none is made.

The appeal having been dismissed, no fee award is made.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor
4 November 2014
