
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/22254/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 29 October 2015                   |On 30 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mr WALTER JEFFREY WOODS
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant (the Secretary of State)  appealed  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal with  permission  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         McDade on 23 July 2015 against the decision and reasons  of  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge A E Walker who  had  allowed  the  Respondent's
         appeal against the revocation on 27 November 2013 of his Indefinite
         Leave to Remain the United Kingdom.  (That ILR was  replaced  by  a
         grant of limited leave to remain of 30 months, which the  Appellant
         would be required to apply to extend.)  The  judge's  decision  and
         reasons was promulgated on 15 May 2015.

    2.     The Respondent is a national of Zimbabwe, born on 23 July  1959.
         The Respondent had appealed successfully to the First-tier Tribunal
         against the automatic deportation order dated  5  March  2012  made
         against him under section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.  On  30
         July 2010 the Appellant had  been  convicted  on  three  counts  of
         possession of class A drugs with intent  to  supply  and  had  been
         sentenced to two years' imprisonment on each charge,  concurrently.
         Following the Appellant's appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
         Secretary of  State  had  thereafter  applied  section  76  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and  had  revoked  the
         Appellant's ILR.

    3.     Permission to appeal was granted  by  Judge  McDade  because  he
         considered that it was arguable that the  judge  had  misunderstood
         the effect of section 76 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
         Act 2002.  The Appellant remained liable to deportation despite the
         revocation of the order made.  The effect of section 76 was not  to
         reinstate the pre-existing ILR.

    4.     Standard directions were made by the tribunal,  indicating  that
         the decision would be remade in the event that a material error  of
         law were found.

    Submissions

    5.     Ms Fijiwala for the Appellant relied on the grounds  of  onwards
         appeal and the grant of permission to appeal.  She  submitted  that
         the judge had misdirected herself in law and had  failed  to  apply
         George v SSHD [2014] UKSC 28.  Ali (s.76 -"liable to  deportation")
         Pakistan [2011] UKUT 00250 (IAC)  should  be  noted  by  the  Upper
         Tribunal as it stated  that  a  person  subject  to  the  automatic
         deportation provisions whose leave was to  be  revoked  could  only
         have that leave revoked if the Secretary of State  had  deemed  his
         deportation conducive to the public good.  The Secretary  of  State
         contended that that had been done in this case.  The  decision  and
         reasons should be set aside, remade and dismissed.

    6.     The Appellant was unrepresented and there was nothing he  wished
         to say, other than his circumstances as previously found  by  Judge
         Walker had not changed.

    7.     The tribunal indicated at the conclusion of submissions that  it
         found that there  were  material  errors  of  law,  such  that  the
         decision and reasons had to be set aside.

    Material error of law finding

    8.     The tribunal accepts the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
         Secretary of State.  It must however  be  said  that  it  was  most
         regrettable that the Secretary of State had been unable to  provide
         a presenting officer for the original appeal hearing, given that it
         was an appeal of some  importance  and  legal  issues  arose.   The
         Respondent had also been unrepresented.  The judge was thus without
         any assistance from the parties.  It  must  be  questioned  whether
         this was a sensible use of public resources.  It certainly had  the
         appearance of a failure by the Secretary of State  to  comply  with
         the overriding objective of the 2014 Procedure Rules.

    9.     No doubt the judge did her best in  the  circumstances  but,  in
         short, the tribunal finds that the judge fell into  material  error
         of law at [21] of her decision when considering the effect of  s.76
         of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   The  judge's
         starting point was incorrect.  The effect of the deportation  order
         was to revoke the Appellant's ILR.  That  was  made  plain  by  the
         Supreme Court in George v SSHD [2014] UKSC  28,  per  Lord  Hughes.
         The fact that the Appellant had succeeded  in  his  appeal  against
         deportation to the First-tier Tribunal meant only that he could not
         be deported for legal reasons, i.e., the  Article  8  ECHR  grounds
         which   rendered   implementation   of   the   deportation    order
         disproportionate and therefore unlawful.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
         (as upheld by the Upper Tribunal) had not, for example, found  that
         there was no power in law  to  make  the  deportation  order.   The
         effect of the judicial decision did not revive the Appellant's  pre
         deportation leave.

    10.    Ali (above) was not cited to the judge at first instance nor was
         it referred to by Lord Hughes in George (above).  Its authority  is
         thus doubtful in the light of George.  In any  event,  the  reasons
         for refusal letter states in terms that the Appellant's conduct  is
         so serious that it warrants the revocation of his status: see  page
         2 of the letter dated 7 May  2014.   That  amounts  to  a  reasoned
         decision that the Appellant's deportation was deemed  conducive  to
         the public good.  That was hardly a  surprising  view  to  take  of
         class A drugs offences.

    11.    It follows that the judge's application of and  reliance  on  RD
         (Cessation - burden of proof  -  procedure)  Algeria  [2007]  UKAIT
         00066 was mistaken.   Her  reasoning  was  invalid  and  failed  to
         reflect George (above).  The decision and reasons must be set aside
         for material error of law and remade.

    12.    There had been no challenge by the Secretary  of  State  to  the
         judge's findings of fact.  The decision and  reasons  is  otherwise
         set aside.

    Remaking the decision

    13.    Given that the judge's findings of fact stood and that there was
         no real dispute of fact, neither side wished to  make  any  further
         submissions.  For clarity and convenience  the  tribunal  will  now
         refer to the parties by their original designations in  the  First-
         tier Tribunal.

    14.    In the tribunal's view, following the ending of the  Appellant's
         ILR brought about by his own criminal conduct, it  was  appropriate
         for the Secretary of State to review what should happen next.   Her
         decision was that the Appellant's claimed reform was  by  no  means
         safely established, in effect that his deportation, which could not
         be effected for the  legal  reason  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
         decision, remained conducive to the public good.

    15.    In the tribunal's judgment,  notwithstanding  the  low  risk  of
         reoffending,  the  Appellant's  offences  were  serious  enough  to
         warrant him to in effect be placed on  probation  by  a  period  of
         limited leave to remain.  That does not marginalise the  Appellant,
         but rather gives him every incentive to  demonstrate  his  complete
         rehabilitation.  He will have the opportunity in due course to seek
         ILR again.

    16.    There is no reason for an anonymity direction  in  this  appeal,
         which would be pointless given the public nature of the Appellant's
         previous criminal trial.

    17.    The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

    DECISION

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law and is set aside.

    The tribunal makes a fresh decision as follows: The appeal is DISMISSED




    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell






    TO THE RESPONDENT
    FEE AWARD

    The appeal was dismissed so there can be no fee award




    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
