
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/22481/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 September 2015                  |On 16 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   MR AZHARUDDIN AYUB HAFEJI ISMAIL PATEL
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Parkin, Solicitor Advocate, instructed by UK
Law Associates


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For ease of reference, I shall refer to the parties as they were before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The  Secretary  of  State  is  therefore  the
    Respondent and Mr Patel is the Appellant.

 2. This is an appeal by the Respondent against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Eames (Judge Eames), promulgated on 16 February 2015, in
    which he allowed the Appellant's appeal. That appeal  was  against  the
    Respondent's decision of 14 May 2014, refusing to vary the  Appellant's
    leave to remain and to remove him from the United Kingdom under section
    47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 3. The Appellant is an Indian  national,  born  on  30  January  1986.  He
    arrived in this country on 18 September 2007  and  remained  here  with
    leave a Tier 4 student until 27 April  2012  whereupon  he  was  grated
    leave as a Tier 1 Post-Study Migrant, this leave running until 27 April
    2014. On 17 April 2014 the Appellant sought further leave to remain  as
    a Tier 1 Entrepreneur. The Respondent refused the  application  on  the
    basis  that  he  had  failed  to  provide  a  letter   from   a   legal
    representative as required under Paragraph 41-SD(d)(ii) of  Appendix  A
    to  the  Immigration  Rules  (although  the   specific   provision   is
    inaccurately recorded). As a result of  this,  the  Appellant  was  not
    awarded points and the application failed under Paragraph  245DD(b)  of
    the Rules. The discretion available to the Respondent  under  Paragraph
    245AA of the Rules was not exercised in the Appellant's favour.

The decision of Judge Eames

 4. The two principal issues considered by Judge Eames were  those  of  the
    legal representative's letter required under Paragraph 41-SD(d)(ii) and
    the bank  letter  apparently  required  by  Paragraph  41-SD(c)(i).  As
    regards the legal representative's letter, he concluded  that  all  the
    required information had been provided, but it was not in  the  correct
    format and to that extent was non-compliant with the Rules  (paragraphs
    28 and 30). He went on to conclude that the discretion under  Paragraph
    245AA(b)(ii) of the  Rules  was  "available",  and  that  the  required
    information and declarations had been provided by a later  letter  from
    the legal representative, dated 12 August 2014. It was found  that  the
    Respondent  had  been  under  a  duty  of  fairness  to  request   this
    appropriately formatted information (paragraph 31).  He  then  admitted
    the new letter in as evidence in compliance, as he saw it, with section
    85A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (paragraph 32).

 5. As to the bank letter, Judge Eames agreed with the submission from  the
    Appellant's  representative  that  the  Explanatory  Memorandum   which
    accompanied the Statement of Changes to the Rules,  HC1138,  in  effect
    relaxed the requirements of Paragraph 41-SD  to  the  extent  that  the
    absence of such  a  letter  was  not  fatal  to  the  appeal's  success
    (paragraph 33).

 6. Following on from this, Judge Eames concluded that  the  Appellant  met
    all the requirements of the Rules and, as I  read  the  decision,  then
    exercised his own discretion in substitution to that of the  Respondent
    and allowed the appeal outright under the Rules themselves.

The Respondent's grounds of appeal

 7. In essence, the grounds  assert  that  Judge  Eames  erred  in  several
    respects: he admitted evidence that was  inadmissible;  he  disregarded
    the requirement for a bank letter; he misapplied the  provisions  under
    Paragraph 245AA of the Rules.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lambert
    on 20 April 2015. Although  only  grounds  1  and  2  are  specifically
    referred to, both representatives before me were agreed that the  grant
    was not limited in its scope.

The hearing before me

 9. Mr Whitwell relied on the grounds of appeal. In addition, he  made  the
    point that Paragraph 41-SD(c)(ii) would not have assisted the Appellant
    in any event because the third party's bank  statements  related  to  a
    company account, not a personal one, as required.

10. Mr Parkin submitted that viewing pages 18-23 of the Appellant's  bundle
    in the round, the information provided by the legal  representative  (a
    solicitor, Ms Fatema Sattar) was compliant  with  the  requirements  of
    Paragraph 41-SD. It was only the format which was incorrect. Once Judge
    Eames had found this to be the case, submitted Mr Parkin, the issue  of
    discretion under Paragraph  245AA(b)(ii)  of  the  Rules  was  engaged.
    Having regard to the decision letter of 14 May 2014,  it  was  apparent
    that the Respondent had in fact exercised her discretion,  but  not  in
    the  Appellant's  favour.  Therefore,  Judge  Eames  was  entitled   to
    substitute his own discretion for that of the Respondent,  as  he  duly
    did in paragraphs 31, 32, and 34. Seen in this way, Mr Parkin  asserted
    that there was no material error.

11. In terms of the admission of the legal representative's  letter  of  12
    August 2014 into evidence, it was submitted that this  was  permissible
    so as to show that if the Respondent had requested correctly  formatted
    evidence prior  to  making  her  decision,  the  Appellant  could  have
    produced it.

12. Finally, in respect of the bank letter, it was said  that  Judge  Eames
    had been entitled to rely on the Explanatory Memorandum to Statement of
    Changes HC1138 as being an official document from the Respondent  which
    was itself an indication of policy guidance. It  was  tantamount  to  a
    statement of policy that the Rules were being relaxed as  regards  this
    particular issue. Policy guidance can operate outwith the Rules. It did
    not matter that the formal policy guidance on Tier 1  did  not  contain
    the effects of what was said in the Memorandum. It  was  accepted  that
    the Appellant had not provided any bank letter, but this was not fatal.
    Mr Parkin acknowledged that he needed to succeed on  this  argument  as
    well as that relating to the legal representative's letter in order for
    the decision of Judge Eames to survive.

13. In reply, Mr  Whitwell  submitted  that  the  bank  letter  remained  a
    mandatory requirement of the Rules. The wording of the  Memorandum  did
    not in fact assist the Appellant.  The  document  at  page  18  of  the
    Appellant's  bundle  did  not  in  fact  contain   all   the   required
    information. Finally, the letter of 12  August  2014  was  inadmissible
    under section 85A(4) of the 2002 Act. Even if it  was  admissible,  the
    Appellant's case failed on at least one alternative basis.

Decision on error of law

14. I find that Judge Eames did materially error in law when  allowing  the
    Appellant's appeal.

15. The first and most obvious  error  was  to  effectively  disregard  the
    requirement for a bank letter under Paragraph 41-SD(c)(i) of Appendix A
    to the Rules. It is accepted that there was  in  fact  no  such  letter
    submitted with the application or at any material time  thereafter.  It
    is clear that Judge Eames concluded that this omission  was  immaterial
    to the success of the application and in turn the appeal (see paragraph
    33 of his decision). It is also clear that in reaching this significant
    conclusion he relied solely upon the Appellant's  contention  that  the
    Explanatory Memorandum accompanying Statement of Changes HC1138 applied
    what he described as a "more relaxed regime as regard bank evidence  in
    cases where the  application  was  made  on  or  after  6  April  2014"
    (paragraphs 16-17 and 33 of his decision).

16. This approach is flawed  for  several  reasons.  First,  there  is  the
    wording of the Memorandum itself. At paragraph  7.6  (page  32  of  the
    Appellant's bundle), the third bullet point states that, "minor updates
    are being made to evidential requirements." In the  same  paragraph  it
    states that the changes  would  affect  the  contents  of  third  party
    funding declarations from banks in  order  to  better  reflect  banking
    practice."   What   it   clearly   does   not   say   is   that    such
    declarations/letters were to be disposed of as  mandatory  requirements
    of the Rules. Indeed, the following bullet point  leaves  no  room  for
    doubt: the change in wording of the Rules was in  order  to  "emphasise
    more explicitly that applicants must provide all the relevant specified
    evidence..." In short, the wording of the Memorandum itself simply does
    not support the conclusion of Judge Eames that an existing  requirement
    of the Rules was being "relaxed" to the extent that the Appellant  need
    not have provided evidence from the bank.

17. Second, and following on from the first point, the actual  changes  set
    out in HC1138 do not themselves have the dramatic effect  of  obviating
    the need to produce evidence from a bank.  Following  the  coming  into
    force of HC1138 on 5 May 2014 the requirements  of  Paragraph  41-SD(c)
    clearly retained the need to provide a bank  letter  or  personal  bank
    statements. The purpose of an Explanatory Memorandum is, by its nature,
    to  explain  why  the  relevant  changes  are  being  made.  Thus,  the
    explanation provided necessarily relates to what the amendments to  the
    Rules in fact say: what they say is unambiguous.

18. Third, Mr Parkin's suggestion that the Explanatory Memorandum acted  as
    a  separate  policy  document  beyond  the  remit  of  the   Rules   is
    misconceived. In addition to what I have said already about the wording
    and nature of the Memorandum, there  is  nothing  in  the  Respondent's
    formal Tier 1 guidance to indicate that the requirements  of  Paragraph
    41-SD(c) can be avoided by an applicant. It is highly unlikely, to  say
    the least, that in  the  time  since  the  introduction  of  HC1138  no
    substantive  change  to  the  guidance  would  have  occurred  if   the
    Memorandum had the effect contended for by Mr Parkins  and  applied  by
    Judge Eames.

19. The error by Judge Eames is material. I raised the possibility  at  the
    hearing that the provision of personal bank  statements  by  the  third
    party  could  have  satisfied  Paragraph  41-SD(c)(ii),  which  is   an
    alternative to (c)(i). Mr Whitwell was right to point out that the bank
    statements at page 17 of the Appellant's bundle were in the name  of  a
    company secretary, not the third party himself. Having reflected on the
    alternative requirements, I note that bank statements  cannot  in  fact
    come from a third party in any event  and  so  the  statements  in  the
    Appellant's bundle did not comply with  Paragraph  41-SD(c)(ii)(4).  Mr
    Parkin did not seek to argue otherwise.

20. The second material error of law relates to the legal  representative's
    evidence. Whilst Judge  Eames  found  that  the  evidence  as  a  whole
    contained all mandatory information, this  simply  was  not  the  case.
    Indeed, at paragraph 18 of his decision the Appellant's acceptance of a
    deficiency in the information provided is recorded.

21. Paragraph 41-SD(d)(ii) requires there to be "a letter" from  the  legal
    representative. There was no such letter submitted with the application
    in this case. There  was  not  even  a  series  of  letters  containing
    elements of the required information in each.  Therefore,  a  mandatory
    item of evidence was missing from  the  application.  Judge  Eames  was
    wrong to have concluded that the issue  was  one  of  incorrect  format
    only.

22. The third error lies in Judge Eames' decision to admit and take account
    of the legal representative's letter of 12 August 2014. This letter did
    indeed contain all the information required by Paragraph  41-SD(d)(ii).
    However, it was clearly inadmissible under section 85A(4) of  the  2002
    Act, as the evidence related to the acquisition  of  points  under  the
    Points-Based System. This error was material.

23. The final error flows from  the  others.  On  the  admissible  evidence
    before him there was no lawful basis upon which Judge Eames could  have
    allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules, as he purported to do.

24. I set aside the decision of Judge Eames.

Re-make decision

25. In the event that I found errors  of  law,  both  representatives  were
    content for me to go on and re-make the decision on the  basis  of  the
    evidence before me. This I now do.

26. It is accepted by the Appellant that he did not provide a  bank  letter
    at the time the application was made or  at  any  stage  prior  to  the
    Respondent's decision. Having regards to my conclusions  on  the  first
    error of law identified in the decision of Judge Eames, above, an  item
    of evidence specified under Paragraph 41-SD(c)(i) was omitted. In turn,
    the Appellant was not entitled to  the  points  required  to  meet  the
    Rules. On this basis alone, the appeal must fail under the Rules.

27. As regards the  legal  representative's  evidence,  insofar  as  it  is
    admissible, there is no letter or  combination  of  letters  from  them
    containing all the information required under  Paragraph  41-SD(d)(ii),
    as I have discussed in relation to the second error  of  law  by  Judge
    Eames, above. It is not a question of wrong format, but  of  a  missing
    document or documents. Again, the Appellant was not entitled to  points
    and the appeal must fail under the Rules on this ground too.

28. As regards Paragraph 245AA, the issue of  discretion  simply  does  not
    arise in this case. There was no requirement for the Respondent to have
    exercised discretion because there were two separate items of  required
    evidence which were not provided at all with  the  application,  namely
    the bank letter and the  legal  representative's  letter(s).  In  these
    circumstances, the Appellant's situation did not fall within any of the
    categories under Paragraph 245AA.

29. There is no evidence before me of any policy which existed at the  time
    of the decision and should have been applied to the Appellant  (bearing
    in mind what I have said about the Explanatory Memorandum, above).

30. Article 8 has not been argued before me in any way. I note that it  was
    not raised in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. Even if
    it had, there is no possibility of a claim succeeding on the evidence.

Anonymity

31. No direction has been made previously and none has been sought from me.
    I see no need for one. I make no such direction.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal  on  under  the  Immigration
Rules.


Signed      Date: 14 September 2015

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed      Date: 14 September 2015

Judge H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
