
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22388/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31st January 2014                          |On 3rd July 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                        miss boipelo katlego moiketsi
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Lloyd (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant's appeal against a decision to refuse to vary  her  leave
    was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Wiseman  ("the  judge")  in  a
    determination promulgated on 18th November 2013.  The judge found  that
    the requirements of paragraph 297 of the rules were  met.   He  allowed
    the appeal on this basis and also under Article 8 of the  Human  Rights
    Convention.

2.   The Secretary of State made an application for  permission  to  appeal.
    It will be convenient to continue to refer to her as  "the  respondent"
    and to Miss Moiketsi as "the appellant" in this determination.  In  the
    application,  it  was  contended  that  the  judge  made   a   material
    misdirection in law as paragraph 297 of the rules was "not deemed to be
    appropriate at the date of application" as the appellant  was,  so  the
    author of the grounds suggested, 18 years  of  age.   Furthermore,  the
    appellant, now over the age of 18, could return to Botswana.  The judge
    erred in finding that the requirements of the rules were met.

3.   It was also contended that the  judge  erred  in  allowing  the  appeal
    under Article 8.  The appellant arrived  here  as  a  visitor,  had  no
    legitimate expectation that she will be able to  remain  and  any  ties
    established here in the United Kingdom  were  done  so  while  she  had
    precarious status.   There  were  no  exceptional  or  very  compelling
    circumstances that would result in an unjustifiably harsh  outcome  and
    so the judge erred in allowing the appeal.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted on 5 December 2013 on the  basis  that
    it was arguable that the judge erred as paragraph 297 relates to  entry
    clearance cases and when the First-tier Tribunal introduced the  issue,
    the appellant was too old to qualify.

5.   A response was made on the appellant's behalf  under  rule  24  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  As at the date of  the
    appeal hearing, on 25th October 2013, the appellant was still aged  17.
    She was accompanied by her aunt and uncle.  The appellant did not  give
    evidence but her close relatives did.  The  judge  properly  took  into
    account evidence that the appellant's aunt in  Botswana  was  alcoholic
    and he was  entitled  to  make  the  findings  he  did.   Although  the
    application for leave was not made under paragraph 297  of  the  rules,
    the judge did not err in law  in  considering  the  operation  of  that
    particular rule.  This was relevant in the  proportionality  assessment
    he made.  The appellant's application was made when she  was  16  years
    old and a delay of one  year  and  three  months  followed  before  the
    adverse decision  was  made.  The  judge  took  into  account  evidence
    regarding the appellant's life in Botswana, her  best  interests  as  a
    child in  the  light  of  section  55  of  the  2009  Act  and  reached
    conclusions that were open to him.

Submissions on Error of Law

6.   Mr Deller said that the issues could  be  narrowed  usefully.   It  was
    clear that the appellant was not 18 at the date of decision.  Secondly,
    although the judge granting  permission  observed  that  paragraph  297
    applied in  entry  clearance  cases,  paragraph  298  contained  nearly
    identical requirements.  Thirdly, paragraph 2 of  the  written  grounds
    was abandoned.  In the Secretary of State's letter giving  reasons  for
    the adverse decision, attention was  drawn  to  the  apparent  lack  of
    evidence about the aunt's condition but the judge  had  looked  at  the
    evidence and made a finding that was open to him.  What  was  left  was
    the way in which the  Tribunal  dealt  with  the  case  and  reached  a
    conclusion that the appeal fell to be allowed.

7.   When the application was made, within the period of leave given to  the
    appellant as a visitor, there was no possibility  that  the  aunt  here
    could act as a sponsor in a settlement case.  Indeed, leave was applied
    for in  form  FLR(O),  outside  the  rules,  because  of  the  domestic
    circumstances in Botswana.  The application  was  made  on  15th  March
    2012.  The rules were changed substantially on 9th July that year,  the
    Secretary of State taking a particular stance on Article 8 and  related
    matters.  Another relevant change in circumstances  was  the  grant  of
    indefinite leave to the appellant's aunt.   This  meant  that  she  was
    capable of acting as a sponsor under the settlement rules.

8.   Mr Deller said that the Secretary of State's files showed that a  first
    decision was made in August 2012.  The caseworker was  aware  that  the
    sponsor had indefinite leave to remain. There was no provision  in  the
    rules enabling a child to remain with her aunt and  so  the  caseworker
    indicated that all that could be considered  were  private  life  ties.
    The requirements of the rules were not met as the  appellant  had  been
    present here for less than seven years.  That decision  was  challenged
    in grounds which  included  an  assertion  that  the  sponsor  now  had
    indefinite leave.  When the case came to court, the Presenting  Officer
    noted that the Secretary of State had not considered section 55 of  the
    2009 Act and so the decision was withdrawn.  Under the procedure rules,
    that brought the appeal to an end.

9.   Another decision was then made, six months later.  This  gave  rise  to
    the present appeal.  The grounds of appeal prepared on the  appellant's
    behalf  were  broadly  similar  to  the  first  set  of  grounds.   The
    application for leave was made in form FLR(O),  outside  the  rule,  in
    reliance upon Article  8.   At  the  hearing,  the  judge  invoked  the
    settlement rules.  He mentioned paragraph 297 whereas the correct  rule
    should have been 298.  The judge observed that there was no reason  why
    he could not consider the  rules.   The  Tribunal  was  a  creature  of
    statute.  Paragraph 298 required, of course,  an  appropriate  form  of
    application which was not completed in this case.   Matters  concerning
    leave outside the rules fell  to  be  considered.   There  was  another
    possibility in the light of AS (Afghanistan) and the  judgment  of  the
    Supreme Court in Patel [2013] UKSC 72.  If it were contended  that  the
    decision under appeal was not in  accordance  with  the  rules  because
    certain requirements of the rules were,  in  fact,  met,  the  Tribunal
    might have a duty to determine that issue.  The adverse  decision  made
    in May 2013 contained notice under section 120 of the  2002  Act.   The
    judge was required to consider whether the settlement rules  were  met,
    after all.

10.  The determination showed that the point took hold  and  the  judge  did
    consider the settlement rules.  The Presenting Officer appears to  have
    gone along with that, even though the correct formalities - the correct
    application form in particular - were not complied with.  In any event,
    the rule contained in paragraph 298 might have  been  relevant  in  the
    proportionality assessment that the judge undertook.  In light  of  the
    grounds of appeal against  the  first  decision,  supplemented  by  the
    knowledge that the Secretary of State already had that the sponsor  had
    indefinite leave, an  application  under  the  rules  might  have  been
    invited.  However, the Secretary of State did not take this step.   Did
    the judge in fact allow the appeal under the rules?  The author of  the
    grounds to the Upper Tribunal asserted that the requirements  were  not
    met on the date of application, as the sponsor did not have  indefinite
    leave, or at the date of promulgation, as the appellant  was  over  18.
    It was pertinent to consider  how  the  judge  felt  able  to  consider
    paragraph 297 or 298 of the rules, rather than weighing the evidence in
    those contexts as factors going to proportionality.

11.  Stepping back, given the sponsor's indefinite leave,  which  was  known
    to the Secretary of State when the first decision  was  withdrawn,  and
    the six months' delay in making the second decision,  the  section  120
    notice should be given proper recognition so  that  paragraph  298  did
    fall to be considered.  Looking at the requirements of  that  rule,  in
    play was paragraph 298(i)(d), requiring serious and  compelling  family
    or other considerations making the exclusion of the child  undesirable.
    The determination showed that the judge did indeed  find  that  serious
    and compelling circumstances were present.  Home Office  guidance  fell
    to be considered where the requirements were in play.  The judge had in
    mind circumstances in Botswana and circumstances here.  Even though the
    judge's treatment  of  other  matters  might  be  described  as  rather
    cursory, he did have these factors clearly in mind.  If the  First-tier
    Tribunal properly weighed the  evidence  against  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 298, the judge concluding that the appeal fell to be allowed,
    that might be the end of the error of law challenge.  In the  light  of
    AS and Patel, if the judge was  entitled  to  consider  paragraph  298,
    there was nothing of  substance  in  the  challenge  that  he  in  fact
    referred to paragraph 297.  It might be said that the judge  failed  to
    properly identify why he felt he could consider  the  immigration  rule
    and the determination showed that Article 8 seemed to be the main basis
    of his analysis.  Nonetheless, proper consideration of the section  120
    notice might provide the answer.

12.  Ms Lloyd said that the sponsor's indefinite leave was expressly  raised
    in the grounds of appeal.  It was fair to observe that  the  solicitors
    did not expressly refer to paragraph 298 of  the  rules.   Nonetheless,
    chapter  8  of  the  appropriate  guidance  revealed  that  serious  or
    compelling considerations  fell  to  be  assessed  by  decision-makers.
    Overall, the issues were canvassed before the judge.  The guidance  was
    contained in Annex M to the IDIs,  in  chapter  8,  section  5A.   This
    governed applications by children and specifically  where  serious  and
    compelling reasons were said to be present.

Conclusion on Error of Law

13.  In substantial acceptance  of  Mr  Deller's  analysis  and  Ms  Lloyd's
    complimentary submissions, I conclude that no material error of law has
    been shown.  By the time the appeal was heard,  a  combination  of  the
    circumstances in which the first decision was withdrawn, the  sponsor's
    indefinite leave, the section 120 notice in the second decision and the
    way in which the case was put to the judge all combined to  enable  him
    properly to consider the immigration rules.  No material error is shown
    in his identification of the correct paragraph as 297 rather than 298.

14.  The determination shows that the judge had the correct guidance  before
    him (paragraph 14), as he did the evidence  of  circumstances  both  in
    Botswana and in  the  United  Kingdom.   He  accepted  the  appellant's
    sponsor and her husband as credible witnesses.  He was entitled to find
    that the appellant would be at risk on return to Botswana, in the light
    of the evidence regarding her aunt there.  He made a  brief  assessment
    of the best interests of the appellant as a child, without  overlooking
    that at the date of the hearing, she was just short  of  her  majority.
    His approach was pragmatic and sensible.  He found that in reality, the
    appellant would be dependent upon her sponsor here  for  some  time  to
    come.

15.  I conclude that the proportionality assessment made by the judge,  with
    his conclusion at paragraph 45 of the determination, was open to him on
    the evidence.  Whether or not he was entitled to allow the appeal under
    the rules, his conclusion on Article 8 was not vitiated by error.  Even
    if he did err in relation to the rules, the error is not material.

16.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material  error  of  law
    and shall stand.

ANONYMITY

No  application  for  anonymity  has  been  made  at  any  stage  in   these
proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

