
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/22781/2013
                                                               IA/30124/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 April 2014                              |On 3 June 2014               |
|Oral Determination                            |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                              mr Eduardo Pedra
                            Master Leonardo Pedra
                                                                  Appellants


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    First Appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Mr Eduardo Pedra and Master  Leonardo  Pedra  with
    permission against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge N M K
    Lawrence promulgated on 10 January 2014 in  which  he  dismissed  their
    appeals against  the  decisions  by  the  respondent  pursuant  to  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  to  refuse  to
    issue them with residence cards as  confirmation  of  their  rights  of
    permanent residence.

 2. The first appellant, who was born on 1 October 1985, is the  father  of
    the second appellant, born on 21  March  2006;  both  are  citizens  of
    Brazil.  The first appellant was married to  a  Polish  national,  Miss
    Anna Golonka, in Brazil in January 2007.  The couple then travelled  to
    the  United  Kingdom  where  Miss  Golonka  worked  and  was  therefore
    exercising treaty rights  as  she  was  entitled  to  do  as  a  Polish
    national.  Their child, the second appellant, was  born  here  but  the
    relationship broke down and in 2011 Miss Golonka petitioned for divorce
    which was made final on  7  September  2011  the  date  of  the  degree
    absolute.  Since that date (and indeed before then) Mr Pedra  has  been
    in employment.  He has joint care of the  second  appellant  who  lives
    primarily with his mother who continues to exercise  treaty  rights  in
    the United Kingdom.

 3. An application was made by the first appellant for confirmation of  his
    right of permanent residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.   His  son  was
    included in that application.  The applications  were  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State for the reasons set out in the refusal letter  dated
    30 May 2013 which  accompanied  refusal  notices  in  respect  of  both
    appellants dated 30 May 2013.   It  is  unfortunate  that  the  refusal
    notice in respect of the second appellant  is  expressed  in  identical
    terms to the notice in respect of his  father  as  clearly  the  second
    appellant is not applying as the spouse of a former EEA  national;  the
    position of the second appellant is a matter I will deal  with  at  the
    end of my decision.

 4. In summary the Secretary of State refused the application  as  she  was
    not satisfied that the first appellant  had  shown  that  he  had  been
    living in the United Kingdom for a period of five years  in  accordance
    with the Regulations.  That period has to be covered by  in  this  case
    the first appellant living in the United Kingdom whilst  his  wife  was
    exercising treaty rights and as a person who had pursuant to Regulation
    10(5) of the EEA Regulations retained a right of  residence,  residence
    in that capacity accounting for  the  remainder  of  the  period  after
    divorce.   The  respondent  reached  these  conclusions   because   the
    appellant had not provided a divorce certificate and had  not  provided
    sufficient documentary evidence to show firstly that his wife had  been
    exercising treaty rights prior to the divorce, second that she had been
    exercising treaty rights at the point  of  the  divorce  and  that  the
    appellant had not provided sufficient evidence of him  working  in  the
    United Kingdom, that is fulfilling the requirements of Regulation 10(6)
    of the EEA Regulations.  Appeals were then lodged with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the appellants electing for the matter to  be  determined  on
    the papers.

 5. The appeals came before First-tier Tribunal Judge N M  K  Lawrence  who
    noted that there was limited evidence before  him.  He  concluded  that
    there was insufficient evidence to show  that  the  appellant's  former
    wife was exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom at the date  of
    the application.  He also noted also that the appellant was married  to
    Miss Golonka.

 6. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against that decision on
    the grounds:-

      a) that the judge had erred in concluding that the appellant was still
         married when this was not the case and a degree absolute  had  been
         provided as evidence of that;

      b) that there  was  evidence  before  the  judge  that  she  had  been
         exercising treaty rights up to and until the date  of  the  divorce
         and seeking to adduce further evidence.

 7. On 4 March 2014 I granted permission to appeal on the basis that it was
    arguable that Judge Lawrence had erred by proceeding on the basis  that
    the first appellant was still married to an EEA national  when  he  was
    divorced, as shown by the decree absolute dated 7 September 2011  which
    was before him; and as the judge's findings related  to  the  issue  of
    whether the ex-wife was at the date of  application  exercising  treaty
    rights (which was not  relevant)  and   thus  he  had  failed  to  make
    relevant findings.

 8. Subsequent to the grant of permission, the respondent issued a Rule  24
    letter on 24 March 2014 stating that the respondent does not oppose the
    appellant's application for permission to appeal and invited the  Upper
    Tribunal to determine the appeal with a fresh oral hearing to  consider
    whether  the  appellant  has  retained  a  right  of  residence   under
    Regulation  10(5)  and/or  has  acquired  permanent   residence   under
    Regulation 15(1)(f) of the same Regulations.

 9. When the matter came before me there was some discussion as to what was
    now in dispute given that  there  has  been  a  substantial  amount  of
    documentation provided by the first appellant in respect of  the  first
    appellant's former wife prior  to  the  divorce;  around  the  time  of
    divorce; and the first appellant's earnings subsequent to the divorce.

10. The documents produced include a number of letters from  HM  Revenue  &
    Customs stating that the appellant and his  ex-wife  were  entitled  to
    working tax credits and covering the  three  years  prior  to  divorce.
    These set out the number of hours per week worked by Miss  Golonka  and
    her earnings.  It is evident also from the nature of  the  awards  that
    Miss Golonka was working for over 30 hours a week.   Given  that  these
    are facts accepted  by  HM  Revenue  &  Customs  I  consider  that  the
    documents are reliable evidence of Miss Golonka working in  the  United
    Kingdom and I am satisfied that she was employed in the United  Kingdom
    and therefore exercising treaty rights for the period from 15  February
    2008 until the divorce, that being confirmed by a  further  tax  credit
    award.

11. In addition, there are also wage slips provided which  show  that  Miss
    Golonka was employed around the date of the divorce,  specifically  the
    tax calculation from HM Revenue & Customs issued on 11 September  2011.
    For these reasons I am satisfied that given that the letters show  that
    the appellant and his former wife were living in the United Kingdom and
    that Miss Golonka was exercising treaty rights through employment as  a
    worker up until the date of divorce.

12. Turning then to whether  the  appellant  fulfils  the  requirements  of
    Regulation 10(6) I note that there are a number of wage slips  produced
    indicating that he has worked for several different  employers.   I  am
    satisfied, viewing these as a  whole  and  given  that  they  cover  an
    extensive period with a single employer and bearing in mind the figures
    given in the wage slips for the gross pay to date  in  respect  of  the
    first appellant's earnings  show a continuity of employment between the
    dates of the wage slips, that  the  first  appellant  does  fulfil  the
    requirements of Regulation 10(6) of the EEA Regulations in that he has,
    since the date of divorce been employed and, were he an  EEA  national,
    he would have been a "worker" and thus a qualified person.

13. Accordingly I am satisfied on the basis of the evidence before me  that
    the first appellant does meet the requirements of Regulation 15 of  the
    EEA Regulations and is entitled to be issued with a residence  card  as
    confirmation of his permanent right of residence.

14. Turning to the second appellant,  he  is  of  course  a  minor  and  is
    partially in the care of his mother who it appears is still  exercising
    treaty rights and is a Polish national.  On that basis and the basis of
    his relationship with his father who for the reasons set out  above  is
    entitled to a residence card I am satisfied he is also entitled  to  be
    issued with a card as confirmation of his right of residence.

15. Accordingly I am satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal  did  make  an
    error of law affecting the outcome of the decision.  That  decision  is
    set aside and I remake the determinations in respect of both appellants
    by allowing the appeals under the EEA Regulations.



SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

    1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making
       of an error of law, and I set it aside.

    2. I remake the decision by allowing both appeals under the Immigration
       (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006


Signed                                  Date approved:  2 June 2014
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


