
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22376/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 July 2015                      |On 18 August 2015                    |
|Prepared 18 July 2015                |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                          Mr UFuoma Sylvester Inoko
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of  Nigeria,  date  of  birth  16  May  1978,
    appealed against the Respondent's  decision,  dated  10  May  2014,  to
    refuse a residence card with reference to Regulations 6, 7 and 8(5)  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  The  appeal
    of the Appellant was rejected by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Majid  (the
    judge) who  on  6  November  2014  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision.

2.   The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on 16 December 2014.  At a hearing  on
    3 March 2015 in a written decision  subsequently  promulgated  I  found
    that the judge had made a number of errors of law which meant that  the
    Original Tribunal decision could not stand and the matter would have to
    be remade.

3.   In the Notice of Immigration Decision, dated 10 May 2014, points  taken
    by the Respondent were that the Appellant had failed to produce a valid
    marriage certificate and failed to produce evidence to prove he was  in
    a durable relationship with an  EEA  national  and  failed  to  provide
    evidence that they were a  qualified  person.   The  decision  did  not
    assert that it was a marriage of convenience.  In the extensive Reasons
    for Refusal Letter dated 8 May 2014 again the issues raised in relation
    to the validity of the marriage by proxy and the issue of there being a
    durable relationship as well as the evidence of  the  Sponsor  being  a
    qualified person but there was no suggestion by the Respondent that  it
    was a marriage of convenience or a sham marriage.  This appears to have
    been a new issue that was raised  at  the  hearing  by  the  Presenting
    Officer before First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid (D  paragraph  12).   At
    that stage it is clear that the judge although he  expressed  it  in  a
    somewhat ambiguous way was taking  a  view  that  the  absence  of  the
    Appellant or his wife was evidence that there was a sham marriage.

4.   The fact of the matter was that quite simply the  evidence  before  him
    did not establish that there was a durable relationship  but  certainly
    the Appellant's and his wife's claim was that they  were  in  a  proper
    marriage attained by proxy  and  recognised  in  the  Appellant's  home
    country.

5.   As I indicated in my directions  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  were  to
    provide witness statements concerning the durability  of  the  marriage
    and an explanation from the Sponsor of her  being  a  qualified  person
    exercising treaty rights as well as  other  evidence  relating  to  the
    validity of the marriage.  Further I directed that  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor should attend or absent of doing so for health or other reasons
    proper and adequate evidence should be filed to sustain  the  basis  of
    their absence.

6.   It was clear therefore that when I considered the error of law  neither
    the Appellant nor the Sponsor were present.  Whilst  there  may  be  an
    explanation  for  their  absence,  namely  they  were  told  by   their
    Representatives that they did not need to attend, the fact was that the
    evidence  was  not  before  me  to  show  that  there  was  a   durable
    relationship.  Thus there was no such evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Judge Majid nor before me.  I made  allowances  therefore  for  what  I
    regarded  as  ill-informed  advice  to  enable  them  to  provide  such
    evidence.

7.   At the hearing the EEA Sponsor did not attend and the Sponsor  said  in
    a statement, whose provenance was disputed by Mr Duffy,

         "(6) I understand that I have been required to attend  the  hearing
             on 17 July 2015  I  was  looking  forward  to  my  attendance.
             Unfortunately, my  father  was  killed  by  armed  robbers  in
             Nigeria.  I have therefore had to travel to  Nigeria  for  the
             burial rites.  It would have been insensitive on  my  part  to
             request the family to  stall  the  burial  on  account  of  my
             husband's pending appeal.

         (7)  I anticipate the entire burial ceremony shall  take  over  two
             months.  I am therefore appealing to the Tribunal  to  adjourn
             the hearing to any date in November so that I can  attend  the
             hearing in person."

8.   At the hearing the Appellant said that his wife left on  15  July  2015
    and although he did not know what her travel  arrangements  he  thought
    that she would go to France by train and then by air to  Nigeria.   The
    Appellant did not know when his wife's father died.  He  did  not  know
    where it had happened or what was the reason for the claimed  death  by
    armed robbers.  The Sponsor had not contacted him since she left and he
    did not know where she was.  There  was  no  evidence  other  than  the
    statement of the EEA national as to the death of her father.

9.   The Appellant did not wish for this matter to  be  adjourned,  which  I
    put to him as a consideration.  The Appellant indicated  he  wished  to
    proceed with the hearing come what may.

10.  There  was  no  new  statement  from  the  Appellant  concerning  their
    relationship, its length, durability and their respective intentions to
    wed each other.

11.  The sworn statement of the  Appellant  originally  provided,  dated  23
    July 2014, said nothing of that issue but simply asserts  there  was  a
    valid marriage which should have been recognised in the UK.

12.  The statement of the Sponsor which appeared to have been the first  one
    in existence of 15 July 2015 again principally argued that there  is  a
    valid  marriage  and  said  nothing  about  the   durability   of   the
    relationship,  the  nature  of  the  relationship,   their   respective
    intentions one to another, their way of life together or  any  personal
    matters relating to that claimed relationship.

13.  Thus even though there may be an explanation as to the  EEA  national's
    absence there was nothing provided pursuant to my directions addressing
    the issues.  I find that failure to provide such information  when  the
    point has been so clearly raised from the outset persuaded me that  the
    Appellant has failed to discharge the burden of proof that he is in the
    relationship claimed.  It may be as a fact the Sponsor was working  and
    would be a qualified person under the Rules.  What the Appellant's  and
    Sponsor's evidence does not show is that there  was  or  is  a  durable
    relationship.  There was no evidence  from  friends,  acquaintances  or
    persons speaking to their knowledge  of  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor's
    relationship.  There was no evidence from any  third  party  about  the
    matter.  There  were  no  photographs  of  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor
    together.  There is no evidence of them taking any holiday together  or
    what their intentions are one to another.   Accordingly  even  if  they
    were as ill-advised as Mr Ikie seems to have accepted the fact is  that
    the opportunity was there for them to give and address  evidence  about
    their durable relationship but they have not done so.  Accordingly even
    if the Appellant and EEA Sponsor really shared the  same  address  that
    does not demonstrate of itself or by itself that they are in a  durable
    relationship.

14.  In the circumstances I find the Appellant had failed to  discharge  the
    burden of proof that the marriage met  the  relevant  requirements.   I
    find that the basis on which they continue to contend  that  they  have
    undertaken a valid  marriage  remains  open  to  concerns  given  their
    claimed relationship.

15.  Accordingly I find that the  EEA  national  is  currently  a  qualified
    person but that the requirements of the Regulations 7 and 8(5)  of  the
    EEA Regulations 2006 has not been established.

NOTICE OF DECISION

In the circumstances the Appellant is not entitled  to  the  residence  card
claimed.

ANONYMITY ORDER

No anonymity order was requested nor is one appropriate.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has failed and therefore no fee award is appropriate.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

