


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22274/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 4 July 2013                              |On : 5 July 2013             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            muhammad muneeb afzal
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In Person (with McKenzie Friend, Mr Shahzad Ahmad)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   (SSHD) against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Woodhouse
   allowing  Mr  Afzal's  appeal,  on  Article  8   grounds,   against   the
   respondent's decision to refuse leave to remain as a Tier  1  (Post-Study
   Work) Migrant.

2. For the purposes of this decision, I shall  refer  to  the  Secretary  of
   State as the respondent and Mr Afzal as the appellant,  reflecting  their
   positions as they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

3. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 1 January 1988. He  first
   arrived in the United Kingdom on 17 January  2010  with  entry  clearance
   conferring leave to enter as a Tier 4  (General)  Student  Migrant  valid
   until 25 June 2011. On 13 October 2011 he was granted leave to remain  as
   a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant until 23 February 2012. On 23  January
   2012 he applied for further leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work)
   Migrant under the Points Based System. His application was refused on  26
   September  2012  on  the  basis  that  his  ACCA  qualification   was   a
   professional qualification and therefore did not  meet  the  requirements
   for the award of points. He was accordingly  awarded  zero  points  under
   Appendix A and B of the Rules and was unable to meet the requirements  of
   paragraphs 245FD(c) and (d) of HC 395.

4. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was heard  on
   27 November 2012 by Judge Woodhouse. The judge did not  accept  that  the
   appellant's ACCA qualification was a UK recognised degree and found  that
   he was accordingly not able to meet the requirements of  the  immigration
   rules and she dismissed the appeal on those grounds. However, she went on
   to allow the appeal on human rights grounds under Article 8 of the  ECHR,
   with reference to the guidance  in  CDS  (PBS:  "available":  Article  8)
   Brazil [2010] UKUT 00315 (IAC).

5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by  the  respondent
   on the  grounds  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
   requirements of the new Article 8 rules. The grounds also referred to the
   fact that the appellant would have completed his  ACCA  qualification  by
   the time the determination was promulgated and relied on the guidance  in
   CDS in that respect.

6. Permission to appeal was granted  on  17  January  2013  on  the  grounds
   argued.

Appeal hearing and submissions

7. The appeal was initially listed for hearing on 4 March 2013.  However  in
   view of the indication before the Tribunal that the appellant  wished  to
   cross-appeal on the basis that the case of Mirza v SSHD (ACCA Fundamental
   level qualification - not a recognised degree) [2013] UKUT 00041 had been
   wrongly decided, the appeal was adjourned in order to await  the  outcome
   of a test case in the High Court.  The  appeal  was  listed  for  a  'For
   Mention' hearing on 20 May 2013, by which time the High Court had, in the
   case of in Syed, R (on the application of) v Secretary of State  for  the
   Home Department [2013] EWHC 984, endorsed the Upper  Tribunal's  decision
   in Mirza.

8. The appeal then came before me on 4  July  2013.  The  appellant  was  no
   longer legally represented, but was accompanied  by  a  McKenzie  friend,
   Shahzad Ahmad.

9. Ms Pal relied on the grounds of appeal, submitting  that  the  judge  had
   erred by failing to consider paragraph 276ADE of  the  immigration  rules
   and had thereby erred in her  proportionality  assessment.  Her  reliance
   upon the fact that the appellant would not be able to work was irrational
   and perverse and the basis upon which she had allowed the appeal  was  in
   effect a "near miss" argument. She had given no  consideration  to  other
   aspects of the appellant's private life or to the fact  that  he  had  no
   legitimate expectation of being able to remain in the United Kingdom  and
   she had not taken into account the  Secretary  of  State's  interests  in
   maintaining a firm immigration control.

10. Mr Ahmad, on behalf of the appellant, relied on a skeleton  argument  he
   had produced in submitting that the respondent was wrong  to  argue  that
   the judge had erred by considering  Article  8  without  the  immigration
   rules. He submitted further that the judge was right to consider the work
   experience part of the  ACCA  course  since  the  qualification  was  not
   complete  until  the  work  experience  had  been  undertaken.  When  the
   appellant had been granted entry to the United Kingdom  to  do  the  ACCA
   course there had been a legitimate expectation that he would be permitted
   to do the work experience part of the course.

11. I advised the parties that in my view the judge  had  erred  in  law  by
   failing to consider the Article  8  immigration  rules  as  part  of  her
   proportionality assessment and  that  her  findings  on  Article  8  were
   materially flawed and had to be set aside.

12. In re-making the decision, I made further enquiries of the appellant  in
   regard to his circumstances in the  United  Kingdom.  He  said  that  the
   course consisted of fourteen subjects of theoretical studies followed  by
   the practical part of the studies. He should have completed the course in
   December 2012 but he had failed two subjects and so was studying  to  re-
   take them in December 2013. That was the professional part of the course,
   as he had already passed the fundamentals level. He could start the  work
   experience at any time but needed to have Tier 1 leave in order to do  so
   and therefore had not been able to commence that part of  the  course.  I
   asked him why he could not do the work  experience  in  Pakistan  and  he
   replied that the point of doing the ACCA course here was to do  the  work
   experience here. He confirmed that he was single.

13. I then heard from Mr Ahmad in regard to  the  appellant's  circumstances
   and private life. He said that he was undertaking  his  studies  and  had
   friends in the same field of study. There were parts of the ACCA  course,
   such as taxation, which were particularly relevant to the United Kingdom.
   ACCA had no chartered status in  Pakistan  and  therefore  the  appellant
   could not become a chartered accountant  there  with  that  qualification
   whilst he would be able to do that in the United Kingdom.

14. Ms Pal submitted that there was no  evidence  from  the  ACCA  board  in
   Pakistan to show how their courses were regulated. There was no  evidence
   that the ACCA course in Pakistan did not follow the same basic modules as
   the UK course or to show that the appellant  would  be  disadvantaged  by
   having to complete the course in Pakistan.

15. In response, Mr Ahmad  said  that  the  ACCA  in  Pakistan  was  just  a
   qualification, like a degree, whilst in  the  United  Kingdom  you  could
   become a chartered accountant. In Pakistan you could claim exemptions but
   you could not become a chartered accountant. The ACCA course in  Pakistan
   was cheaper and easier, but people chose to do the course in  the  United
   Kingdom because of the effectiveness of the course.

Consideration and findings

Error of Law

16. In my view Judge Woodhouse erred in law in two main respects.

17. Firstly, by omitting to give any consideration to  the  new  immigration
   rules, and by failing to take account of  the  fact  that  the  appellant
   could not meet the requirements of those  rules,  she  omitted  from  her
   assessment of proportionality the public policy interests raised by those
   rules. The Upper Tribunal provided guidance in the case of MF (Article  8
   - new rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 393 as to the two-stage approach to  the
   consideration of Article 8 and to the role to be played by the new  rules
   in the context of the wider Article 8 assessment, in the following terms:



   "However, as a result of the introduction of the new rules, consideration
   by judges of Article 8 outside the rules must be informed by the  greater
   specificity which they give to the  importance  the  Secretary  of  State
   attaches to the public interest."

18. Indeed, in Green (Article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT  00254,  the  Upper
   Tribunal, following the decision of the Administrative Court in  Nagre  v
   SSHD [2013] EWHC 720, which in turn approved the guidance  of  the  Upper
   Tribunal in Izuazu (Article 8 - new rules) [2013]  UKUT  00045,  endorsed
   the two-stage approach  and  emphasised  the  substantial  weight  to  be
   attached to the rules in the assessment of proportionality. Whilst  these
   latter decisions were subsequent to the appeal  before  Judge  Woodhouse,
   they serve only to emphasise the  need  for  judges  to  include  in  the
   proportionality assessment the  public  interest  considerations  in  the
   immigration rules.  Clearly that was a matter that the judge failed to do
   and as a result her proportionality assessment was flawed.

19. The second  respect  in  which  the  judge  erred  in  law  was  in  her
   proportionality assessment at paragraph 65 of  her  determination,  where
   she took as the overriding consideration the need for  the  appellant  to
   complete the practical part of his course in a first-world  country  such
   as the United Kingdom. As Ms Pal submitted the judge did not  include  in
   the balance other relevant considerations, such as the public interest in
   immigration control and the appellant's failure to meet the  requirements
   of the rules.

20. In the circumstances, the judge's decision has to be set aside  and  re-
   made with respect to Article 8.

Re-making the Decision

21. It is clear that the appellant  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  the
   immigration rules relating to private life, namely paragraph 276ADE,  and
   there is no suggestion of any  family  life  established  in  the  United
   Kingdom relevant to Appendix FM of the rules. His inability to meet those
   rules has not been disputed.

22. In the wider context of Article 8,  and  following  the  guidance  in  R
   (Razgar) v SSHD (2004) UKHL 27, it does not appear to be in dispute  that
   the appellant has  established  a  private  life  here,  based  upon  his
   studies, and that his removal as a consequence of the decision to  refuse
   his application would interfere with  his  private  life.  Article  8  is
   engaged.  The respondent's decision being in accordance with the law  and
   in pursuit of a legitimate aim, namely the  economic  well-being  of  the
   country in terms of immigration control, the relevant issue in the appeal
   is thus proportionality.

23. In their decision in CDS, the Upper Tribunal made it clear that  Article
   8 could not be used as a means of getting around the immigration rules:

   "It is apparent from these principles that Article 8 does not  provide  a
   general discretion in  the  IJ  to  dispense  with  requirements  of  the
   Immigration  Rules  merely  because  the  way  that  they  impact  in  an
   individual case may appear to be unduly harsh."

24. It seems to me that that is precisely what the appellant is  seeking  to
   do. He cannot meet the requirements of the rules under the  points  based
   system because his qualification is not a degree. There was no legitimate
   expectation that the grant of leave to enter would enable him to complete
   the 36 months of work experience. He was not granted a period of leave of
   sufficient duration to include such activities but was  granted  only  an
   initial period of one year, followed by a further period of eight  months
   which enabled him to complete the fundamental levels of the course and to
   commence the professional ethics module. Had he wished to  complete  that
   module, he could have applied for further leave to remain under  Tier  4,
   but he did not do so and chose instead to apply for  Tier  1  leave.  The
   letter dated 25 February 2013 from ACCA, upon which the appellant relies,
   makes it clears that the work experience part  of  the  course  could  be
   completed after his studies. No evidence has been produced to  show  that
   the appellant could not undertake that work experience in Pakistan  after
   completing the theoretical part of the course in the United Kingdom, with
   the benefit of the qualifications  gained  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and
   complete the ACCA course there. The appellant's situation is thus clearly
   not one contemplated by the Upper Tribunal in CDS  when  considering  the
   circumstances in which a breach of Article 8 could be demonstrated.

25. The appellant has not provided evidence of other aspects of his  private
   life in the United Kingdom other than his studies. His  Article  8  claim
   appears, therefore, to be based almost exclusively upon those studies and
   his future employment prospects. It is claimed that he has friends  here,
   but there was no suggestion that such ties were so strong that they could
   not be continued from outside the United Kingdom. There are otherwise  no
   other ties to the United Kingdom. In such circumstances, the  appellant's
   case with respect to Article 8 appears to be simply that the  immigration
   rule itself, in preventing him and others from undertaking the  practical
   experience part of the ACCA course in the United Kingdom, is  unfair  and
   disproportionate.  However  such  an  argument  was   rejected   by   the
   Administrative Court in Syed, in their findings at the end  of  paragraph
   29 of their judgement.

26. Furthermore, and as stated above, the new immigration rules relating  to
   Article 8 provide a strong indication of where the public  interest  lies
   in the balancing exercise. The appellant cannot meet the requirements  of
   those rules. He has not been able to show any weighty  considerations  to
   balance against the relevant public interest. He has been in  the  United
   Kingdom for only a relatively short amount of time, now three and a  half
   years, and has no real ties to the United Kingdom other than his  studies
   and some friendships of which little is known. He has completed the first
   part of his course and has not  applied  for  the  appropriate  leave  to
   complete the subsequent module. He has provided no evidence to show  that
   he would not be able to find work in Pakistan  using  his  qualifications
   gained thus far in the United Kingdom and why he could not  complete  the
   ACCA qualification in Pakistan, the country where he spent  the  majority
   of his life. Even if it is the case, as Mr Ahmad submitted, that he could
   not become a chartered accountant in Pakistan, there is no reason why  he
   could not otherwise work as an accountant in that country. He applied  to
   come to the United Kingdom  on  a  temporary  basis  and  never  had  any
   legitimate expectation that he would be able to remain here permanently.

27. In all of these circumstances I find that the respondent's  decision  to
   refuse his application for Tier 1 leave is not disproportionate and  that
   his removal in accordance with that decision would not breach  Article  8
   of the ECHR (albeit that a lawful removal decision has yet to be made  by
   the respondent).

DECISION

28. The making of the decision  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. The decision has been set aside and
   to that extent the appeal made by the SSHD  is  allowed.  I  re-make  the
   decision by dismissing the appellant's appeal, in regard to the variation
   decision, under the immigration rules  and  on  Article  8  human  rights
   grounds.













                               Signed                                  Date

                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
