
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22411/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 23 January 2019                      |On 14 February 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                    m A S
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Maqsood, Counsel, instructed by Expert Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of India whose date  of  birth  is  6  March
    1990.  He made an application on 16 December for a residence card as  a
    dependent family member of an EEA national  exercising  treaty  rights,
    namely his father-in-law [DQ], a citizen of Poland.

2.   His application was refused.  He appealed.  His appeal was  allowed  on
    29 February 2016 by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hussain.   There  is  a
    history to this case and I concluded that the judge had made a material
    error of law and set aside the decision to allow his appeal  under  the
    2006 Regulations.

3.   The history of the case and the reasons  for  my  decision  are  to  be
    found in my decision which was promulgated on 8 November 2018 following
    a hearing at Field House on 25 October 2018. The salient parts read  as
    follows:

         "2.  The Appellant appealed. His appeal was allowed by Judge of the
             First-tier Tribunal Hussain following a hearing on 29 February
             2016.  The decision was promulgated  on  8  March  2016.   The
             judge  found  that  the  marriage  was  not  a   marriage   of
             convenience finding the Appellant and his wife credible.   The
             judge went on to allow the appeal "under the Immigration (EEA)
             Regulations  2006".  The  Secretary  of  State   was   granted
             permission by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum on 15 September  2016.
             The matter came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan on
             16 November 2016. His task was to decide whether Judge Hussain
             made an  error  of  law.   He  concluded  that  Judge  Hussain
             materially erred and set aside  the  decision.  He  concluded,
             agreeing with the Secretary of State, that following the  case
             of Sala [2016] UKUT 411 there was no jurisdiction to determine
             the appeal because the Appellant's rights depended on  whether
             he could meet the  requirement  of  the  Regulations  as  they
             relate to extended family members.  He dismissed the appeal.


         3.   Judge Sheridan's decision was set aside by the Court of Appeal
             (in a decision of 3 August 2018)  following  the  decision  of
             Lord Justice Hickinbottom on 3 July 2018  granting  permission
             to the  Appellant  and  remitting  the  matter  to  the  Upper
             Tribunal for fresh determination of the Secretary  of  State's
             application for permission to appeal.  The parties agreed that
             Judge Sheridan erred in the light of the case of  Khan  [2017]
             EWCA Civ 1755.


         4.   I heard submissions from both parties at  the  hearing  before
             me.  I conclude that Judge Hussain materially  erred  in  law.
             The findings relating to the marriage of convenience  are  not
             challenged.  However, the only  way  this  Appellant's  appeal
             could succeed under the Regulations was as an extended  family
             member of an EEA national (his wife is a  citizen  of  India).
             Considering the decision of Judge Hussain, it is not  entirely
             clear whether  he  allowed  the  appeal  under  Regulation  8;
             however, if he did, there was no lawful basis to do so because
             there was no consideration of whether  the  Appellant  was  an
             extended family member in  accordance  with  the  Regulations.
             That the marriage between the Appellant and his wife,  neither
             of whom are EEA nationals, is not one of convenience is not  a
             lawful basis on which to allow an appeal this appeal under the
             2006 Regulations.  There was no analysis of Regulation  8  and
             whether  the  Appellant  met  the  requirements  set  out   in
             Regulation  8  of  the  2006  Regulations  (see  Dauhoo   (EEA
             Regulations - Reg 8(2)) [2012] UKUT 00079). This is a material
             error.  I set aside the decision to allow the appeal.


         5.   It was Mr Maqsood's view that the appeal should be allowed and
             remitted to the Secretary of State to decide whether to  issue
             a residence  card  based  on  the  Appellant's  rights  as  an
             extended family member. However,  this  is  misconceived.   It
             should have been clear to those representing the Appellant  at
             every stage of these proceedings that findings need to be made
             concerning whether the Appellant is an extended family  member
             on the basis that it is now the case as found by the FTT  that
             the marriage between him and his Sponsor's daughter in law  is
             not a sham. The judge found for the Appellant in  this  regard
             and there  is  no  reason  to  go  behind  this  finding.  The
             Secretary of State did not have to engage with reg  8  in  the
             decision letter because he concluded that the marriage was one
             of convenience and so the application was  refused.   This  is
             not a  concession  that  the  Appellant  otherwise  meets  the
             requirements of the regulations.  I indicated an intention  to
             remake the decision on the evidence before the FTT. Mr Maqsood
             asked  for  the  substantive  hearing  to  be   adjourned.   I
             reluctantly agreed to adjourn because of the  history  of  the
             case and how the matter had proceeded to date which, taking  a
             very generous view of the represented  Appellant's  situation,
             may have given rise to some confusion.   The issue is  narrow.
             It relates to dependency and or membership of  household  with
             reference to Dauhoo. I rejected  the  submission  made  by  Mr
             Maqsood that the matter should  be  remitted  to  the  FTT.  I
             adjourned the matter to be re-heard in the UT."

The resumed hearing

4.   At the resumed hearing on 23  January  2019  it  was  established  that
    there had been a failure to comply with  my  directions  and  that  the
    Appellant had not served further evidence  as  directed.   However,  Mr
    Maqsood indicated that it was his intention that the case be dealt with
    by way of submissions only.  The case was put back to later in the  day
    because the Appellant and his family were not in attendance.  They were
    travelling from Birmingham and had not arrived. I put the matter to the
    end of my list.

5.   It was Mr Maqsood's case that Dauhoo should not apply.   The  Appellant
    cannot succeed under Dauhoo.  He came to the UK in 2011; at a time when
    the Sponsor was not an EEA national.  There was no  prior  relationship
    between the Appellant and the EEA Sponsor.  Because the Appellant would
    have no protection under the 2006 Regulations or in any other  category
    it would be  right,  according  to  Mr  Maqsood,  to  afford  him  some
    protection. Mr Maqsood conceded that his submission was not  backed  by
    legal authority.  However, he invited me to find that the Appellant  is
    an extended family member notwithstanding Dauhoo.

6.   I  heard  submissions  from  Mr  Lindsay.      He  submitted  that  the
    Appellant cannot meet the Regulations.  The position is made  clear  in
    Dauhoo.  There is no hampering of free  movement  in  this  case.   The
    Appellant cannot succeed as an extended family member. He  referred  me
    to paragraph 14 of Dauhoo.

Conclusions

7.       I remind myself of the decision in Dauhoo:

         Under the scheme set out in reg 8 (2) of the Immigration  (European
         Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006,  a  person   can   succeed   in
         establishing that he or she is an "extended family member"  in  any
         one of four different  ways,  each  of  which  requires  proving  a
         relevant connection both prior to arrival in the UK and in the UK:


             i.   prior dependency and present dependency


             ii.  prior membership of a household and present membership of
                  a household


             iii. prior dependency and present membership of a household;


             iv.  prior membership of a household and present dependency.


         It  is  not  necessary,  therefore,  to  show  prior  and   present
         connection in the same capacity:  i.e.  dependency-  dependency  or
         household membership-household membership ((i) or  (ii)  above).  A
         person may also qualify if able to show (iii) or (iv).

8.   It is accepted  that  the  Appellant  is  a  "present"  member  of  the
    Sponsor's household and that he does not satisfy either of the  "prior"
    requirements.   Mr Maqsood's argument, raised at  the  resumed  hearing
    for the first time was a last -ditch attempt.  The case  was  adjourned
    on the last occasion to give the Appellant  the  opportunity  to  serve
    further evidence. The Appellant did not  comply  with  the  directions.
    His solicitors must have advised him that he could  not  succeed  under
    the Regulations.  For some reason he decided to pursue this appeal.  It
    may be that he has been  poorly  advised  by  his  solicitors.  He  and
    members of his family travelled to the hearing centre from  Birmingham.
    There was no live evidence.  Furthermore, there was simply no  hope  of
    this appeal succeeding under EU Law. There was  no  argument  that  the
    Regulations would be improperly applied to the Appellant. There was  no
    argument that the  Directive  was  not  properly  transposed  into  the
    Regulations or that there was an issue with interpretation.  There  was
    no reference made by Mr Maqsood  to  the  Directive.  The  nub  of  the
    argument was that there is no other route  under  which  the  Appellant
    could succeed and therefore the decision is unfair.  This is a hopeless
    and spurious argument. There is no good reason to depart  from  Dauhoo.
    There is no legal basis under EU  law  on  which  this  appeal  can  be
    allowed.


9.   The Appellant's appeal is dismissed under the 2006 Regulations.


Signed            Joanna McWilliam                    Date 7 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

