
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/22932/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25th January 2016                     | On 7th April 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before


                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 mrs jin xin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Lam (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The respondent is a citizen of China.  Her appeal against decisions  to
    refuse to vary her leave and to remove her from the United  Kingdom  by
    way of directions under section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006 was allowed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Housego
    ("the judge") in a decision promulgated on 3rd October 2015.  The judge
    found that the decisions were  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  and
    proceeded to dismiss the appeal in relation to the  respondent's  human
    rights but allow it under the Immigration Rules ("the rules").

2.   Permission to appeal was sought by the  Secretary  of  State.   It  was
    contended that the judge erred in finding that the Secretary  of  State
    had confined herself to treating the ending of the relationship between
    the respondent and another person as the only and determinative  factor
    in refusing the application for further  leave,  following  an  earlier
    grant of leave for three years in March 2011.  The judge's finding that
    the Secretary of State had assessed the case too  narrowly  formed  the
    basis of his conclusion that the decisions to refuse to vary leave  and
    to remove the respondent were not in accordance with the law.

3.   The  Secretary  of  State  had  in  fact  considered  the  most  recent
    application under paragraph 276ADE of  the  rules  but  the  respondent
    could not meet those requirements.   She arrived in the United  Kingdom
    in 1999 and there were no significant obstacles to her  integration  on
    return to China.  The judge's overall conclusion that the  appeal  fell
    to be allowed under the rules was unsustainable.

4.   In a second and related ground, it was contended that  the  judge  gave
    no proper reasons for finding that the respondent met the  requirements
    of the rules.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    on 26th November 2015.

Submissions on Error of Law

6.   Ms Pal, for the Secretary  of  State,  drew  attention  to  the  letter
    giving reasons for the adverse decisions, dated 12th May 2014.  In  the
    letter, mention was made of the grant of  discretionary  leave  to  the
    respondent for a period of three years, apparently on the basis of  her
    then subsisting relationship with another person.  However, by the time
    the Secretary of State dealt with her application  for  further  leave,
    the respondent was unable to show that she still  enjoyed  family  life
    with her partner as the relationship no longer  existed.   Nonetheless,
    she sought to remain in the United Kingdom on a private life basis.

7.   Careful consideration was given to the respondent's case, as was  clear
    from the third page of the Secretary of State's  letter.   Mention  was
    made there of friendships, the  absence  of  anyone  dependent  on  the
    respondent and the presence in China of  her  daughter,  a  person  who
    might be able to offer support.  What appeared in the letter undermined
    the judge's finding that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not  properly
    considered the case.

8.   The Secretary of State maintained that discretionary  leave  was  given
    to the respondent on the basis of family life  with  her  partner.   In
    2014, she sought further leave on a different basis but she was  simply
    not entitled to it as she could not meet the requirements of the rules.
     The Secretary of State made a proper assessment, including considering
    whether there were any exceptional circumstances justifying  the  grant
    of leave.   The judge had not explained why he allowed the appeal under
    the rules.

9.    In  response,  Mr  Lam  relied  upon  written  submissions  from   the
    respondent's solicitors, contained in a letter dated 19th January 2016.
     In that letter, it was asserted that the Secretary of  State  did  not
    challenge any  of  the  findings  of  fact  made  by  the  judge.   The
    respondent's sixteen years in the United Kingdom and her community ties
    were factors which fell in her favour in relation to Article 8, outside
    the rules.  The decision showed that  the  judge  was  aware  that  the
    respondent did not fall within the rules and the grant of discretionary
    leave was given to her outside them.  The judge was  entitled  to  note
    that reasons for the previous grant appeared to be absent.

10.  In the letter from the respondent's solicitors,  the  overall  decision
    was described as somewhat strange  as  it  included  dismissal  of  the
    appeal on human rights grounds but a favourable outcome in relation  to
    the rules.  The respondent's solicitors accepted  that  the  judge  may
    have erred in allowing the appeal under the rules but, nonetheless, all
    the findings of fact tended to show that the respondent ought  to  have
    succeeded under Article 8.

11.  Mr Lam  said  that  the  decision  did  appear  somewhat  curious.   At
    paragraph 51, the judge found  that  the  respondent's  ties  with  the
    community had strengthened since 2011.  The  finding  at  paragraph  45
    that the Secretary of  State  had  not  shown  that  her  reasoning  in
    refusing the respondent's application was correct was open to him.   It
    had not been shown that the earlier grant of  discretionary  leave  was
    only because of the respondent's relationship with  her  partner.   The
    decision letter appeared to focus on the relationship and  have  little
    regard to other  matters.   These  included  the  length  of  time  the
    respondent was present in the United Kingdom, although she had no leave
    until 2011.  It was accepted that her status was  precarious.   In  her
    bundle at pages 5 and 6 were copies of a SAL 2 letter  issued  in  1999
    which gave the respondent the  right  to  work.   Taking  into  account
    section 117B of the 2002 Act, the respondent was not a burden on public
    funds and she spoke English.  She had never been in  trouble  with  the
    police.  It might be accepted that the Secretary  of  State's  decision
    letter should have addressed other aspects of her life, other than  her
    relationship.  The length of her presence in  the  United  Kingdom,  at
    sixteen or seventeen years, was significant.  The judge was entitled to
    make the findings he did in paragraph 45 and at paragraphs 50 to 51.

12.  Even if the judge had erred in law, his findings  in  relation  to  the
    respondent's private life were open to him  and  not  been  challenged.
    The judge was entitled to find that the decisions made by the Secretary
    of State were not in accordance with the law.

13.  In a brief response, Ms Pal said that it was clear that  the  Secretary
    of State had considered the respondent's  private  life  ties  and  the
    length of her  time  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  judge  had  erred
    materially in law.


Findings and Conclusions on Error of Law

14.  The outcome recorded at the end of the judge's  decision  is  difficult
    to reconcile with the Secretary of  State's  reasons  for  deciding  to
    refuse to vary the respondent's leave and to remove her to China, given
    in the letter of 12th May 2014.   The  requirements  of  the  rules  in
    relation to private life ties were simply not met.  As the respondent's
    relationship  with  her  partner,  which  was  at  the  very  least   a
    substantial and relevant factor when she was given discretionary  leave
    in 2011, had come to an end, she had no family life case under Appendix
    FM.  The findings and conclusions made by the judge at paragraphs 39 to
    51 of the decision do not engage with the rules at all.

15.  It follows that no reasons, or no sustainable reasons, have been  given
    for the decision to allow the appeal under the rules.

16.  Dismissal of the human rights appeal is, on the face  of  it,  entirely
    consistent with the reasoning which preceded it.  At  paragraph  49  of
    the decision, having taken into account section 117A to D of  the  2002
    Act, the judge correctly directed himself that little weight fell to be
    given to the respondent's private life ties,  at  least  in  the  years
    between  1999  and  2011.   More  weight  fell  to  be  given  to  ties
    established or developed in the  years  2011  to  2014,  when  she  had
    discretionary leave but, overall, the judge concluded that the  private
    life claim failed.

17.  The  judge  accepted  that  the  Secretary  of  State  made  a  general
    evaluation of the respondent's circumstances but went on, in  paragraph
    51, to find that in refusing to vary  the  respondent's  leave  and  in
    deciding to remove her, the Secretary of State "did  not  consider  any
    matter other than the ending of the relationship" with the respondent's
    partner, "such as the increase to sixteen years of  the  (respondent's)
    innocuous residence in the UK and the ties ... to her community".  This
    apparent failure was described as an error of law on the  Secretary  of
    State's part.

18.  Ms Pal submitted that, in fact, the Secretary  of  State  did  consider
    other matters in refusing to vary the  respondent's  leave.   I  accept
    that submission in the light of what appears on pages 2 and  3  of  the
    decision letter.  It is clear that taken into account  were  the  years
    the respondent has spent in the United Kingdom, the years she spent  in
    China before arriving  here,  the  precariousness  of  her  immigration
    status and the  absence  of  any  expectation  that  she  might  remain
    indefinitely without meeting the requirements of the rules,  her  claim
    to have established many friendships, the absence of  anyone  dependent
    on her in the United Kingdom and the prospect of support on  return  to
    China from her daughter there.  Overall, it is clear from the  decision
    letter that the Secretary of State did take into account aspects of the
    respondent's case in addition to the ending of  her  relationship  with
    her partner.

19.  In the light of the decision  to  allow  the  appeal  under  the  rules
    although the relevant  requirements  were  not  met,  and  the  judge's
    finding  that  the  Secretary  of  State  impermissibly  narrowed   her
    assessment, contrary to what in fact appears in the decision letter,  I
    conclude that the judge erred materially in law.  Insufficient  reasons
    were given for allowing the appeal as he did and  for  concluding  that
    the Secretary of State's adverse decisions were not in accordance  with
    the law.

20.  Mr Lam suggested that favourable  findings  of  fact,  which  were  not
    challenged, should be preserved and a submission to  this  effect  also
    appears in the  written  response  from  the  respondent's  solicitors.
    Attention was drawn to findings made in paragraphs 45, 50 and 51 of the
    decision.  The difficulty here is that paragraph 45 merely  contains  a
    finding that the Secretary of State has not shown a "correct" reason in
    her decision letter and failed to identify the considerations which led
    to the earlier grant of discretionary leave.   As  noted  earlier,  the
    Secretary of State did in fact consider the respondent's  circumstances
    more broadly.  So far as paragraphs 50  and  51  are  concerned,  these
    contain the judge's view of the importance of immigration  control  and
    the way in which the  Secretary  of  State  exercised  her  discretion.
    There are no relevant findings of fact to preserve, save for the period
    of years the respondent has been present here (about which there is  no
    dispute).

21.  In a brief discussion regarding the venue for  remaking  the  decision,
    Ms Pal was neutral and Mr Lam suggested that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    would be best, in view of the extent of the fact-finding required and a
    need to amend the grounds of appeal.  I  agree  with  Mr  Lam  and  the
    decision shall be remade in the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross.

Notice of Decision

22.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contains  material  errors  of
    law and is set aside.  It will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal  at
    Hatton Cross, before a  judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Housego.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

ANONYMITY

There has been no application for anonymity and I make no direction on  this
occasion.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

