
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22146/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th May 2017                       |On 10th May 2017                     |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                            MS ROSE MARIE MCLEOD
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E. Oremuyiwa, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 29th of August 1966. She
      appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Oliver
      sitting at Hatton Cross on 8th of August 2016 in  which  he  dismissed
      her appeal against a decision of the  Respondent  dated  27th  of  May
      2015. That decision was to refuse to grant her leave to remain in  the
      United Kingdom outside the Immigration Rules under Article 8.


   2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 20th of  June  2002  as  a
      visitor. She was granted a student visa valid from  21st  of  February
      2003 until 30th of September 2003. She made two  further  applications
      for a student visa on 30th of June 2006 and 19th of July 2006 both  of
      which were rejected and refused. On 23rd of July 2008 she  was  served
      with form IAS 151 as an overstayer.


   3. On 27th of March 2014 she claimed asylum on the grounds that  she  had
      given evidence against a man at a trial in the United Kingdom when  he
      was indicted for  rape  against  his  daughter  (he  was  subsequently
      acquitted). The man returned to Jamaica  after  serving  a  nine-month
      sentence for assault and told the  Appellant  to  remember  that  they
      would all meet up in Jamaica which she took as a threat. She  did  not
      complain to  the  police  at  the  time  because  of  her  immigration
      problems.


   4. The Respondent considered the asylum claim to be without any merit and
      it was certified as such. It appears that the Upper Tribunal  rejected
      a judicial review challenge to the certification on the basis that the
      Appellant's protection claim had no prospects of success on appeal. On
      16th of January 2015 the Appellant applied to remain outside the rules
      on the basis of her family and private life  arguing  under  paragraph
      276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules  there  would  be  very  significant
      obstacles to the Appellant's reintegration back to Jamaica.


   5. The Appellant was said to have a particular  close  relationship  with
      her cousin whom she treated like a daughter. The man against whom  she
      had given evidence would kill her if  he  found  her  in  Jamaica.  He
      belonged  to  a  gang  which  was  strongly  feared  in  Jamaica.  The
      Respondent refused the application on the basis that the Appellant had
      spent the first 36 years of her life in Jamaica and had not  lost  all
      social, cultural and family ties. Her evidence in the Crown Court  was
      not an exceptional circumstance warranting consideration  outside  the
      Rules. There was no medical condition  warranting  her  stay  in  this
      country.

The Decision at First Instance

   6. At the hearing at first instance the Appellant gave  evidence  of  her
      friendships in the United Kingdom and that she had become an  integral
      part of the local community. She explained the very close relationship
      she had with her cousin and that they could not bear to  be  separated
      from each other. She  had  been  receiving  counselling  to  help  her
      through her stress, fear and depression. Her own  children  were  both
      now in America although her daughter was  only  there  as  a  6  month
      visitor. In Jamaica, the Appellant had worked in  a  hotel  and  in  a
      factory. She had worked in a hotel  in  the  United  Kingdom  too  but
      stopped just after her visa expired in 2003 and had not worked  since.
      She had been supported since then by family and friends. She  did  not
      know if anyone she knew had contacted the man she feared.  The  people
      in his neighbourhood had severed ties with him because she had cousins
      living in that area and so knew that. She did not know if the man  had
      any influence locally but she knew he had a gun. The police in Jamaica
      would not provide protection for her.


   7. Paragraph 10 of his determination the Judge wrote:


         "The Appellant's fear of the man against whom  she  gave  evidence
         was fully considered at the time  of  her  asylum  appeal.  Nothing
         material has changed since then and she has not  explained  any  of
         the circumstances which led her to claim that he will kill her. The
         Appellant's claim is based on her private life,  to  which  I  give
         little weight because it has developed while she has  been  in  the
         United Kingdom in breach of immigration law without leave.  In  the
         circumstances, I do not accept that there would be very significant
         obstacles to her integration into  Jamaica.  This  being  the  only
         potentially exceptional circumstance, since it has been  considered
         already under the Rules it cannot be a reason for  considering  the
         claim outside the Rules. In any event the public  interest  in  the
         maintenance of a firm but fair immigration system far outweighs her
         own interests".


    The Judge dismissed the appeal under both the Immigration Rules and  on
    Human Rights grounds.

The Onward Appeal

   8.  The  Appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  arguing  that  the
      determination was biased.  The  Judge  had  relied  on  the  principle
      established in the case of Devaseelan which only supported findings on
      the same appeal. The Judge needed to make his own  assessment  on  the
      basis of evidence adduced before him in this case. He  pre-judged  the
      Appellant's  case.  The  Judge  had  not  attempted  to   assess   the
      Appellant's  claim  independently  following  the  amount  of  witness
      evidence made available  at  the  hearing.  The  Judge  had  erred  by
      comparing the Appellant's asylum  claim  to  her  current  immigration
      application and not accorded any weight to the amount of time that had
      passed and the level of threats received by  the  Appellant  following
      her participation in a severe criminal matter. The grounds also argued
      that the Judge had asked irrelevant questions but gave no examples  of
      any such. The grounds cited various authorities on Article  8  arguing
      that the Judge  had  refused  or  declined  to  examine  the  material
      evidence before him.


   9. The application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers  before
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on 8th of  February  2017.  He  noted
      that the grounds of onward appeal had consisted of a series of  quotes
      and assertions without engaging with the decision. At paragraph  4  he
      wrote: "the asylum claim would  have  been  considered  to  the  lower
      standard and would have had to consider the issues of  protection  and
      internal relocation, Devaseelan applied. The Judge was obliged to take
      that as a starting point, he was entitled to find that  there  was  no
      evidence to justify  departing  from  the  earlier  decision.  As  the
      Appellant  had  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  illegally   for   some
      considerable time her private life would attract  little  weight.  The
      grounds are a lengthy disagreement with  findings  properly  made  and
      open to the Judge for the reasons given."


  10. The Appellant renewed her application for permission to appeal to  the
      Upper Tribunal following this rejection in grounds largely disagreeing
      with the assessment of the Article 8 claim. The First-tier Tribunal it
      was said had erred in law by not applying the appropriate standard  of
      proof to the Appellant's case. She had a well-founded fear  on  return
      to her home country she  had  been  a  vital  witness  in  a  criminal
      prosecution matter. The Judge could  not  hold  that  the  Appellant's
      asylum claim would have been unsuccessful that would be  to  pre-judge
      the Appellant's case without careful consideration.


  11. The renewed application for  permission  came  before  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Smith on 24th of March 2017. In granting  permission  to  appeal
      she wrote: "the first ground takes issue with the  standard  of  proof
      applied to what is said to be a  protection  claim.  The  Respondent's
      decision under appeal did not relate to that  protection  claim.  That
      claim was determined in an earlier decision and certified  as  clearly
      unfounded. The Upper Tribunal rejected a judicial review challenge  to
      certification. The Appellant did not appeal  that  decision.  Although
      the basis of the Upper Tribunal's decision (UTJ Southern) is that  the
      protection claim has no prospect of success on appeal, it is  arguable
      that the Judge has erred by assuming at paragraph 10 of  the  decision
      that this is the same consideration of the substance of the  claim  as
      would be made on appeal, that findings had already been made  on  that
      claim and  that  those  were  therefore  the  starting  point  to  his
      determination. The remaining grounds are less persuasive.  However,  I
      do not limit the grant of permission."


  12. The Respondent replied to the grant of permission under rule 24 of the
      Procedural Rules. She relied on the House of Lords decision  of  South
      Bucks District Council v Porter [2004]  UK  HL  33.  The  reasons  for
      decision must be intelligible and they must  be  adequate.  They  must
      enable the reader to understand why the matter was decided as it  was.
      The First-tier Judge's reasons according to the Respondent enabled the
      reader to understand why the matter was decided as it was at paragraph
      10. The First-tier Judge was correct to say there had been no material
      change since the Appellant's  last  determination.  It  could  not  be
      established that a different decision could  have  been  reached.  The
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal directed himself appropriately.

The Hearing Before Me

  13. In consequence of the grant of permission the matter was set down  for
      hearing on whether there had been a material error of  law  such  that
      the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside.  I  heard
      submissions  from  both  representatives.  For  the   Appellant,   her
      solicitor relied on a skeleton argument which now  conceded  that  the
      standard of proof in the case was the  balance  of  probabilities  (as
      opposed to the so-called lower standard). However once  the  Appellant
      could show that the decision  maker  had  violated  her  rights  under
      Article 8 the onus then rested on the decision maker  to  justify  the
      breach. The Judge's reasons for his decision were  not  reasonable  or
      adequate and he  had  not  undertaken  a  careful  assessment  of  the
      Appellant's case. The skeleton argument again conceded that for  leave
      to remain to be granted outside the Immigration Rules that should only
      be  in  an  exceptional  case.  As  this  was  not  a  case  involving
      criminality or deportation the  Appellant  should  have  been  granted
      leave  outside  the  rules.  The  Judge  had  failed  to  undertake  a
      proportionality assessment in his decision.


  14. In oral submissions it was argued that the First-tier Tribunal had not
      considered the actual facts of the case or the risks  upon  return  to
      Jamaica. The case had not been looked at outside the rules. Devaseelan
      was applied but this  claim  was  different.  There  were  significant
      obstacles to the Appellant's relocation in Jamaica. The Appellant  had
      been in the United Kingdom for  15  years  following  overstaying  but
      during that time she had put down roots in the United Kingdom.


  15. In reply, the Presenting Officer indicated that this was a  perversity
      challenge but the decision was  not  perverse.  The  very  significant
      obstacles test contained in paragraph 276 ADE (vi) was not to be  used
      for a 2nd bite at the cherry. The test was whether the Appellant could
      have a private life in Jamaica. The Appellant had made an asylum claim
      on the same facts that she was arguing now but the certificate had not
      been overturned. The Appellant could not  use  the  guise  of  private
      life. The question was whether the Appellant would be such an outsider
      that she would not be able to form a private life within a  reasonable
      time. She was not at risk as had already been decided. The presence of
      the individual concerned (who was said to have made  the  threats)  in
      Jamaica was irrelevant for the purposes of 276  ADE.  It  was  a  much
      narrower issue. Finally, in reply the Appellant's solicitor said  that
      this was a private life application the Tribunal had to make  its  own
      findings and there were obstacles to relocation.

Findings

  16. The Appellant makes two challenges in this  case.  The  first  is  the
      Judge's treatment of her claim that she would be at risk  upon  return
      to Jamaica because she  feared  a  man  against  whom  she  had  given
      evidence at a criminal trial in the United Kingdom. She made  a  claim
      for asylum on that basis which  was  refused  by  the  Respondent  and
      certified as being without merit. There appears to have  been  no  new
      evidence of threats since the Respondent's  certification  and  it  is
      difficult to see how such a vague claim could indeed amount to a valid
      claim for international protection. The  Respondent's  certificate  is
      wholly understandable as is  the  rejection  of  the  judicial  review
      challenge by the Upper Tribunal.


  17. The grant of permission in this case  appears  to  be  concerned  with
      whether  by  indicating  there  were  significant  obstacles  to   the
      Appellant's re-integration back into Jamaica the  First-tier  Tribunal
      should have re-examined the Appellant's claim that she feared  threats
      from the individual against whom she had given evidence. The criticism
      made of the first-tier Tribunal in this case is  that  the  Judge  has
      applied the ratio in the case of Devaseelan [although I note  that  at
      no point does the Judge himself refer to that case] whereas he  should
      have looked at the facts of the case  himself.  There  are  however  a
      number of problems with that submission. The first is  that  the  test
      applied by Upper Tribunal Judge Southern  would  have  been  that  the
      decision of the Respondent to certify the Appellant's asylum claim  is
      being without merit was not Wednesbury unreasonable. As the grounds of
      onward appeal now acknowledge the standard of proof in this  case  was
      not the lower standard applicable to asylum claims but the balance  of
      probabilities as this was an Article 8 claim outside  the  Immigration
      Rules not an Article 3 claim.


  18.  On that basis there was ample material before the Judge  for  him  to
      find that the Appellant could not show on the balance of probabilities
      that it was more likely than not  that  there  were  very  significant
      obstacles to her relocation to Jamaica. The Respondent's  decision  to
      certify the asylum claim as  being  without  merit  was  a  reasonable
      decision, that was the  effect  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Southern's
      decision. As the  Respondent's  decision  was  a  reasonable  one  the
      Appellant could not  show  it  was  more  likely  than  not  that  the
      Respondent had got it wrong and that she was at risk upon  return.  If
      the Respondent had been wrong to say that the  Appellant's  claim  for
      asylum was without merit the picture might have  been  very  different
      but that was not the reality the First-tier Judge was dealing with.


  19. The Appellant had not appealed further Upper Tribunal Judge Southern's
      rejection of her judicial review claim. The issue had  therefore  been
      decided, the Appellant did not have a valid claim for asylum and there
      was no new evidence put before the Judge to cause  him  to  re-examine
      the matter. The Judge specifically stated as much at paragraph 10 when
      he said "nothing material has changed since  [the  Appellant's  asylum
      appeal was considered]". Brief as the Judge's  decision  was,  he  was
      quite entitled to dismiss the claim under paragraph 276 ADE  and  find
      that there were no  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
      return to Jamaica.


  20. The remainder of the grounds are as Upper Tribunal Judge Smith pointed
      out less persuasive. The Appellant had a bad immigration  record.  She
      had overstayed by several years and little  if  any  weight  could  be
      attached to a private life that she had acquired during the  time  she
      was here. That she had made a number of meritless applications in  the
      meantime did not strengthen her claim to a private  life  but  did  go
      some way perhaps toward explaining any  delay  by  the  Respondent  in
      dealing with her. The Judge was quite entitled  to  conclude  that  so
      little weight could be given to the Appellant's  claim  to  a  private
      life that it was easily outweighed by the weight to be  given  to  the
      fact that this was  a  claim  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.  There
      appears  to  be  no  family  life  claim  of  any  significance,   the
      relationship between the Appellant and her cousin being that of adults
      displaying no more than normal emotional ties.  The  Judge's  findings
      were open to him on the evidence and the grounds of onward appeal were
      indeed no more than a disagreement with the result.  The  decision  of
      the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error of  law
      and I dismiss the Appellant's onward appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.

Signed this 8th day of May 2017

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.

Signed this 8th day of May 2017

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
