
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22566/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 27th November 2015                         | On 22nd December 2015        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                          MR MUHAMMAD ZESHAN QAMAR
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A. Syed-Ali of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 6th November  1988.   He
    appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Cassel
    in Chambers dated 12th March 2015 in  which  the  Judge  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  12th
    May 2014.  That decision was to refuse the Appellant's application  for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    Migrant under the points-based system and  for  a  biometric  residence
    permit and remove the Appellant by way of directions under  Section  47
    of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

2.   On 7th March 2014 the Appellant made a combined application  for  leave
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student and for  a  biometric  residence  permit.
    The  Respondent  refused  the  application  on  the  grounds  that  the
    Appellant could not meet the requirements of paragraph 245ZX(C) of  the
    Immigration  Rules  as  he  had  not  been  awarded  30  points  for  a
    Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies (CAS).  The CAS checking service
    was checked by the Respondent on 12th May 2014  but  no  CAS  had  been
    assigned to the Appellant.  As such he failed to meet the  requirements
    of paragraph 117 of Appendix A.  He was  also  awarded  no  points  for
    maintenance arising therefrom.

3.   The Appellant appealed  against  that  decision  arguing  that  he  had
    submitted his Tier 4 leave to remain application on 7th March 2014 with
    an offer letter from Radcliffe College. That was as much  as  he  could
    send as he did not have his full English language score at  that  time.
    Radcliffe College had explained the situation in  their  letter  making
    the conditional offer to the Appellant and had requested the Respondent
    to consider the matter.  The Appellant was under  the  impression  that
    Radcliffe College would send him a CAS  as  soon  as  he  received  his
    English language test score.  Unfortunately the result of the test took
    an unusually long  time  to  be  published  and  in  the  meantime  the
    Appellant received a refusal letter from the Respondent on the  grounds
    of no CAS supplied.  The Appellant was now in a position to send both a
    CAS and an English language certificate but  his  application  remained
    refused.  The Appellant argued  there  was  procedural  unfairness  and
    relied on the case of Thakur [2011] UKUT 00151.  The  failure  to  meet
    the requirements at the time of making his application was  beyond  his
    control as he had not received his result in the  expected  time.   The
    Respondent could have asked for an explanation of  what  was  happening
    instead of refusing the application outright.  The Appellant should  be
    shown discretion and allowed leave under the Tier 4 Rules and  in  line
    with the principles of CDS (Brazil) [2010] UKUT 305.

The Decision at First Instance

4.   The Judge found the Respondent's decision to refuse under the Rules  to
    be a well reasoned one with careful consideration  of  the  documentary
    evidence submitted.  The decision was not one based on rote, it  was  a
    fair  assessment  and  the   outcome   was   neither   surprising   nor
    unreasonable.  The appeal was dismissed under the Rules.   In  relation
    to Article 8 the Judge directed himself in accordance with Nagre [2013]
    EWHC 720.  There was no suggestion  the  Appellant  could  satisfy  the
    requirements of Appendix FM in relation to any claim for family life or
    paragraph 276ADE for any claim to private life.  It  was  proportionate
    to the legitimate aim being  pursued  that  the  Appellant  should  not
    remain in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant  appeared  able  to  speak
    English  and  in  the  Judge's  view  might  well  be  able  to  manage
    financially but little weight could be given to his private life  under
    Section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.
    There was no evidence he had built up a wide  network  of  friends  and
    appeared to have no health problems.  The appeal  was  dismissed  under
    both the Rules and Article 8.

The Onward Appeal

5.   The Appellant appealed against this  decision  repeating  his  argument
    that there had been a delay in obtaining his language certificate.  His
    application was only  supported  by  an  offer  letter  from  Radcliffe
    College as the college was reluctant to assign him with a  CAS  due  to
    the absence of an English language  test  certificate.   The  Appellant
    added that at the time Radcliffe College  were  not  on  the  Sponsor's
    register.  No other college would assign a CAS whilst  the  Appellant's
    application  was  pending.  The  Respondent  had  failed  to   exercise
    evidential flexibility.  The Appellant had come to the  United  Kingdom
    for higher education and made progress for which  he  had  obtained  an
    extension of leave as a student.  His ongoing studies in which  he  had
    made this progress would be unnecessarily interrupted  by  his  removal
    from the United Kingdom.

6.   The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cruthers  on  28th  May  2015.    Refusing
    permission to appeal he wrote that the grounds amounted to no more than
    an attempt to re-run the Appellant's case  that  was  rejected  by  the
    Judge.  The simple fact was that the Appellant had no CAS with which to
    support the application that was refused by the Respondent on 12th  May
    2014.  There was no basis  on  which  the  Judge  could  properly  have
    allowed this appeal.

7.   The Appellant renewed his application for permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal on the same grounds as before.  His renewed  application
    came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty on 30th July 2015.   In
    granting permission to appeal he wrote it was arguable that the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  materially  erred  in  law  in  failing  to
    adequately explain his reasons why he  rejected  the  Appellant's  case
    that the Respondent had failed to act fairly.  The  Respondent  replied
    to this grant of permission on 13th August  2015  submitting  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision was adequately reasoned.  The  Appellant
    had not submitted a valid CAS and thus fell to  be  refused  under  the
    Rules.  The Respondent relied on the Court of  Appeal  decision  of  EK
    (Ivory Coast) [2014] EWCA Civ 1517.  The Respondent was not responsible
    for any erroneous actions of a college.  Further the  Court  of  Appeal
    decision in Kaur [2015] EWCA Civ 13  where  the  court  had  considered
    deficiencies in the CAS was also against the Appellant.

The Hearing before Me

8.   Counsel  for  the  Appellant  argued  that  he  wished  to  modify  the
    Appellant's grounds of  onward  appeal  in  order  to  distinguish  the
    Appellant's case from the facts of EK (Ivory Coast).  On 7th March 2014
    the Appellant had made his application  with  an  offer  letter  and  a
    covering letter.  He had clearly drawn the attention of the  Respondent
    to the fact that Radcliffe College had lost its licence.  Following the
    Supreme  Court  decision  in  Mandalia  [2015]  UKSC  59  the   process
    instruction obliged the Respondent first to have invited the  applicant
    in that case to repair the  deficit  in  his  evidence.   There  was  a
    deficit of evidence in this Appellant's case with a  clear  explanation
    why a CAS was not  produced  at  the  time  of  the  application.   The
    Appellant obtained his English language certificate on 19th April  2014
    but the refusal was on 12th May one month after the Appellant was  able
    to make a  proper  application  if  there  had  been  a  request.   The
    Appellant should have been given 60 days to  make  another  application
    and would then have been able to meet all the conditions.

9.   In response the Respondent relied on the Rule 24 response.  A  CAS  had
    not been provided.  In the decision  of  EK  (Ivory  Coast)  (where  an
    applicant's CAS had been withdrawn in error by the college) it was held
    by the Court of Appeal  that  the  requirement  on  the  Respondent  to
    postpone making a decision on an application in order to raise with the
    applicant the cancellation of a CAS letter would undermine the benefits
    associated  with  the  points-based  system  in   a   significant   and
    inappropriate way.  There was no common law duty owed to the  Appellant
    in this case and  the  correct  decision  had  been  made.   Under  the
    Respondent's 60 day  policy  where  a  CAS  is  cancelled  because  the
    sponsoring college loses its licence the applicant has 60 days to  find
    another Sponsor. This did not apply in this case because the reason for
    refusal was that a CAS had not been provided as the Appellant  had  not
    passed his English language test.  It was not refused because Radcliffe
    College had lost its sponsorship licence.  Reliance was placed  by  the
    Respondent on the case of Kaur in which it was held that when a Tier  4
    Sponsor failed to provide the evidence via a CAS to enable a student to
    secure the  necessary  points,  there  was  no  obligation  founded  in
    fairness which obliged the Respondent further to investigate  with  the
    Sponsor or to inform a student (paragraph 38 of Kaur).

10.  In conclusion Counsel accepted that Article 8 was not being pursued  in
    this appeal but submitted that the  60  day  point  arose  because  the
    refusal was because the college did not have a  licence.   It  did  not
    arise out of a failure to give a CAS due to the absence of  an  English
    language test.  The failings were beyond the Appellant's control  at  a
    time before the Respondent's decision was made.  The Respondent was put
    on notice that a piece of evidence was missing and the  Respondent  had
    the option (which was not exercised) of allowing a consideration of the
    application to take place when the evidence  could  be  produced.   The
    evidence could have been produced within one month before the  decision
    and that was why the Respondent's decision was not in  accordance  with
    the law.

Findings

11.  The argument in this case  is  whether  the  Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse the Appellant's application for an extension of leave to  remain
    was or was not in accordance with the law.  At the  time  he  made  his
    further application the Appellant was not in possession of  an  English
    language test certificate.  The Rules require that such a document must
    be submitted with the application and if  it  is  not  the  application
    falls to be refused.  The Appellant's argument that he should have been
    given more time to produce a test certificate because the production of
    one was outside his control has in my view no merit.  It  is  difficult
    to see how in the context of this case the common law duty of  fairness
    arose.

12.  The Respondent was correctly applying  the  Immigration  Rules.   Those
    Rules required the Appellant to submit a CAS with his  application  but
    he could not do that.  There was an added  complication  in  this  case
    that Radcliffe College had lost its licence.  That was not  the  reason
    why the application was refused and it is something of a  red  herring.
    The point was put simply  and  briefly  by  both  the  Judge  at  first
    instance and by Judge Cruthers in refusing permission to appeal. It was
    a simple straightforward point and did not require elaboration.

13.  I do not consider there was a material error of law because  I  do  not
    find that the Judge failed to adequately explain the  reasons  why  the
    Appellant's case on fairness was rejected. The issue  of  fairness  did
    not arise.  It was not  incumbent  upon  the  Judge  at  First-tier  to
    address irrelevant issues.  The case law relied upon by the  Respondent
    including EK (Ivory Coast) and Kaur makes it clear  that  there  is  no
    general  common  law  duty  of  fairness  on  the  Respondent  in  such
    circumstances.  The case of  Mandalia  relied  upon  by  the  Appellant
    similarly does not take matters any further since  that  was  concerned
    with the evidential flexibility policy.   Mandalia  was  decided  on  a
    relatively narrow point of what  constituted  documents  in  a  series.
    That was a very different factual situation to the one before the Judge
    at first instance in this case.

14.  As the Court of Appeal decided in Rodriguez 2014] EWCA Civ 2  there  is
    no general duty on the Respondent to assist  an  Appellant  to  perfect
    their application.  The Court of Appeal in EK  (Ivory  Coast)  made  it
    quite clear why that should be so.   There  is  a  public  interest  in
    having a clear and predictable scheme operating according to  objective
    criteria.  Where the Rules require an applicant to have  a  CAS  before
    their application can succeed and the applicant does not provide a  CAS
    because he has not obtained an English language  test  certificate  the
    provisions of the points-based system  adequately  cater  for  such  an
    eventuality.  In this case it meant that the application  was  refused.
    When considering the weight of authority in this  case  no  common  law
    duty of fairness arose such as  to  require  the  Respondent  to  delay
    making a decision on the  application  whilst  the  Appellant  put  his
    application in order.  Accordingly I find  that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not disclose any error of law and I uphold  the
    decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision
The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I dismiss the  Appellant's  appeal.  I  make  no  anonymity
order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.

Appeal dismissed.

Signed this 11th day of December 2015
.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been dismissed there can be no fee award.


Signed this 11th day of December 2015


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

