
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/22676/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11th November 2013                           |On 15th November 2013      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                omer dirilmis
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance and no representation
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant seeks permission to appeal against the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Plumptre) who in a determination promulgated
    on 28th  March  2013  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent to  refuse  his  application  for  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds under Article 8.

 2. There has been no appearance or no  representation  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant at the hearing before this Tribunal.  Before I deal with that
    issue, there is a substantial procedural history which is  relevant  to
    this appeal.  It is as follows.

 3. The Appellant is a citizen of Turkey born  on  1st  January  1981.   He
    entered the UK illegally on 5th  November  1999  and  on  9th  November
    lodged an application for asylum.  The claim  was  considered,  refused
    and certified on 18th June 2001.  After lodging an appeal on 21st  July
    2001, which was heard by a judge on 19th May 2003 that application  was
    dismissed on 5th June 2003.  An application for permission to appeal to
    the Tribunal was lodged by the Appellant on 23rd June 2003,  permission
    was granted and the appeal was heard on 2nd  November  2004.   On  17th
    December 2004 his appeal was dismissed it appears that he married  Vija
    Balode, an EU national.  On 12th January 2005 he sought  permission  to
    appeal to the Court of Appeal which was refused on 16th February  2005.
    In February 2005 he lodged an application for a residence card  as  the
    spouse of an EU national.  On 16th March 2005,  he  was  considered  to
    have exhausted all rights of appeal.

 4. In respect of the application  made  for  a  residence  card,  on  27th
    September 2005 he was issued with a residence  card  valid  until  27th
    September 2010.  It appears a further residence card was issued on 29th
    June 2006, valid until 29th June 2011  which  superseded  the  original
    document.

 5. On 27th September  2012  he  was  encountered  by  UK  Border  Agency's
    officers and served with an  IS151A,  notice  of  a  person  liable  to
    removal.  The evidence before the Tribunal  was  that  the  Appellant's
    wife returned to Latvia in 2008 and since that time has not lived  with
    the Appellant nor  has  she  exercised  treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Home Office have not been notified at  any  time  of  his
    wife leaving the United Kingdom.

 6. Following the Appellant's arrest on 27th September 2012,  his  previous
    representatives made an application for leave to remain on 5th  October
    2012 under Article 8 of the ECHR on the basis of the  private  life  he
    had established in the United Kingdom after thirteen  years'  residence
    and based on the family life that he  had  established  with  Miss  Ali
    Arslan,  it  was  asserted  there  was   a   genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship.  The application was  refused  by  the  Respondent  in  a
    letter of 5th October 2012.  It  was  this  refusal  that  led  to  the
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal on  23rd  January  2013  and
    18th March 2013 before Judge Plumptre.

 7. In a determination promulgated  on  28th  March  2013,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Plumptre) dismissed the appeal under Article 8.  It  is
    apparent from that determination that the first  hearing  was  on  23rd
    January 2013 but as  a  result  of  inconsistent  material  in  a  bail
    document, concerning the circumstances in which the Appellant and  Miss
    Arslan met, the judge granted an adjournment in order that instructions
    could be taken as to how the information came to  be  included  in  the
    Grounds of Appeal when  the  information  did  not  form  part  of  the
    Appellant's instructions.  Thus the appeal was part-heard  for  further
    hearing on  18th  March  2013  (see  paragraph  22  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision).

 8. In the determination the judge  reached  a  number  of  findings  after
    having considered the evidence of the Appellant, his  partner,  medical
    evidence in respect of the Appellant's partner and a report  from  Miss
    Seymour, an independent social  worker.   She  reached  the  conclusion
    ultimately that  the  decision  to  remove  the  Appellant  was  not  a
    disproportionate one for the findings that she set out at paragraphs 39
    to 69 of that determination.

 9. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and Counsel who
    represented the Appellant before the First-tier  Tribunal  settled  the
    grounds for permission on 10th April 2013.  There were four grounds set
    out in the application for permission.

10. On 22nd April 2013 permission to appeal was granted by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Cruthers).  He said this:-

         "(1) By a determination promulgated on 28th March 2013,  First-tier
             Tribunal  Judge  Plumptre  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
             against a decision of the  Respondent  taken  on  5th  October
             2012.  Realistically this matter had been pursued only on  the
             suggestion that the decision under  the  appeal  represents  a
             disproportionate breach of Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   Having
             assessed the evidence the  judge  concluded  that  the  appeal
             failed.

         (2)  I note that the five page document setting out the grounds  on
             which the Appellant seeks permission to appeal was drafted  by
             Counsel who appeared before the judge on 23rd January and 18th
             March 2013.  I will summarise my assessment  of  that  grounds
             document:

             (a)  Oddly, more than three complete pages of the document are
                  simply narrative.  The complaints about the determination,
                  the judge's assessment only begin at paragraph 11  on  the
                  fourth page.

             (b)  As regards paragraphs 10 to 12 of the  grounds  ('failure
                  to proffer  enquiries  in  respect  of  facts  which  were
                  material to the appeal'), it is probably unfortunate  that
                  the judge was not in a position to raise with the  parties
                  her concerns arising from the numerous different addresses
                  appearing from  the  papers  for  the  Appellant  and  his
                  'current partner', Miss Arslan - the judge recognised that
                  herself  at   paragraph   42.    However,   it   was   the
                  Appellant's/his representatives who had  put  in  evidence
                  the materials referred to in the judge's  paragraph  41  -
                  materials that undermined the Appellant's claims  relating
                  to the history of  this  claimed  relationship  with  Miss
                  Arslan.

             (c)  As regards paragraph 13, the judge did not say that there
                  was no interference with the family life which is  claimed
                  to exist between the Appellant and Miss Arslan's son -  at
                  least, the judge did not say  that  at  paragraph  47  (as
                  paragraph 13 of the grounds alleged).

             (d)  I am concerned that the grounds may  be  contaminated  by
                  incorrect  statements  in  at  least  paragraph   13   and
                  paragraph 17.  Paragraph 17 is  concerned  with  what  the
                  judge said about the purported letters  of  the  Appellant
                  dated 5th July 2010 and 15th March 2011 copied at pages 60
                  and  61  (respectively)  of  his  bundle.    Contrary   to
                  paragraph 17 of the grounds, it does not appear to me that
                  any response to those letters of 5th July 2010 and/or 15th
                  March 2011 is to be found amongst pages A1 to  E3  of  the
                  Respondent's bundle.

             (e)  - but what is in the Respondent's bundle (page C1)  is  a
                  copy of the Appellant's letter dated 5th July  2010  which
                  also  appears  at  page  61  of  his  bundle.   In   those
                  circumstances  the  judge's  finding  that  the  Appellant
                  manufactured the letters at pages 60 to 61 is unlikely  to
                  be a sustainable finding.  In the last analysis, it may be
                  that any error here was not material (in the sense that it
                  would not have altered the  outcome  of  the  appeal  (see
                  paragraph 10 of R (Iran)) but  I  cannot  be  sufficiently
                  confident  on  the  question  of  materiality  to   refuse
                  permission here.

             (f)  There may also be an arguable point at paragraphs 13  and
                  14 of the grounds to the extent that  the  judge  may  not
                  have sufficiently considered whether or not  the  decision
                  under appeal is in the best of Miss Arslan's son.

             (g)  Similarly in relation to paragraph  15,  it  is  arguable
                  that the judge's analysis does not sufficiently factor  in
                  the claim that Miss Arslan is currently pregnant with  the
                  Appellant's child.

         (3)  Overall, there is sufficient in the grounds to make a grant of
             permission appropriate.  But the  Appellant  should  not  take
             this grant of permission as any  indication  that  his  appeal
             will ultimately be successful.  Apart from anything else,  the
             Appellant has acquired criminal convictions  in  this  country
             and  his  immigration  history  may  fairly  be  described  as
             chequered.  There may also be considerable force in the points
             made by the judge in, for example, her paragraphs 63  and  64,
             (including the point that if Miss  Arslan  was  to  return  to
             Turkey with the Appellant, that many of the risk factors  that
             led to the success of Miss Arslan's asylum appeal  would  fall
             away)."

11. Following the grant of permission, a Rule 24 response was issued by the
    Secretary of State dated 8th May 2013 who sought to oppose  the  appeal
    noting in the response that the judge  had  made  "clear  and  reasoned
    findings as to the evidence before her and was considering the  Article
    8 rights of the Appellant and Miss Arslan and the conclusions were open
    to her."

12. The case was therefore listed for hearing before the Upper Tribunal  to
    resolve the issue as to whether or not the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal disclosed an error of law.  It is plain  from  the  case  file
    that the notice of hearing for 14th June 2013 was sent by  first  class
    post on 15th May 2013 to the Appellant's address at 56A Liptraps  Lane,
    Tunbridge Wells, Kent.  This is the address given  on  the  application
    for permission to appeal the First-tier Tribunal decision under part  A
    setting out the applicant's details.

13. The appeal came before Upper Tribunal Judge Renton on 14th  June  2013.
    The determination is in the file of papers before this Tribunal.  It is
    plain from the determination that the Appellant did not appear nor  was
    he represented before Upper Tribunal Judge Renton.  At paragraph  2  he
    recorded

         "On that occasion there was no appearance by or on  behalf  of  the
         Appellant.  I decided to hear the appeal  in  the  absence  of  the
         Appellant  in  accordance  with  Rule  38  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
         Procedure Rules.  I was  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had  been
         notified of the hearing at his last known address in time, and that
         it would be  in  the  interest  of  justice  to  proceed  with  the
         hearing."

    Thus Judge Renton considered the grounds but found that  there  was  no
    error of  law  disclosed  from  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

14.  Following  service  of  the  determination  upon  the  Appellant,   an
    application was made for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal by
    Geraldine Peterson, Counsel, who  had  previously  been  instructed  on
    behalf  of  the  Appellant  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  who  was
    instructed  by  way  of  direct  access  by  the  Appellant.   In  that
    application, it  was  submitted  that  a  procedural  irregularity  had
    occurred because the Appellant did not receive notice  of  the  hearing
    and thus the determination of 4th July 2013  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Renton should be set aside.  It was further submitted that in the event
    that the decision should not be set aside under Rule 60, the  Appellant
    would seek leave for an extension of time to  submit  further  detailed
    grounds in respect of his appeal against the  decision  of  UTJ  Renton
    promulgated on 4th July 2013.

15.  It is of significance that the grounds for permission  to  appeal  set
    out that the Appellant's address is 56A Liptraps Lane, Tunbridge Wells.
     Appended to the grounds for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal was a witness statement of the Appellant, again noting that  his
    address was 56A Liptraps Lane, Tunbridge Wells.  In that statement  the
    Appellant sets  out  at  paragraph  7  that  he  did  not  receive  the
    notification of the hearing before UTJ Renton.  It is claimed  that  it
    was not clear what address the Tribunal sent  the  notice  to  and  the
    judge did not state the address in the decision.

16. A letter was sent to the Resident Judge at Field House (Resident  Judge
    Southern) on 18th July 2013 by the Appellant himself from  the  address
    at 56A Liptraps Lane, requesting that the decision  of  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Renton be set aside under Rule 60 of the Procedure Rules so  that
    he could be "properly represented at the rehearing of my appeal."

17. As a result of that application settled by  Miss  Peterson  by  way  of
    direct access of the witness statement of the Appellant and the  letter
    to Judge Southern the appeal was put before Upper Tribunal  Judge  King
    on 21st August 2013.  In a notice dated 21st August  2013,  Judge  King
    sets out the history that I have set out earlier noting that it was

         "the contention of the Appellant that  notwithstanding  his  having
         received  the  First-tier  Tribunal  determination  and  the  Upper
         Tribunal determination he  did  not  receive  the  notification  of
         hearing such as would lead him to attend the hearing on 14th June".



    The judge went on to state at paragraph 11 as follows:-

         "The Appellant maintains that the address was his  address  but  is
         adamant that he did not for some reason receive the notification of
         hearing.  The point is made by the  Appellant  that  he  had  every
         intention of pursuing his appeal  and  seeks  to  remain  with  his
         partner and her young son.  He was anxious to be represented by his
         barrister and therefore there was no reason at all for him  not  to
         have  attended  the  hearing  of  the  appeal  had  he  known.   An
         additional complication  in  the  matter  was  his  solicitors  had
         removed themselves from the record and he had  been  instructing  a
         barrister privately which is why he had used  his  address  as  the
         communication address.  It is right to note from the file of copies
         of the notice of hearing that it is marked 'no representative'."

18. In those circumstances, Judge King ordered that representations for the
    parties are invited as to why the determination should not be set aside
    on the grounds of a procedural irregularity and fourteen days was given
    for representations to be made.

19. It does not appear that any representation were made on behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State because on 23rd September 2013 Upper Tribunal  Judge
    King made the following order:-

         "I have had no representations from either party.

         In those circumstances I shall follow the course of action which  I
         indicated that I would take in the notice, namely to set aside  the
         decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Renton  promulgated  on  4th  July
         3012 arising from the hearing conducted on 14th June 2013.

         The position therefore no remains as  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,
         permission to appeal having been given, that there be a hearing  on
         the matter to determine whether or not  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Plumper erred in law in her approach or findings."

20. Thus the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Renton was set aside and  the
    matter was to be relisted.  Directions were given as to filing  of  any
    further evidence or statements.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal :

21. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal on  11th  November  2013
    and there  was  no  appearance  or  representation  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant for a second time.   I  have  set  out  at  some  length  the
    proceedings before the Tribunal including at  each  stage  the  address
    that has been given by this Appellant for address of service whether or
    not represented by solicitors or  whether  or  not  he  has  instructed
    Counsel by way of direct access.  It is  apparent  from  all  of  those
    documents that he has produced that the address that he  has  given  as
    his home address is 56A Liptraps  Lane,  Tunbridge  Wells.   It  is  of
    significance as noted in the determination of Upper Tribunal Judge King
    that the Appellant had claimed that he had not  received  a  notice  of
    hearing when the case was before Upper Tribunal Judge  Renton  in  June
    notwithstanding the fact that he had received the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination at the address I have  just  given  but  also  the  Upper
    Tribunal determination.

22. I have carefully considered the case  file  and  the  history  of  this
    appeal.  The notice of hearing that was sent to the Appellant  for  the
    hearing before Judge Renton was sent to his  address  at  56A  Liptraps
    Lane, Tunbridge Wells on 15th May 2013.  That is the address  that  the
    Appellant has always stated  that  he  has  lived  at.   There  was  no
    evidence attached to his witness statement in support of his claim that
    he had never received the notice of hearing other  than  his  assertion
    that he had always sought to litigate this matter for the reasons  that
    he gave.  There was no evidence in support to show that there were  any
    problems with post being received at his address  particularly  bearing
    in mind that the First-tier Tribunal determination was received by  him
    as was the Upper Tribunal decision which he sought to set aside.

23. It is significant that when the Appellant wrote to  the  court  stating
    that he had not received the notice of hearing  but  had  received  the
    determination of the Upper Tribunal (see paragraph 7)  he  accepted  at
    paragraph 4 that his address was  given  as  56A  Liptraps  Lane.   The
    witness statement also gives the address at 56A  Liptraps  Lane  indeed
    that is the address  given  on  all  of  the  documents  including  the
    application for permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal  and  also
    the letter written to Judge Southern dated 18th  July  2013  requesting
    that the determination be set aside.

24. Looking at the file for the present proceedings for 11th November 2013,
    again the notice of hearing was sent by first class mail to the address
    given by the Appellant on all of his documentation of 56A Liptraps Lane
    on 7th October 2013.  There has been no further correspondence from the
    Appellant of any kind, either requesting from the  Tribunal  a  hearing
    date, making any enquiries as to when the case was to be listed or  any
    further correspondence giving any change of address.   Consequently,  I
    am satisfied that the notice  of  hearing  has  been  served  upon  the
    Appellant at the address that he has notified throughout as his address
    and in those circumstances and applying the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure
    Rules I decided that I should hear the case in his absence.

25. Mr Jarvis appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State and relied  upon
    the Rule 24 response dated 8th May 2012.  He submitted that  there  was
    no error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  In respect
    of the ground asserting that the letters the  Appellant  produced  were
    fabricated  (see  paragraph  17)  he  took  the  Tribunal  through  the
    documentation noting that the judge's findings  in  relation  to  those
    letters, when viewed in the round were properly open to her and that no
    error of law can be found in her approach.  He further  submitted  that
    even if there was an error, it was  not  material  in  that  the  judge
    considered with care the Article 8 claim made by the Appellant and  she
    did so  without  any  obvious  reference  to  the  documents  that  she
    considered had been "manufactured" by the Appellant.  She did not  take
    against the Appellant on that basis and in a similar way did  not  take
    against him on the basis of his criminal conduct (see paragraphs 49 and
    50) even though that was part of the Secretary of State's reasons.  The
    judge therefore did not hold those matters against the Appellant.   The
    judge had taken a very nuanced approach, and considered the  nature  of
    the relationship, the position of the Appellant, his  partner  and  her
    child and considered the inconsistent and discrepant evidence that  had
    been before her as a whole.  Thus it  was  open  to  her  to  make  the
    findings that she did on credibility and ultimately when  carrying  out
    the balancing exercise under Article 8.

26. As to the issue of whether or not he had established his family life at
    the time that it was precarious, the judge  noted  that  the  Appellant
    could not benefit from the Legacy Programme because  he  had  exhausted
    all of his appeal rights and thus could not meet the criteria  even  if
    he had made such an application.  Furthermore his wife who  was  an  EU
    citizen  had  left  the  United  Kingdom  and  he  had  not  sought  to
    communicate this to the Respondent in any way and thus in  those  terms
    his position was precarious he did not have any leave post 2011 in  any
    event.

27. He submitted that this was a difficult case for the judge and that  the
    judge considered and focused on all the important facets of  Article  8
    considerations.  Mr Jarvis also made  a  point  concerning  the  ground
    raised in relation to paragraphs 11 and 12  which  was  Ground  1,  the
    failure to make  proper  enquiries  in  respect  of  facts  which  were
    material to the Appellant.  In this respect Mr Jarvis relied  upon  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in SSDH v Maheshwaran [2002]  EWCA  Civ
    173 and relied upon paragraphs 4 to 6 noting that it was not  incumbent
    of the judge to raise that issue with the Appellant or the  Appellant's
    representative on the basis that there were obvious inconsistencies  in
    relation to the evidence relating to the  addresses  and  that  as  the
    Appellant was represented it was a matter  for  the  representative  to
    deal with.  The  judge  cannot  be  criticised  for  her  approach  and
    nonetheless it only represented one finding.  There  are  a  number  of
    findings made in this case relevant to the proportionality balance  and
    it has not been determined that the judge had made an error of  law  in
    the approach that she had taken to proportionality  and  the  issue  of
    Article 8.

28. I reserved my decision.

The grounds:

29. There are four grounds  advanced on behalf  of  the  Appellant  in  the
    document filed   on  10th  April  2013.   Whilst  the  application  for
    permission to the Court of Appeal set out at paragraph  13  that  leave
    was sought for an extension of time "to submit further detailed grounds
    in respect of this appeal" no further  grounds  have  been  forthcoming
    since 10th April or since the  application  before  the  permission  to
    appeal to the Court of Appeal.  Thus  I  consider  those  four  grounds
    advanced in that permission application as they stand.

30.  The first ground advanced on behalf of the Appellant  is  that  it  is
    asserted that the judge failed to make proper enquiries in  respect  of
    facts which were material to the appeal.  It is  said  that  the  judge
    made findings that the Appellant's relationship was not of the duration
    the Appellant and his partner had stated primarily because  there  were
    different addresses on the documentation.  At paragraph  42  the  judge
    stated that  she  "unhappily"  did  not  raise  the  concern  with  the
    Appellant but  had  reached  the  view  on  those  documents  that  the
    addresses given demonstrate  that  they  were  not  indicative  of  the
    Appellant and his partner living together as a family unit for as  long
    as it had been claimed (see paragraph 42) of  the  determination.   The
    grounds submit that  the  strength  of  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and his partner and child was essential to the appeal and the
    failure of the judge to raise the concern which caused her to  question
    the duration of the relationship was therefore a material error of  law
    because it failed to give the Appellant the opportunity  to  provide  a
    time  line  for  his  and  his  partner's  addresses.   Thus   it   was
    procedurally unfair.

31. Ground 2 asserts that the judge failed to consider  properly  the  best
    interests of  the  child.   Paragraph  13  of  the  grounds  refers  to
    paragraph 47 stating that the decision of the judge was that there  was
    no interference of the family life which existed between the  Appellant
    and his partner's son because he was not the  natural  father  and  the
    relationship was of short duration.  It is asserted that  the  findings
    disclosed a "fundamental error of approach" and that the  judge  should
    have  considered  that  the   decision   would   interfere   with   the
    relationships as they currently existed.  It was further submitted that
    Section 55 relating  to  the  best  interests  of  the  child  was  not
    considered properly.  At Ground 3  it  was  submitted  that  the  judge
    failed in her assessment of the relationship between the Appellant  and
    his partner, by focusing on the duration as opposed to the  quality  of
    the relationship.  In this respect the quality of the relationship  was
    underpinned by the fact that they were expecting a child which was  not
    taken into account.  The last ground relates to the failure to consider
    evidence relating to a factual issue.  The judge  determined  that  the
    strength of the relationships established between the Appellant and his
    partner and child fell away in the light of her finding that  they  had
    established  the  relationship  whilst  his  immigration   status   was
    precarious (see paragraph 69). However the Appellant maintained that he
    had made an application to the Respondent after his EU citizen wife had
    left him (albeit wrongly to the  CRD)  in  2010  before  his  residence
    permit expired.  He stated that until the refusal in  2012  he  thought
    his application was still being considered by the  UKBA.   The  finding
    made by the judge was that the letters were fabricated and this  highly
    influenced her determination.  However there were copies of a  response
    to those letters from the Respondent in the bundle.  Whether or not  he
    had applied to the right department, there was evidence  that  when  he
    met his partner he had an outstanding application for leave to  remain.
    The judge failed to properly consider the evidence.

32. I therefore considered the grounds in the light of the determination of
    the First-tier Tribunal and the evidence that was before it.

A summary of the findings of the First-tier Tribunal:

33. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Plumptre) are set out at
    paragraphs 39 to 69 of the determination.   I  shall  deal  with  those
    findings in detail when considering the four grounds advance on  behalf
    of the Appellant.  In summary, the judge considered the nature  of  the
    relationship between the Appellant and Miss Arslan, who had arrived  in
    the United Kingdom in January 2011 and had subsequently claimed  asylum
    noting at paragraph 41 the judge made an assessment of the  documentary
    evidence before her noting that they refer to a number of addresses and
    that that was not indicative of the Appellant and  Miss  Arslan  living
    together as a family unit for  the  duration  of  time  that  had  been
    claimed.

34.   At paragraph 48 he took into account answers to  questions  that  the
    Appellant had given on the family questionnaire which were inconsistent
    with the length of time that they had lived together and  made  further
    reference to those inconsistencies at paragraph 51.

35.   The judge found that the Appellant could  not  meet  the  Immigration
    Rules indeed it was not submitted on his behalf  that  he  could.   The
    judge did not find that the Appellant's convictions which he considered
    to be minor had  established  that  he  should  be  removed  on  public
    interest grounds.

36.   As to his immigration status and position in the UK, she  found  that
    the residence card had expired on 29th June 2011 and he had been in the
    UK thereafter without leave.  At paragraph 52, his Latvian  spouse  had
    returned in  July  2008  and  the  Appellant  had  never  informed  the
    Immigration Officers of this (paragraph  52).   At  paragraph  68,  the
    judge found that he had shown disregard for the Immigration  Rules  and
    failed to notify UKBA of his Latvian spouse's return to Latvia in  July
    2008.  At paragraph 45 she  found  that  his  immigration  history  was
    consistent with a determined attempt to remain in the UK and had  noted
    that he had married Miss Balode at a time when his  immigration  status
    was precarious in fact he  married  her  on  the  day  his  appeal  was
    dismissed on 17th December 2004.  She found also that  he  had  made  a
    successful application for a residence card in 2011 but  it  was  clear
    from the divorce petition that Miss Balode had  deserted  him  in  July
    2008 and had returned to Latvia.  The judge expressly  did  not  accept
    the evidence that he did not realise that her return  to  Latvia  meant
    that he has no right to remain nor that he could not continue to  work.
    The judge found nothing to suggest that the Appellant had ever informed
    UKBA of his spouse's return to Latvia and did not do  so  when  writing
    letters at pages 60 and 61.  Thus she also found that he entered the UK
    illegally in 1999 and found that he had manufactured letters to suggest
    that he had an outstanding claim with the  Case  Resolution  Department
    (CRD) of the UKBA (the reasons given were at paragraphs 39 and 40).

37.   As to Article 8, she accepted  there  was  family  life  between  the
    Appellant, Miss Arslan and the child Mehmet.  She  found  that  he  was
    born in the UK and therefore Section 55 applied.  She took into account
    that the child was not the Appellant's, that family life was of a short
    duration that was fragile and that he remained  married  to  a  Latvian
    national having only recently lodged a petition  in  January  2013  and
    there  were  "considerable  emotional  and  practical  hurdles   in   a
    relationship of short duration."  The  judge  considered  the  evidence
    concerning the submission made on behalf of the Appellant that it would
    be a disproportionate interference with  the  Appellant's  family  life
    with Miss Arslan for him to return to Turkey given the  nature  of  her
    mental health and her ability to care for Mehmet.

38.   At paragraphs 58 to 59 the judge gave reasons as to why she preferred
    the evidence from Kent and  Medway  Social  Services  rather  than  the
    independent social worker and noted the  inconsistencies  between  that
    evidence, she did not find it unreasonable that for  the  Appellant  to
    return to Turkey and make an application to join his partner bearing in
    mind he had sold his business, was a fit and healthy  male  and  had  a
    wife in Latvia.  She set out the law at paragraphs 61 and  62  applying
    EB (Kosovo) and did not find that there  was  more  than  a  degree  of
    hardship shown for the reasons given.

39.    She accepted that it would be unreasonable to expect Miss Arslan  to
    return to Turkey but with the proviso that  the  judge  in  her  asylum
    claim found that she did not have any political profile but found  that
    she would be at risk on return as an unmarried,  unaccompanied  Kurdish
    woman with a child born out of wedlock and that was the basis  for  her
    grant of asylum.  Judge Plumptre was finding that it was not reasonable
    to expect her to go noted  that  she  could  choose  to  accompany  the
    Appellant to Turkey as the risk factors  found  by  the  judge  in  the
    asylum claim would fall away because she would be  returning  with  the
    Appellant.

40.  She found the  Appellant  had  not  established  more  than  a  normal
    emotional tie between himself and  his  adult  siblings  and  relatives
    (paragraph 65) and that he had  divested  himself  of  employment  ties
    (paragraph 66).  She considered also that he had social,  cultural  and
    family ties in Turkey (see paragraph 67) and that he had entered the UK
    illegally, shown disregard for the Immigration Rules since  failing  to
    notify UKBA that his Latvian spouse had returned to Latvia and that  he
    had manufactured a letter to  show  that  he  had  an  outstanding  CRD
    application.  She also found that he had established family life  at  a
    time when his immigration status was precarious and that  the  strength
    of the public interest in his removal was an important factor even when
    balanced by the interests and the welfare of the child.  Thus she found
    when making the proportionality factors found that the balance  was  in
    favour of the Secretary of State  and  that  removal  would  not  be  a
    disproportionate measure.

Conclusions:

41. I now turn  to  the  grounds.   The  ground  relates  to  a  procedural
    unfairness on the part of the judge that in reaching her  findings  the
    relationship was not of the duration that the parties had stated.

42. The Appellant's case was that Miss Arslan had  arrived  in  the  UK  in
    January 2011  and  they  had  become  friends  in  February  2011  (see
    paragraph 18 of the determination).  It was asserted that they had been
    living together since 13th October 2011 and that she had given birth to
    Mehmet on 22nd October (the Appellant is not Mehmet's natural  father).
    It is plain from the determination that the judge made an assessment of
    the evidence.  At paragraph 41 the judge said this:-

         "41. I have considered the documents and the various addresses  for
             the Appellant and his partner Miss Arslan.  I  note  that  the
             medico-legal report at page  13  dated  July  2011  gave  Miss
             Arslan's address at 79, The Broadway, Langton Green, Tunbridge
             Wells, that an NHS letter dated 2nd April 2012 at page 10 gave
             her address at Flat 3, 145  Upper  Grosvenor  Road,  Tunbridge
             Wells, that a letter dated 27th November 2012 at page 41 gives
             her address as 58A Liptraps Lane, Tunbridge Wells and  finally
             the tenancy agreement at pages 66 to 88 for Flat 3, 145  Upper
             Grosvenor Road, Tunbridge Wells.  I note that this is also the
             address given on the birth certificate for  the  child  Mehmet
             Arslan dated 22nd October 2011.  The tenancy  agreement  gives
             the current address of both the Appellant and Miss  Arslan  as
             52 Grosvenor Road, Tunbridge Wells.  I note from page 76  that
             Miss Arslan did not sign this tenancy agreement and  only  the
             Appellant did so.  The witness statement of both the Appellant
             and Miss Arslan give  their  address  as  56A  Liptraps  Lane,
             Tunbridge Wells and at pages 1-8 which  also  applies  to  the
             additional witness statements at  pages  8-13  of  the  Second
             Appellant's bundle although I note the  manuscript  alteration
             in relation to Miss Arslan's statement to give the address  of
             56A Liptraps Lane when it had been  printed  as  Flat  3,  145
             Upper Grosvenor Road, Tunbridge Wells.  I note also the letter
             from the accountants at page 59 referring  to  acting  for  Mr
             Omer Dirilmis situated at 52A Grosvenor Road, Tunbridge  Wells
             and is dated 8th October 2012.

         42.  Unhappily I was not able to put my concerns to  the  Appellant
             about these several different  addresses  because  I  did  not
             appreciate that there were so many until I came  to  read  the
             documents.  I  find  that  they  are  not  indicative  of  the
             Appellant and his partner living together as a family unit for
             as long as has been claimed.  ..."

43. I do not find that there has been any procedure irregularity that gives
    rise to any unfairness  in  reaching  those  findings.   I  reach  that
    conclusion  for  the  following  reasons.   The  relationship  and  its
    duration was put in issue by the Respondent in the  refusal  letter  of
    5th  October  2012  (see  the  Appellant's  replies   to   the   family
    questionnaire that he completed on 27th  September  2012)  and  in  the
    letter where it was noted the relationship was of short  duration  even
    if genuine and subsisting (see page 3 of 6).  Thus the Appellant was on
    notice of the issue from the outset.  The Appellant had provided  those
    documents in the bundle and it is plain on the face of those  documents
    that there a number of addresses that undermine the  Appellant's  claim
    as to the history of the relationship with Miss Arslan and their  claim
    to have been living together since 13th October 2011.  As submitted  by
    Mr Jarvis on behalf of the Respondent, the decision of Maheshwaran  (as
    cited earlier) makes it clear at paragraph 5 that:

         "Where much depends on the credibility of a  party  and  when  that
         party makes several inconsistent statements which  are  before  the
         decision maker, that party manifestly has a forensic problem.  Some
         would choose to confront the inconsistencies straight on  and  make
         evidential or forensic submissions on them.  Others will hope  that
         'least  said,  soon  as  mended'   and   consider   that   forensic
         concentration on the point will only make matters worse and that it
         would be better to try and switch the Tribunal's attention to  some
         other aspect of the case.  Undoubtedly it is open to  the  Tribunal
         expressly to put a particular inconsistency to a witness because it
         considers that the witness may not  be  alerted  to  the  point  or
         because  it  fears  that  it  may  have  perceived   something   as
         inconsistent  with  an  early  announcer  which  in  truth  is  not
         inconsistent.  Fairness may in some circumstances require  this  to
         be done but this will not be the usual case.  Usually the Tribunal,
         particularly if the party is represented, will  remain  silent  and
         see how the case unfolds."

44. In this appeal, much did depend on the credibility of the Appellant and
    he was represented by Counsel and the issue of the genuineness  of  the
    relationship and its duration was put in issue plainly and  clearly  by
    the Respondent  in  the  refusal  letter  of  5th  October  2012.   The
    Appellant himself had produced documents which had undermined  his  own
    case and whilst it is unfortunate that the  judge  did  not  put  those
    documents to the Appellant, I do not consider that in the circumstances
    outlined  above  that  it  was  incumbent  upon  her  to  do  so.   The
    requirements of fairness are very much conditioned by the facts of each
    particular case, and on the facts of this case and the issues  as  they
    were before the judge, I do not consider that there was any fairness or
    procedural irregularity has been established on the part of the  judge.



45. Furthermore it is wrong to assert that this was the only evidence  upon
    which the finding was made concerning the duration of the relationship.
     The judge at paragraph 48 and 51  took  into  account  other  evidence
    relating to this issue.  At paragraph 48 the judge took into account  a
    family questionnaire completed by the Appellant  dated  27th  September
    2012.  The summary was set out in the refusal letter and  the  accuracy
    of what had been stated had not  been  challenged  during  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  As the judge noted at paragraph 48:

         "I give weight to the fact that although dated 27th September  2012
         the Appellant stated that he had been cohabiting with  Miss  Arslan
         since she moved into his property five - six months ago which  must
         be an inaccurate answer since all the evidence suggests  that  they
         moved to  live  together  on  13th  October  2011  given  that  the
         Appellant has adduced a tenancy agreement to that effect.   I  find
         this  answer  inconsistent  with  them  having  purportedly   lived
         together for virtually one year.  I  find  that  there  is  nothing
         significant in his answer that the son Mehmet Arslan is  10  months
         old given that he was born on 22nd October 2011 and I do  not  hold
         this latter purported inaccuracy against the Appellant.  However  I
         find the reason for the Appellant not being able  to  give  precise
         answers about  Miss  Arslan  is  because  of  the  brevity  of  the
         relationship  and  the  fact  that  there  are  so  many  addresses
         suggesting that they have not lived together as  a  couple  for  so
         long as claimed."

    Thus it can be seen from paragraph 48 that the judge took into  account
    when reaching her findings not only the inconsistent evidence as to the
    amount of  addresses  where  the  couple  were  living,  but  also  the
    Appellant's failure to give answers concerning Miss Arslan and her  son
    which, when viewed together, demonstrated that the relationship had not
    been of the duration or length or quality that was asserted  on  behalf
    of the parties.  The types of questions that were set out in the family
    questionnaire were  set  out  in  the  refusal  letter  and  they  made
    reference to the Appellant not knowing who Mehmet's  biological  father
    was, not being able to provide a full date of birth for Miss Arslan and
    when doing so gave the wrong year for her birth.  The letter  concluded
    that the Appellant was unable to provide basic information and that was
    not indicative of him  having  "knowledge  of  Miss  Arslan's  personal
    circumstances".  For those reasons, I find that there is no  procedural
    irregularity in reaching  those  findings  as  asserted  in  Ground  1.
    Ground 1 is not made out.

46. I now turn to Ground 2 which it  asserted  that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider the best interests of Mehmet.  Contrary to the assertion  made
    in the grounds at paragraph 13, the judge did not say that there was no
    interference to family life which existed between  the  Appellant,  his
    partner and her son because he was  not  the  natural  father  and  the
    relationship was for short duration.  That misreads  the  determination
    and is inaccurate as the grant of permission has identified.

47. The judge expressly found  that  there  was  family  life  between  the
    Appellant,  Miss  Arslan  and  the  child  (see  paragraph  57  of  the
    determination) and also took into account the duty under Section 55  of
    the 2009 Act noting that Miss Arslan's son  was  born  in  the  UK  and
    Section 55 had been  considered  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  the
    decision that was under appeal.  It is  plain  from  the  determination
    that the judge in making an assessment of the best interests of  Mehmet
    took into account a number of factors.  They are  as  follows;  he  was
    born in the UK and therefore  the  Section  55  duty  applied  to  him.
    Mehmet was not the child of the Appellant (presumably this  is  on  the
    basis that  the  Appellant  had  no  statutory  responsibility  or  any
    parental responsibility for Mehmet), that the  family  life  was  of  a
    short duration of seventeen months, and was a fragile  one.   This  was
    based on the fact that Miss Arslan did not tell the Appellant that  she
    had been raped in Turkey and  given  her  fragile  mental  health  (see
    paragraph 57).  The judge found that he remained married to a woman  in
    Latvia and found that there were "considerable emotional and  practical
    hurdles in a relationship of short duration."  In making an  assessment
    of the  evidence  concerning  the  nature  of  family  life  the  judge
    critically considered and assessed  the  evidence  of  the  independent
    social worker Miss Seymour.  The judge had earlier in the determination
    made a summary of her evidence and report at paragraphs 26 to 31.   The
    judge also made a summary of the letters from the Kent and  Medway  NHS
    at paragraph 32.   The  judge's  conclusions  after  considering  those
    documents are set out at paragraphs 58 and 59.  It is  plain  from  the
    determination at paragraph 59 that the  judge  preferred  the  evidence
    from Kent and Medway NHS letters and reports rather than the report  of
    Miss Seymour which was based on a  two  hour  observation.   The  judge
    contrasted what had been said by Miss Seymour in the report  as  Mehmet
    being a "clingy and needy child" and concerns that he  had  not  bonded
    well with his mother that was inconsistent with the evidence  given  by
    Kent and Medway NHS and Peter Knynenbug that baby Mehmet was doing well
    and that Miss Arslan had in fact bonded  well  with  him.   There  were
    other matters listed at paragraph  58  which  the  judge  found  to  be
    inconsistent with the information given by the NHS letters and reports.
     Those findings are entirely open to Judge  Plumptre  on  the  evidence
    that was based before her.   There  has  been  no  challenge  to  those
    findings as they stand in any event.  The judge went on to find that it
    was not unreasonable for the Appellant to return to Turkey to  make  an
    application to join his partner in the UK (see paragraph  60)  and  set
    out the applicable law by way of self direction at paragraphs 61 and 62
    noting that an applicant must show more than a  "degree  of  hardship".
    She also applied the jurisprudence set out in EB (Kosovo).

48. In drawing together all  of  those  findings,  it  is  plain  from  the
    determination that the judge did give sufficient  regard  to  the  best
    interests of Mehmet who was aged 1 year 5 months at  the  date  of  the
    hearing and  it  is  plain  from  the  determination  that  those  best
    interests were for Mehmet to remain in the care of his mother given the
    fact that the Appellant had no  responsibility  for  Mehmet,  his  very
    young age and that his ties and bonds were with his  mother  (based  on
    the evidence from Kent and  Medway  NHS)  and  in  view  of  the  short
    duration of the relationship and the  fragility  of  his  mother.   The
    judge, by preferring the evidence of Kent and Medway NHS did not attach
    weight  to  the  assertions  made  by  the  independent  social  worker
    concerning Miss Arslan's inability to form a bond with her son  due  to
    her medical problems (see paragraph 31) and the finding that Mehmet  in
    fact was doing very well and that Miss Arslan had bonded well with  her
    son (see paragraph 58).  In doing so, the judge considered the  quality
    of the relationship between the adults  and  the  child  concerned  but
    reached the conclusion that it  would  not  be  unreasonable  in  those
    circumstances for the  Appellant  to  return  to  Turkey  and  make  an
    application to re-enter as her partner.  The judge  gave  a  number  of
    reasons for reaching that view based on the Appellant's  circumstances,
    namely that he was fit and healthy, the relationship  was  of  a  short
    duration, mother had bonded well with Mehmet, that he had  strong  ties
    in Turkey including his parents and a network  of  support  on  return.
    Those are balanced against the countervailing factors  also  identified
    at paragraph 69 in which the judge found that the  strength  of  public
    interest in the Appellant's removal was an important factor "even  when
    balanced by the interest and welfare of the child Mehmet Arslan".  Thus
    it is plain that when the determination is read as a whole,  the  judge
    firmly had in mind the best interests of Mehmet and the nature  of  the
    relationship when reaching her findings.  There  is  no  error  of  law
    disclosed in Ground 2.

49. As to Ground 3, I find no error in that ground either.   The  preceding
    paragraphs make it clear that the judge did not  solely  focus  on  the
    duration of the relationship but also other factors when  reaching  her
    decision on the proportionality balance.  Whilst there was  no  express
    reference as to the fact that Miss Arslan was pregnant, it was  plainly
    in the contemplation of the judge and that is clear from  paragraph  23
    when it is recorded that Miss Arslan was now pregnant.   This  fact  by
    itself does not alter the range of factors that  the  judge  considered
    were weighing at the various factors that she had identified that  were
    relevant  to  the  proportionality  balance.   The   grounds   do   not
    demonstrate that that led to any error in the overall balancing factors
    identified by the judge.

50. I now turn to Ground 4.  In doing so  I  should  set  out  the  judge's
    findings as to the Appellant's immigration status and his time  in  the
    UK generally.  She found that he could not meet the Immigration  Rules.
     There is no dispute between the parties that the Appellant was  unable
    to meet the Immigration Rules as they stood.  As to his position in the
    UK and his immigration status the judge noted at paragraph 68 that  the
    Appellant had entered the United Kingdom  illegally  concealed  in  the
    rear of a freight lorry.  The history demonstrates that  there  were  a
    number of applications and appeals against  the  original  decision  in
    2001 none of which were successful.  The judge found that his residence
    card had expired on 29th June 2011 and he had been in  the  UK  without
    leave thereafter.  At paragraph 52 the judge  noted  that  his  Latvian
    spouse had returned to Latvia in July 2008 and the Appellant had  never
    informed immigration officials of this fact.  At paragraph 68 she found
    that the Appellant had shown disregard for the  Immigration  Rules  and
    had failed to notify UKBA that  his  Latvian  spouse  had  returned  to
    Latvia in July 2008.  At paragraph 45 she found  that  the  Appellant's
    immigration history was

         "consistent with  determined  attempts  to  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  I note he married Miss Balode an EU national  at  a  time
         when his immigration  status  was  precarious  as  his  appeal  was
         dismissed the day of his marriage i.e. 17th December 2004.  He made
         a successful application for a residence card which was  issued  on
         27th September 2005 valid until 27th September 2010 which for  some
         reason was reissued and valid until 29th July 2011.  However it  is
         clear from part 6 of the petition for divorce at page 47 that  Miss
         Balode deserted the appellant in July 2008 and returned to  Latvia.
         I do not accept his evidence that  he  did  not  realise  that  her
         return to Latvia meant that he had no right to remain, nor that  he
         could not continue to work.  There is nothing to suggest  that  the
         appellant ever informed UKBA of the return  to  Latvia  of  his  EU
         wife, and he did not take the opportunity to do so when writing the
         letters at pages 60-61."

    The judge also makes a finding that  he  had  manufactured  letters  to
    suggest that he had an outstanding CRD application and the reasons were
    given at paragraphs 39 to 40.

51. Thus it can be seen that there are a number of findings concerning  his
    immigration status based on his history in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    grounds do not take issue with all of those findings but only refer  to
    the findings of the judge concerning the letters  at  pages  60  to  61
    which the judge found at paragraph 39 to have been manufactured by  the
    Appellant in an attempt to suggest that he  had  an  outstanding  claim
    with the Case Resolution Directorate ("CRD").

52. The grounds as drafted are in  error.   Paragraph  17  of  the  grounds
    concern the letters exhibited at pages 60 to 61 and states that  "there
    were copies of a response to these letters from the Respondent  to  the
    Appellant in  the  Respondent's  bundle".   However  as  the  grant  of
    permission states, it does not appear that there were any responses  to
    those letters found in the Respondent's bundle at pages A1 to E3.

53.   Careful consideration should  be  given  to  the  documents  and  the
    findings made by the judge.  There was a letter exhibited at  B1  which
    had been sent to the Appellant dated 8th June  2010  referring  to  the
    cases in the backlog and that  the  Case  Resolution  Directorate  were
    responsible.  The letter  is  simply  a  request  for  information  and
    nothing more than that.  It does not say that an application  has  been
    made or that any form had been sent.  It is plain that the judge  found
    the Presenting Officer's submission at paragraph 40  that  this  letter
    had not been issued bearing in  mind  the  contents  of  B1,  to  be  a
    "surprising one".  However the judge considered the letters at pages 60
    and 61 in the light of the contents of the documents themselves and the
    document at B1 and the document exhibited at C13  of  the  Respondent's
    document (erroneously referred to as page 13 by the judge).

54.   The document at page 61  is  dated  5th  July  2010  the  Appellant's
    address is given as 58 Liptraps Lane and refers to  a  CRD  form  being
    filled in and signed with documentation  .   At  page  60  there  is  a
    further letter purportedly from the Appellant  dated  15th  March  2011
    setting out that further documents were sent by him and  address  given
    in March 2011 is the same address as the document at page 61 namely 58A
    Liptraps Lane.  However the judge made  a  comparison  with  those  two
    documents  with  a  document  at  C13  of   the   Respondent's   bundle
    (erroneously referred to as page 13 at page 40 of  the  determination).
    C13 of the Respondent's bundle was a document dated 1st July 2010.  The
    Appellant had stated in it "I am writing to confirm that  I  reside  at
    52A Grosvenor Road ..." the judge made the point that on 1st July  2010
    (letter exhibited at C13) that he is telling the Home  Office  that  he
    lived at 52A Grosvenor Road whereas four days later on  5th  July  2010
    (see page 61) he allegedly wrote to the Home Office concerning the  CRD
    application giving an address at 58 Liptraps Lane.  The judge  did  not
    find it plausible nor credible that the Appellant would write  to  UKBA
    with two letters and two different addresses within five days  of  each
    other.  In those circumstances she found the documents at pages 60  and
    61 had been manufactured to suggest that he had  an  outstanding  claim
    with the CRD.  As she said at paragraph 40, the two letters  have  been
    produced in an attempt to rebut the  third  paragraph  of  the  refusal
    letter on 5th October 2012 which recorded that the Respondent  have  no
    trace of an application and if the  Appellant  had  proof  of  such  an
    application, further consideration would be given.  The judge took into
    account the letter stating that information was requested but did so in
    the context set out at paragraph 44 that he found the  Appellant  never
    had an outstanding CRD application because it was

         "clear from his immigration history that he would not  be  entitled
         to such an application since his asylum  appeal  was  certified  on
         18th June 2001 and his appeal heard and dismissed by an Immigration
         Judge on 19th May 2003 and dismissed on  5th  June  2003  and  that
         although he succeeded in the grant  of  permission  to  appeal  his
         appeal dismissed on 17th December 2004 and permission to appeal  to
         the Court of Appeal was refused on 15th  February  2005.   Thus  on
         16th March 2005 he was deemed appeal rights exhausted in respect of
         an asylum claim.  Thus for these reasons he would not  fall  within
         the Legacy Programme because his asylum appeal had been resolved."

    Therefore whilst the Respondent may have written to him  in  2010,  the
    judge did not accept that the Appellant had responded by the writing of
    the letters at pages 60 and 61 but had manufactured those letters (that
    the judge found  to  be  inconsistent  with  the  contents  of  another
    document at C13) solely to attempt to rebut the third paragraph of  the
    refusal letter.  Those findings were entirely open to the judge to make
    on the evidence that was before her and no error of law is disclosed by
    her consideration of those documents as a whole.

55. Whilst the judge made reference to the Appellant's immigration state as
    "precarious" when he began his relationship with Miss Arslan, based  on
    those findings, it was open to the judge to reach  that  conclusion  as
    the Appellant did not have any leave  nor  was  there  any  application
    outstanding.  Even if were right that he had made such an  application,
    I do not find that it  is  material  to  the  outcome  as  it  has  not
    demonstrated that there would be any other outcome on the  findings  of
    fact made in relation to his immigration history as a whole.  The judge
    made a number of findings concerning his immigration  history  which  I
    have set out earlier and in particular the  concern  raised  concerning
    his Latvian wife who had left the country in 2008 and  that  the  judge
    had expressly found that she rejected his  evidence  that  he  did  not
    realise her return to Latvia meant that he had no right  to  remain  or
    that he could not continue to work.   The  judge  balanced  the  public
    interest or the countervailing factors in relation to this case and was
    entitled to reach the conclusion that the history  of  the  immigration
    status as a whole was relevant in the balance.  Consequently I  do  not
    find that it has been demonstrated  that  the  determination  of  Judge
    Plumptre discloses any material error of law and that to  the  contrary
    this  was  a  careful  and  considered   determination   dealing   with
    unsatisfactory evidence.  Consequently I find no error of law has  been
    made out and the determination shall stand.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.  The decision shall stand.



Signed                              Date: 13/11/2013

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
