
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Numbers: IA/22533/2014

                                                         IA/22733/2014

                                                         IA/22740/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |        Decision & Reasons          |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 13 January 2016                       |        On 4 March 2016             |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                     kco
                                     soo
                                     cio
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Emezie, Dylan Conrad Kreolle, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizen of Nigeria.   The  first  appellant  is  the
    mother of the second and third appellants.  The appellants appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge V Mays) against  the  decisions  of  the
    respondent to refuse them leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  under
    paragraphs 276ADE of HC 395 (as amended) and Appendix FM.

 2. I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  should  be
    set aside.  I have reached that decision for the following reasons.  At
    [36] the judge considered which version of the Immigration Rules should
    be applied to the  applications  (and  appeals)  to  these  appellants.
    Having regard to the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  Singh  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 74 she found that she should apply the "new"  version  of  the
    Rules given that the decisions had been taken on 16 May  2014  and  lay
    outside  the  window  (9  July  -  6  September  2012)   during   which
    applications should be determined under the  "old"  Immigration  Rules.
    The judge's comments are not, in themselves, inaccurate but  the  judge
    has failed to take account of the fact that  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  was
    subject to an amendment on 28 July 2014.  That amendment did not  apply
    to the appellants because the decisions in their cases had  been  taken
    in May 2014.  The change was possibly material because the  test  which
    the judge had to apply under the Immigration Rules in  respect  of  the
    second  and  third  appellants  had  been  altered  by  the  amendment.
    Unfortunately, it is unclear from the decision exactly which version of
    the Rules the judge has adopted in determining the appeals.  There  are
    instances in the decision (see [54] and [55]) where it appears that the
    judge has applied the amended provisions and, in doing so, she may have
    erred in law.   Given  the  uncertainty,  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  no
    alternative but to set aside the judge's decision.  However, I do  note
    that the judge made  credibility  findings  in  respect  of  the  first
    appellant [38] and those findings appear to be unaffected by any  error
    as to the application of the correct  provisions.   Those  findings  of
    fact shall, therefore, stand.  The appeals are remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (not Judge V  Mays)  for  that  Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 9 April 2015  is  set
aside.  The findings of fact of the judge at [38] shall stand.  The  appeals
are remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not  Judge  V  Mays)  for  that
Tribunal to remake the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 20 February 2016



Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


