
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
             (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)   Appeal Number: IA/22799/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House            |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 16 September 2015                |On: 17 September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between
                               SYED ASIF SHAH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                      NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL AND REASONS

 1. On 10 August 2015 we gave a ruling on a preliminary matter and directed
    as follows:

        1. The appellants must within 14 days serve on the  Upper  Tribunal
           and on the respondent detailed written submissions particular to
           their individual circumstances, identifying why, in the light of
           our preliminary conclusions, the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
           dismissing their individual appeals on article 8 grounds.

        2. The appellants  must  also  within  14  days  inform  the  Upper
           Tribunal if they wish for a further oral hearing  at  which  the
           matters raised in the submissions made at (1) above  are  to  be
           further argued.

        3. In the absence of such submissions being made, or a requires for
           a further hearing, it will be  assumed  that  the  appellant  in
           question wishes to withdraw his appeal before the Upper Tribunal
           and a decision to that effect will be made without  any  further
           hearing or notice to the appellant.

 2. The appellant has not made submissions in respect of his case, nor  has
    he requested an oral hearing. Accordingly,  we  consider  that  we  are
    entitled to conclude that he has nothing more  to  say  and  wishes  to
    withdraw his appeal.

 3. Consent of the Upper Tribunal is required for a party to  withdraw  its
    case. Having carefully considered the facts of this appeal as a  whole,
    and observing that the respondent was the successful party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, we give such consent for the case to be withdrawn.

 4. Accordingly with our  consent,  and  pursuant  to  rule  17(5)  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, this appeal is recorded
    as "Withdrawn with the consent of the Upper Tribunal". This is a Notice
    pursuant to rule 17(5) to inform the parties that the appellant's  case
    is withdrawn.

 5. The effect of the appellants'  case  being  withdrawn  from  the  Upper
    Tribunal is that the proceedings before the Upper Tribunal  are  at  an
    end. There is no appeal before the Upper Tribunal  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision shall stand.


Signed   Date:  16 September 2015

 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

