
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: IA/22818/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |              Decision & Reasons      |
|                                         |Promulgated                           |
|On 11 December 2015                      |              On 18 January 2016      |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              FATOU JALLOW JOME
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Emezie of Chipatiso Associates LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Morgan promulgated on 15 July 2015.  Judge Morgan allowed the appeal of
    Ms Fatou Jallow Jome against a decision of the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department to refuse to issue her with an EEA residence  card,
    such decision having been made by way of Notice of Immigration Decision
    dated 9 May 2014 for reasons set out in a 'reasons for refusal'  letter
    ('RFRL') of the same date.


2.   Although before me the Secretary of State is the appellant and Ms  Jome
    is the respondent, for the sake of  consistency  with  the  proceedings
    before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer to  Ms  Jome  as
    the Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.


3.   The Appellant's application for a  residence  card  was  based  on  her
    relationship with her partner, Mr Malam Endami, a Portuguese  national.
    The couple had entered into a  proxy  marriage  in  the  Gambia  on  13
    December 2013.


4.    The  Respondent  refused  the  application  for   a   residence   card
    essentially for two reasons.  In the first instance the Respondent  was
    not satisfied that the marriage was a valid marriage for  the  purposes
    of the application for  a  residence  card  -  that  it  was  not  duly
    recognised and as such could not avail the Appellant in her claim to be
    a family member of an EEA national exercising  Treaty  rights.  In  the
    alternative the Respondent went on to consider the  issue  of  'durable
    relationship' in the context of whether the Appellant might be said  to
    be an extended family member of her partner: the Secretary of State was
    not satisfied in that regard.


5.   The Appellant appealed to the Immigration and Asylum Chamber.


6.   On appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  heard  evidence  from  the
    Appellant and her partner and, as he  states  at  paragraph  6  of  his
    decision, found such evidence to be  "credible  and  consistent  within
    itself  and  with  the  documentary  evidence  contained   within   the
    Appellant's bundle". In such circumstances  the  Judge  accepted  "that
    evidence in its entirety", and then set out his findings on  the  basis
    of that evidence at paragraphs 7 and 8.


7.   At paragraph 9 the Judge says this:

         "In respect of the validity of the marriage I accept  the  couple's
         evidence that this marriage is valid under Gambian law.  However Mr
         Emezi, on behalf of the appellant accepted that  were  no  evidence
         before me  in  respect  of  the  validity  of  the  marriage  under
         Portuguese law.  Mr Emezi therefore accepted that the issue  before
         me was the durability of the couple's relationship."


8.   The Judge went on to consider the issue of  durability,  found  on  the
    basis of his primary findings of  fact  that  the  relationship  should
    indeed be  characterised  as  a  durable  relationship,  and  in  those
    circumstances was satisfied that the Appellant was the extended  family
    member of a Portuguese national  working  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    exercising Treaty rights under the EEA Regulations. On that  basis  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal.


9.   The Respondent  has  sought  and  been  granted  permission  to  appeal
    against the decision of Judge Morgan.  The Secretary of State's grounds
    raise two bases of challenge.  One, primarily in reliance upon the case
    of Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC),  and  the
    other primarily in reliance upon the guidance in the  case  of  Ihemedu
    (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC).


10.  The Respondent's ground relating to the case of  Kareem  is  raised  in
    the application for permission to appeal on a contingent basis;  it  is
    relied upon only if it be  considered  the  case  that  the  Judge  had
    concluded that there was a valid marriage for the purposes of EEA  law.
    The grounds suggest "It is unclear  whether  the  IJ  is  allowing  the
    appeal purely on the basis of the durable relationship or  in  addition
    to him finding the couple have contracted a customary marriage".


11.  Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Frankish
    on 13 October 2015.


12.  The Appellant,  through  her  representatives,  has  filed  a  Rule  24
    response under cover of letter dated  29  October.  That  response  has
    arrived under cover of a letter from the Appellant's solicitors, and as
    I understand it was drafted by Mr Emezie.   Attached  to  the  Rule  24
    response  are  extracts  from  a  communication  from  the   Portuguese
    authorities to the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights  at
    the UN in relation to Portuguese domestic law with regard to  marriage,
    which I will return to in due course.


Consideration

13.  In my judgement it is very clear that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    did not proceed on the basis that he was satisfied  that  there  was  a
    valid marriage for the purposes of EEA law. It is abundantly clear from
    the passage already quoted from paragraph 9 of the  decision  that  the
    Judge considered that a concession had been made in this regard by  the
    Appellant's representative, and in those circumstances the Judge turned
    his  mind  to  the  alternative  argument  in  respect  of  a   durable
    relationship.


14.  I will return to the issue of that concession in a few moments.


15.  Because I am of the view that it is clear that the Judge  proceeded  on
    the basis that he was only looking at the issue of 'durability' I  need
    not go into any greater detail at this time with regard to that  aspect
    of the Respondent's challenge based on Kareem, and accordingly  I  turn
    to the challenge made in reliance upon the case of Ihemedu.


16.  The key relevant passage from Ihemedu is that set out in  the  headnote
    at subparagraph (iii):

         "Regulation 17(4) makes  the  issue  of  a  residence  card  to  an
         OFM/extended family  member  a  matter  of  discretion.  Where  the
         Secretary of State has not yet exercised that discretion, the  most
         an Immigration Judge is entitled to do is to allow  the  appeal  as
         being not in accordance with the law, leaving the matter of whether
         to exercise this discretion in the Appellant's favour or not to the
         Secretary of State."


17.  In short, the  Respondent  argues  that  the  Judge  went  too  far  in
    allowing the appeal outright. Having concluded that there was a durable
    relationship the Judge, it is argued, should simply then have  remitted
    the case to the Secretary  of  State  to  given  consideration  to  the
    discretion under Regulation 17(4).


18.  As regards the Ihemedu point, in the Rule  24  response  it  is  simply
    stated that "the authority relied upon is not on point".  With respect,
    it seems to me that the authority of Ihemedu is absolutely on point.


19.  In the course of  discussion  and  submissions  Mr  Ezemie  decided  to
    advance the submission in the alternative: that if  it  was  on  point,
    Ihemedu was wrongly decided.  However he had not produced a copy of the
    case of Ihemedu in order to be able to take me through it  to  identify
    those areas of the reasoning of the Tribunal with which  he  disagreed,
    and  he  did  not  provide  any  other  materials  to  support  such  a
    submission.  As indicated, in any event, such a submission is  not  the
    submission advanced in the Rule 24 response.


20.  In those circumstances I find that nothing has been said  to  me  today
    to undermine the reasoning in Ihemedu,  and  I  accept  and  adopt  its
    reasoning  and  approach.   On  that  basis  I  find  that  within  the
    parameters with which Judge Morgan set out his decision he  was  indeed
    wrong to go on to allow the appeal outright and  should  properly  have
    simply recognised that there was a discretion at large which needed  to
    be remitted to the Secretary of State to consider  in  accordance  with
    the findings and guidance set out in  the  case  of  Ihemedu.   It  was
    accordingly in those terms a material error of law for him to allow the
    appeal substantively.


21.   It  is  necessary,  however,  for  me  to  make  some   comments   and
    observations in respect of the issue of proxy  marriage,  as  that  has
    been the subject of some considerable discussion during the  course  of
    the hearing today.


22.  I have already quoted  the  passage  wherein  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge records what was in his perception  a  concession  made  on  this
    point.  I should just emphasise that  the  concession  as  recorded  by
    Judge Morgan in his decision was not to the effect that Mr  Emezie  had
    said that the marriage was or was not valid under Portuguese  law,  but
    that there was no evidence  before  Judge  Morgan  in  respect  of  the
    validity of the marriage under Portuguese law.


23.  Before me today Mr Emezie claims that he made no such  concession,  and
    indeed asks rhetorically why would he have made such  a  concession  in
    circumstances where such a marriage is indeed valid?  Again I note that
    the concern was not whether the marriage was or was not valid but  what
    was the available evidential material in respect  of  its  validity  in
    Portugal. Indeed it is clear that there was no  such  material  in  the
    appeal bundle that was filed by the  Appellant's  representatives  with
    the First-tier Tribunal in support of the appeal.


24.  Mr Emezie has produced for the Upper Tribunal - appended  to  the  Rule
    24 response - a communication from the Portuguese  authorities  to  the
    Office of the High Commission for Human Rights.   Before  me  today  he
    suggested that he in fact submitted that document to Judge Morgan - and
    indeed it is very much on that premise that he advances the  contention
    that he would not have made the concession recorded in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.


25.  There is not a copy of the Portuguese document on file  contemporaneous
    with the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  The only copy is  the  one  that
    has been provided with the Rule 24 response.  Accordingly,  if  such  a
    document was handed to Judge Morgan it is not apparent that  he  placed
    it on the file. It is difficult to see in circumstances  where  all  of
    the other documents are duly on file, why the Judge would not have  put
    this one particular document on file. It is also difficult to  see  why
    Judge Morgan would have stated what he did in paragraph 9 if in fact he
    had just been handed a document to a contrary effect to the  concession
    that he thought Mr Emezie had made.


26.  Be that as it may, and in any event, the issue of  the  concession  has
    not been raised in the Rule 24 response.  Whilst  arguments  have  been
    advanced in respect of the validity of the Appellant's  proxy  marriage
    in Portuguese law, nothing has been said at all in the Rule 24 response
    taking issue with the apparent concession recorded by Judge  Morgan  at
    paragraph 9.


27.  In my judgement it is too late to  raise  what  is  essentially  a  new
    ground of challenge, and moreover  a  ground  founded  upon  a  factual
    dispute as to what had happened before the First-tier Tribunal - such a
    challenge also only being raised by way of Mr Emezie's oral submissions
    at the appeal, not in writing, and with no notice  to  the  Respondent.
    Where an appellant or his/her representatives wish to raise  a  dispute
    of fact in relation to some aspect of the procedure before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal this would in the usual way require to  be  supported  by
    evidence: in the instant case that would in effect require Mr Emezie to
    file a statement in support of his version of any  contentious  issues.
    Moreover this would then involve the  very  likely  probability  of  Mr
    Emezie having to stand  aside  as  an  advocate  in  these  proceedings
    because he could not at both times be a witness as to what had happened
    before the First-tier Tribunal and an advocate.  I am clear,  and  have
    no hesitation in ruling, that it  is  too  late  to  be  raising  these
    matters - particularly when there is no reference, not even a  hint  of
    such a matter in the Rule 24 response.


28.  Nonetheless I have had brief regard to the  materials  that  Mr  Emezie
    has submitted appended  to  the  Rule  24  response  and  I  makes  the
    following brief observations.

      (i)  The  document  appears  to  be  a  communication  sent  from  the
    Portuguese Permanent Mission in  Geneva  to  the  Office  of  the  High
    Commissioner for Human Rights of the United Nations, seemingly dated as
     having been  received by that office on 22 April  2014.   It  is  said
    that the communication refers to note OHCHR/RRDD/VAW which I  pause  to
    observe is not otherwise explained, and that it  is  a  "Reply  by  the
    Portuguese authorities to the questionnaire on child, early and  forced
    marriage".

     (ii) Perusal of the body of the document does indeed suggest that  this
    is an attempt to summarise certain aspects of the civil law  provisions
    contained in the  Portuguese  Civil  Code  relating  to  inter-personal
    relationships.   The particular passage to which my attention has  been
    directed appears at paragraph 1.2.1 which is in the following terms:

         "Marriage by proxy is permitted  (Article  1620  CC).  One  of  the
         intending  spouses  may  delegate   authority   to   an   appointed
         representative through a proxy document that must contain  specific
         authority to contract the marriage, name the other intending spouse
         and indicate how the marriage will  take  place  and  the  type  of
         marriage.
         The proxy becomes invalid if it is  revoked  or  if  the  principal
         representative dies or becomes incapacitated. The intending  spouse
         can revoke the proxy any time (Article 1621 CC)."

     (iii) Without more I am not  satisfied  that  these  passages  are  not
    simply references to procedures that are permissible within Portugal in
    respect of proxy marriage.  Without more I am not satisfied  that  this
    constitutes evidence that a  proxy  marriage  contracted  elsewhere  in
    circumstances which may or may not be consistent  with  Portugal's  own
    code  is  inevitably  a  recognised  marriage.  Accordingly  I  am  not
    satisfied that this document could have, as it were, 'filled  the  gap'
    in the evidence identified by Judge Morgan as having been  the  subject
    of a concession. As such it is immaterial,  in  my  judgement,  whether
    Judge  Morgan  either  did  not  have  the  document  before  him,   or
    alternatively failed to address it.


29.  Mr Emezi otherwise made reference during the course of  submissions  to
    the recent Court of Appeal case of Collins Agho [2015] EWCA  Civ  1198.
    He did so again without producing a copy of that decision, although  he
    was able to bring up a case note on his mobile device which I was  able
    to peruse briefly.  That case essentially says that where the Secretary
    of State is alleging a sham marriage or a marriage  of  convenience  in
    the context of an EEA case then the burden of proof is on the Secretary
    of State to demonstrate that the marriage was indeed a sham.


30.  It seems to me that that is not on point.  The Secretary  of  State  is
    not now in the proceedings before me arguing that the relationship  was
    not genuine or that the marriage was a sham: the issue is the  question
    of the recognition of the marriage by the Portuguese authorities. I  am
    not remotely persuaded in those circumstances that the case of  Collins
    Agho results in a shift of the burden of  proof  from  that  which  was
    applied in the case of Kareem.


31.  Mr Emezie otherwise fell  back  on  arguing  that  Kareem  was  wrongly
    decided, and in this context made reference to two cases in respect  of
    which permission to appeal had been granted by the Court of Appeal.


32.  Yet again, these matters have been raised in his Rule 24  response  and
    the Secretary of State has not been put on notice of them  accordingly.
    I do not have particular or specific details  of  those  cases  pending
    before the Court of Appeal, but in any event no decision has  yet  been
    made on them and until such time as any decision is made on them  I  am
    content to agree with the approach  taken  in  Kareem  and  adopt  that
    approach in cases where it is relevant.


33.  Be that as it may, it seems to me for the reasons  already  given  that
    the issue in respect of proxy marriage  is  not  squarely  before  this
    Tribunal in this case.   It  was  raised  in  the  alternative  by  the
    Secretary of State in circumstances where it is  clear  to  me  it  was
    entirely unnecessary for the Secretary of State to raise it.  There  is
    no cross-appeal against  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  on  the
    point, and the arguments that Mr Emezie has sought to  advance  on  the
    point during the course of the hearing are not raised in  the  Rule  24
    response which confines itself to submissions on factual merits.  Those
    factual merits essentially rest on the  Portuguese  documents  which  I
    have indicated seem to me not to advance the matter any further.


34.  Accordingly in summary I find that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did
    indeed err in law in  respect  of  failing  to  identify  the  residual
    discretion under Regulation 17(4) and to that extent his decision  must
    be set aside. In remaking the decision I find that the appeal  must  be
    allowed on the basis that the issue of discretion remains at large  and
    that is to be remitted to the Secretary of State to  be  considered  in
    accordance with the law, pursuant to the guidance in Ihemedu.  No doubt
    the Secretary of State in considering the residual discretion will want
    to take into account the very positive findings made by Judge Morgan in
    respect of this couple's relationship.  There is  no  need  for  me  to
    interfere with any aspect of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision
    in respect of validity of marriage and  that  aspect  of  the  decision
    stands.


Notice of Decision

35.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is set aside.


36.  I remake the decision in the appeal.  The  appeal  is  allowed  to  the
    limited extent of being remitted to the Secretary of State to  consider
    the discretion under Regulation 17(4).


34.  No anonymity direction is made.


The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
at the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed                                  Date: 15 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  whole  fee
award because it was necessary  for  the  Appellant  to  pursue  her  appeal
before the First-tier Tribunal in order to  establish  that  she  was  in  a
genuine durable relationship with the sponsor.

Signed                                  Date: 15 January 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

