
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22675/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 December 2016                           |On 22 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Puar instructed by Permits 2 Work


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity direction made under rule 14  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  (SI  2008/2698  as
    amended) which remains in force.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, for convenience I will refer to the parties as they  appeared
    before the First-tier Tribunal.



Introduction

 3. AK, the Appellant, is a citizen of Afghanistan.  He  initially  entered
    the United Kingdom illegally and  was  removed  on  24  November  2004.
    Thereafter, he re-entered the UK, again illegally, and  claimed  asylum
    in February 2008.  That claim was refused and he was  removed  back  to
    Afghanistan on 12 January 2011.  Thereafter, the  appellant  re-entered
    the UK.  He was encountered by the police  on  18  March  2014  and  he
    admitted that he had entered the UK illegally in 2013.

 4. The appellant accepted that he had left Afghanistan  in  2011  and  had
    travelled through a number of countries including Italy before entering
    the UK.  Subsequently, enquiries made by the UK authorities showed that
    he had been fingerprinted in Italy on 9 July 2012.  As  a  result,  the
    Secretary  of  State  made  a  formal  request  to  Italy   to   accept
    responsibility for determining the appellant's asylum claim  under  the
    Dublin Regulations on 30 March 2014.  On 29  April  2014,  the  Italian
    authorities accepted responsibility.   As  a  result,  the  appellant's
    asylum claim was certified on safe third country grounds.  On 29  April
    2014, the appellant was notified that it was proposed to remove him  to
    Italy under the Dublin provisions.  On 29 May 2014, the respondent made
    a decision to remove the appellant to Italy.

 5. The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   That  Tribunal
    initially determined as a preliminary issue that the appellant did have
    a valid in-country appeal against the decision to remove him  taken  on
    29 May 2014 as he had previously made a human rights claim when he  was
    arrested on 18 March 2014.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 6. The appellant's substantive appeal was heard  by  Judge  Frazer  on  28
    October 2015.  The appellant relied upon the Immigration Rules and  Art
    8 to resist his removal to Italy.  In particular, he  relied  upon  his
    relationship with a British citizen ("JA") which had begun  in  January
    2013.  JA has two children from a previous relationship, C aged 5 and J
    aged 3.  In addition, the appellant and JA also have a  son  ("K")  who
    was born on 31 March 2014.

 7. Judge Frazer allowed the appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules
    and under Art 8.   She  accepted  that  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and JA was a genuine and subsisting one  and  that  they  co-
    parented all three children.  She found they  functioned  as  a  family
    unit.   However,  given  the  particular  living  arrangements  of  the
    appellant and JA (which did not include cohabitation), Judge Frazer did
    not accept that JA was the appellant's "partner" for  the  purposes  of
    the 'partner' route under Appendix FM.  Nevertheless, she  went  on  to
    allow the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  satisfied  the
    requirements of  para  EX.1.  as  the  appellant  had  a  "genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship" with each of the three  children  and
    that it would "not be reasonable to expect" the three children to leave
    the UK and live in Italy with the appellant if  he  were  removed.   In
    addition, on the hypothetical basis that her  finding  in  relation  to
    EX.1. was wrong, Judge Frazer also  allowed  the  appeal  under  Art  8
    outside the Rules  on  the  basis  that  there  were  "very  compelling
    circumstances"  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  given  the  "grave
    repercussions for any continuing relationship with his  child"  if  the
    appellant was removed to Italy.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal which was granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  (UTJ  Southern
    sitting as a judge of the First-tier Tribunal) on 4  May  2016  on  the
    basis that the judge had arguably erred in law in treating para  EX.1.1
    as  a  "freestanding  provision".   Secondly,  the  judge   had   given
    inadequate reasons as to why it would be  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    children  to  accompany  the  appellant  and  their  mother  to  Italy.
    Thirdly,  the  judge  had  failed  properly  to  apply  s.117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the NIA Act 2002").

 9. The appeal was initially listed before me on 13 September 2016.   In  a
    decision sent on 7 October 2016, I  concluded  that,  in  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules and Art 8, the judge had
    erred in law.  First, the judge had been wrong to consider  para  EX.1.
    as a freestanding provision.  The appellant could not succeed under the
    'partner' route even  if  he  established  the  requirements  in  EX.1.
    because he had failed to establish that he was a "partner"  within  the
    definition  in  GEN.1.2.   Secondly,  her   finding   in   respect   of
    "reasonableness" under the Rules and s.117B(6) was legally flawed.   My
    reasons are set out in full in my decision and  it  is  unnecessary  to
    repeat them here.

10. As a consequence, I set aside the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  and
    adjourned the appeal in order for  the  appeal  to  be  relisted  at  a
    resumed hearing in order to remake the decision in respect of Art 8.

Remaking the Decision

11. The appeal was relisted on 13 December  2016.   At  that  hearing,  the
    appellant was represented by Mr Puar and the respondent was represented
    by Mr Richards.

12. It was common ground between  the  parties  that  the  sole  issue  was
    whether the appellant was entitled to succeed under Art 8  outside  the
    Rules.  Judge Frazer's finding that the appellant was not  a  "partner"
    for the purposes of Appendix FM had not been challenged and  was  fatal
    to any claim by the appellant under Appendix FM on that basis.  It  was
    not  suggested  that  the  appellant  could  succeed  under  any  other
    Immigration Rule whether as a "parent" under  Appendix  FM  or  on  the
    basis of his private life under para 276ADE of the Rules.

13. At the hearing before me, Mr Puar relied upon the witness statements of
    the appellant and JA: dated (in respect of the appellant) 13 June 2014,
    8 September 2014, 20 October 2015 and 5 September 2016; (in respect  of
    the sponsor) 8 September 2014, 20 October 2015, 19 October 2015  and  5
    September 2016.

14. In addition, the sponsor gave oral evidence before me updating her  and
    the appellant's situation in the UK.   She  was  cross-examined  by  Mr
    Richards and, in his submissions, Mr Richards accepted that  there  was
    no reason why I should not accept JA as a truthful  witness.   I  agree
    and I do so.

15.  As  I  have  already  indicated,  the  appeal  was  argued,  by   both
    representatives, on the basis of whether the  appellant  could  succeed
    under Art 8 outside the Rules.  The focus of the submissions, as I will
    return to shortly, was whether the appellant could bring himself within
    s.117B(6) which provides as follows:

         "117B(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
                the public interest does not require the  person's  removal
                where -

                (a)   The person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                     relationship with a qualifying child, and

                (b)   It would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                     leave the United Kingdom."

16. Judge Frazer  accepted  at  para  46  of  her  determination  that  the
    appellant had a "genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship"  with
    each of the three children, namely C (age 6), J (age 4) and K (age  2).
    The judge accepted that JA and the appellant (who also had a subsisting
    relationship - "co-parent all of the children together.  They  function
    as a "family unit." (see para 42 of the  determination).   The  judge's
    findings were made even though the  appellant  is  not  the  biological
    father of C and J.  Those findings were not challenged by the Secretary
    of State and Mr Richards in his submissions did not seek to ask  me  to
    find otherwise.  I see no reason to depart from those  findings  which,
    in any event, are entirely consistent with the additional oral evidence
    given by JA which I accept.  It is accepted that C, J and K are British
    citizens and so each is a "qualifying child" within s.117D(1).

17. In his submissions,  Mr  Puar  submitted  that  it  was  in  the  "best
    interests" of each of the children to remain  in  the  UK  to  maintain
    stability and that it was not reasonable to expect them to leave the UK
    and live in Italy with the appellant.

18. Mr Richards submitted that it was reasonable to expect the children  to
    leave the UK and live in Italy, an EU  country,  in  particular  having
    regard to the public interest in effective  immigration  control  which
    outweigh their individual circumstances.

19. In applying Art 8 outside the Rules, I adopt  the  5-stage  test  in  R
    (Razgar) v SSHD [2014] UKHL 27.   The  burden  of  proof  is  upon  the
    appellant to establish a breach of Art 8 on a balance of probabilities.
     It is for the Secretary of State to establish any justification  under
    Art 8.2.

20. In reaching my findings, I take into account all the evidence relied on
    before me, including the witness statements of the appellant and JA and
    the latter's oral evidence.  The judge's findings of primary fact  were
    not challenged and I adopt them except to the  extent  that  JA's  oral
    evidence demonstrates that matters have  moved  on  since  the  hearing
    before the judge.

21. First, I consider whether Art  8.1  id  engaged.   I  accept  that  the
    appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with JA  and  also,
    in the role of a  parent,  with  C  and  J  (although  he  is  not  the
    biological father) and K.

22. The appellant formed a relationship with JA in January 2013.   At  that
    time,  indeed  the  position  has  never  changed,  he  had  no  lawful
    immigration status.  JA was unaware of this  until  the  appellant  was
    arrested on 18 March 2014.  That was around two weeks before the  birth
    of their son, K on 31 March 2014.

23. C is in full-time education at  primary  school  and  J  and  K  attend
    nursery.  The judge accepted, and so do I, that the appellant has  been
    "actively involved" in the  lives  of  all  three  children  since  the
    relationship between the appellant and  JA  began.   Again,  the  judge
    accepted, and so do I, that JA and the appellant "co-parent" all  three
    children and they function as a family unit.

24. The judge accepted the evidence of the appellant and JA that  they  did
    not cohabit because of the consequences to JA who  was  in  receipt  of
    welfare benefits.  Although the appellant does not  live  with  JA,  he
    stays with her two nights a week but comes to the house each morning in
    order to take C to school and help care for  the  other  children.   JA
    repeated that evidence in her oral evidence before me.  She  said  that
    he sees them on  Tuesdays,  Wednesdays  and  Thursdays  and  always  at
    weekends.

25. It is clear to me that JA, the appellant and three children form a very
    close-knit family unit.  JA told me that the biological father of C and
    J had very limited contact with them.  She told  me,  however,  that  a
    relationship was developing and that she had managed to achieve limited
    contact each week which could be counted in hours.  That  was  all  the
    father could manage.  He did not financially support C or J.   JA  also
    told me that C, at least, understands who his biological father is  but
    he thinks of both the appellant and his biological father as being  his
    "dad" even though they  try  to  explain  that  he  has  a  father  and
    stepfather.

26. JA also told me that she and the father of C  and  J  had  also  had  a
    stillborn child on 30 June 2011.  She said that C understood  this  and
    that they visited the grave, particularly at Christmas, birthday times,
    etc, as a family  unit.   The  children  give  flowers  and  clean  the
    headstone.  JA told me that she and her children would not be  able  to
    do this if they were to leave the UK and live in  Italy.   JA  told  me
    that the children only speak English.

27. JA also told  me  that,  although  she  had  moved  since  the  judge's
    decision, it was within Swindon and she still remains  within  a  short
    distance of her family (her mother and sister) and her father who lived
    in Calne.   She told me that her family "cherished  the  ground"  which
    the appellant "walks upon".  She also told me that her family  maintain
    regular contact and support, for example her  father  helps  out  every
    weekend.

28. In her oral evidence, JA said that  her  employment  circumstances  had
    changed since the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.  She has now been
    offered a job as a care assistant in a private  care  home.   That  job
    consisted of 36 hours a week at the rate of �7.20 per hour  and  was  a
    permanent position.   JA explained that she had GCSE qualifications but
    she would be trained in the job with NVQs and that she saw this as  her
    career in the future.  Mr Richards on seeing a copy of  the  job  offer
    sent via email and held on JA's telephone, accepted what JA  had  said.
    In cross-examination, JA was asked about childcare arrangements if  she
    worked.  She said that her sister could help with the two younger ones,
    as could her mother and her father helped out at weekends.

29. Applying  the  5-stage  test  in  Razgar,  first,  I  accept  that  the
    appellant's removal to Italy will interfere with his private and family
    life  in  the  UK  sufficiently  seriously  to  engage  Art  8.1.   The
    integration of the  appellant,  JA  and  the  three  children  will  be
    disrupted if the appellant is returned to Italy.  Further, any movement
    by the children would disrupt the developing relationship that C and  J
    have with their father in the UK.   The  appellant  plays  a  full  and
    active part in the children's lives and has a subsisting  relationship,
    amounting to family life, with JA even though they do not cohabit in  a
    conventional sense of living together  throughout  each  week.   It  is
    likely, in my judgment, on the evidence before me that the  appellant's
    family will not follow him to Italy given  the  disruption  that  would
    cause to the three children and also the impact that would have upon JA
    who is about to embark upon employment (for the first time), which  she
    considers to be her future career.

30. For these reasons, I find that Art 8.1 is engaged.

31. Secondly, the decisions are in accordance with the law as the appellant
    cannot succeed under any of the Immigration Rules.

32. Thirdly, the appellant's removal is for a legitimate  aim,  namely  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control (see, s.117B(1) of the NIA
    Act 2002).

33. Fourthly, I turn to  consider  the  issue  of  'proportionality'.   The
    crucial issue is whether the appellant's removal is justified as  being
    a proportionate interference with  his  Art  8  rights  and,  for  this
    purpose, I take into account the rights of JA and the three children as
    they comprise a "family unit" (see, Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39).
     The issue of proportionality requires a balancing of the  individual's
    interests  and  rights  against  the  public  interest   in   effective
    immigration control (see, Razgar at [20]).

34. I bear in mind that, as the appellant cannot succeed under  the  Rules,
    there  must  be  'compelling'  circumstances  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest (see, Singh and Khalid v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74),

35. In determining proportionality, the best interests of C, J and K are  a
    primary, though not determinative, consideration (see ZH  (Tanzania)  v
    SSHD [2011] UKSC 4  and  Zoumbas  v  SSHD  [2013]  UKSC  74  at  [10]).
    However, a child's best interests may be outweighed by  the  cumulative
    effect of other considerations (see, e.g. Zoumbas at [10(3)]).

36. In determining proportionality under Art 8.2, I must "have  regard"  to
    the  considerations  listed  in  s.117B  of  the  NIA  Act  2002  (see,
    s.117A(2)).

37. Section 117B provides as follows:

         "117B. Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in  all
         cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English -

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons -

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to -

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

38. I deal first with the children's "best interests".  Mr Richards did not
    make any submissions specifically on this issue.  Mr Puar, on behalf of
    the appellants submitted  that  in  considering  their  best  interests
    stability was paramount.  He submitted that C, J and K  have  undergone
    significant challenges in their early years.  C and J's father left  JA
    and they have had little or no contact with him until  recently.   That
    contact had now begun albeit to a limited extent with their  biological
    father.  It was in their best interests that  their  relationship  with
    their father should  continue.   Mr  Puar  relied  upon  JA's  evidence
    concerning the  importance,  within  the  family  unit  of  the  family
    continuing to visit, as JA said was an important part of  their  lives,
    of the grave of their deceased sibling.

39. Mr Puar submitted that the family unit of JA and the appellant gave all
    three children stability and  routine  and  there  was  also  a  strong
    relationship between the children and their extended family  who  lived
    within close range.

40. Mr Puar submitted that it was in the best interests of the children  to
    maintain these relationships.  In  addition,  Mr  Puar  submitted  that
    these factors also point in favour  of  a  finding  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect them to leave the UK given  the  upheaval,  that
    they would have to learn a new language, that there would  be  setbacks
    for JA in having to  give  up  employment  and  that  they  only  spoke
    English.

41. I accept the substance of Mr Puar's submissions.  I have no doubt  that
    it is in the best interests of all three children to  remain  within  a
    family unit made up of the appellant  and  JA.   The  judge  made  that
    finding at para 48 of her determination and it is  not  challenged.   I
    agree with  that  finding.   As  the  judge  found  at  para  44:  "Any
    separation  from   [the   appellant]   is   likely   to   affect   them
    significantly."

42. I accept Mr Puar's submission that it is in the best interests  of  all
    three children to maintain the  stability  of  the  family  unit.   The
    children are all British citizens and have the right to live in the  UK
    together with JA who is  a  British  citizen.   Of  course,  all  three
    children are young - the eldest, C, is aged 6.  As the case  law  makes
    plain (e.g. Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC)), at this age whilst  it
    is in the best interests of children to be  with  their  parents,  that
    does not mean that any disruption to  their  private  life  necessarily
    significantly affects their private life as they are primarily  focused
    inwards within the family.  That, in my judgment, applies to all  three
    children even though C has begun primary school and J and  K  attend  a
    day nursery.  I am, however, clear that it would not  be  in  the  best
    interests of any of the children to separate them from the family  unit
    comprising JA and the appellant together.   C  and  J  would  lose  the
    developing relationships with their biological father in the UK and all
    three children would lose the immediacy of the relationships they  have
    with their grandparents and aunts and uncles  in  the  UK  who  are,  I
    accept, part of a close family. Modern communications, such  as  Skype,
    can maintain some contact but cannot fully  and  effectively  replicate
    the immediacy of family relationships.

43. The evidence concerning the situation which the family  would  face  in
    Italy is somewhat limited.  Mr Richards  submitted  at  the  hearing  a
    document from the Italian authorities dealing with Dublin returns dated
    8 June 2015.  Mr Puar did not seek to object to this new evidence and I
    admitted it pursuant to rule 15(2A) of the Upper Tribunal's Rules.   It
    sets out, by way of tabular form, places reserved for  "family  groups"
    within  the  SPRAR  framework  (Protection  System  for   International
    Protection Applicants and Refugees).  It  sets  out  that  projects  of
    "integrated reception" are financed by means of public resources  which
    are implemented by municipalities with the  support  of  the  voluntary
    sector, including the provision of information,  guidance  and  support
    seeking to ensure "family unity" and including Italian language courses
    and job training.

44. The reception arrangements for asylum seekers in Italy has, as is  well
    known, been the subject of  considerable  litigation  concluding,  most
    recently, with the Court of Appeal's decision in NA (Sudan) and Another
    v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 1060.  These cases are, however, only  concerned
    with whether the circumstances on return to Italy  for  asylum  seekers
    infringe the European Convention on Human Rights.  They do not  concern
    the issues of whether it would be in the "best interests" of a  British
    citizen child to be subject to those "reception conditions" or  whether
    it would be "reasonable" for a British citizen child to leave the UK in
    those circumstances.

45. In truth, no clear evidence was placed  before  me  as  to  the  actual
    circumstances that would be faced by this family unit if the  appellant
    were returned to Italy and accompanied by JA and the three children.  I
    was not  shown  any  evidence,  for  example,  whether  the  "reception
    conditions" applicable to asylum seekers applied to their families  who
    were themselves EU nationals or whether  those  "reception  conditions"
    only apply to an asylum seeker and his  family  where  all  were  third
    country nationals.  In  addition,  although  Mr  Richards  also  placed
    weight in his submission upon  JA  and  the  three  children  being  EU
    nationals, there was no evidence of what would be their entitlement  on
    that basis to, for example, accommodation in Italy.  The  position  is,
    therefore, wholly unclear  and  given  that  the  burden  of  proof  in
    justifying any interference under Art 8.2  is  with  the  Secretary  of
    State, I am un-persuaded that there  is  anything  other  than  a  real
    prospect of instability for JA and her children if they went  to  Italy
    with the appellant if he is removed.  JA has  now  obtained  employment
    but she is starting out, for the first time, on that career  and  I  do
    not accept that she would obtain employment in Italy in  the  short  or
    medium term to support the family.  There is no evidence as to what, if
    any, welfare benefits she would be entitled to in Italy.

46. For these reasons, I am satisfied that it is in the best  interests  of
    the three children to remain in a family unit with JA and the appellant
    and to do so in the UK.

47. I turn then to consider the issue of proportionality.  I do so,  having
    regard to the factors set out in s.117B and in the light  of  the  fact
    that the appellant cannot succeed under the  Immigration  Rules.  As  I
    have already noted, the children's best interests may be outweighed  by
    sufficiently  strong  countervailing  factors  based  on   the   public
    interest.

48. First, I accept that the appellant's removal is in the public  interest
    for the maintenance of effective immigration control (see,  s.117B(1)).



49. Secondly, as the judge accepted at para 49 of  her  determination,  the
    appellant speaks English.  However, that is a neutral factor  and  does
    not dilute the otherwise existing public interest (see Rhuppiah v  SSHD
    [2016] EWCA Civ 803 interpreting s.117B(2) and (3)).

50. Thirdly, it has not been suggested that the appellant  is  "financially
    independent".  There is no evidence that he worked and, at least at the
    present, before JA begins work she is dependent upon welfare  benefits.
    The public interest engaged under s.117B(3), therefore, applies.

51. Fourthly, I  accept  that  "little  weight"  should  be  given  to  the
    appellant's private life and his relationship with JA (as a "qualifying
    partner") as that relationship was established at a time when he was in
    the UK unlawfully.  I note, however, that JA was unaware of his  status
    until he was arrested over a year after their relationship began on  18
    March 2014.

52. Finally, I turn to consider  s.117B(6)  which  was  the  focus  of  the
    submissions before me.

53. As I have already indicated, I accept  (as  did  the  judge)  that  the
    appellant has a "genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship"  with
    each of the three children who are each "a qualifying child"  to  which
    s.117B(6) therefore applies providing that it would "not be  reasonable
    to expect" the children to leave the UK.

54. The issue of "reasonableness" under s.117B(6) is not determined  simply
    on the basis of the children's "best interests" (see  R  (MA)  Pakistan
    and Others v UTIAC and Others [2016] EWCA Civ 705).  In  MA  (Pakistan)
    the  Court  of  Appeal  decided  that  in  determining  the  issue   of
    "reasonableness"  the  decision  maker  must  carry  out  a   balancing
    exercise,  considering  all  the  circumstances  including   the   best
    interests of the children, but taking into account the public  interest
    (see at [45]).  The Court of  Appeal  recognised,  in  the  case  of  a
    "qualifying child" on the basis of seven years  residence  in  the  UK,
    that there would have to be "strong" or "powerful"  reasons  to  depart
    from the conclusion that it  would,  in  general,  be  unreasonable  to
    expect that child to leave the UK.  That must also be the  case  for  a
    "qualifying child" by virtue of his or her British citizenship.

55. I have already set out the circumstances of the family, including  that
    of the three children above.  I  do  not  repeat  them  in  full  here.
    However, I note again that the developing relationships between C and J
    and their biological father will be abruptly halted. I also  find  that
    if the three children are expected to leave the UK, they will  have  to
    do so only with JA and there will be a significant impact upon her,  in
    particular her career and her close relationships with  her  family  in
    the UK.  The children will also lose the immediacy of the relationships
    they have developed with their grandparents and aunts who  live  nearby
    and which cannot be fully and  effectively  replicated  through  modern
    means of communication such a Skype even though it may allow  for  some
    contact to still be maintained.

56. All three children are British citizens.  That is a significant  factor
    in assessing whether it is reasonable to expect them to  leave  the  UK
    including moving to an EU country.  I accept Mr Puar's submission  that
    'stability' is a crucial factor and if the children leave the UK  there
    will be significant instability in their  lives.   The  situation  they
    would face in Italy is uncertain whether they go there as the  children
    of an asylum seeker (the appellant) or of an  EU  national  (JA,  their
    mother).  Mr Richards emphasised, in his submissions, that Italy was an
    EU country.  However, there would remain language barriers  -  none  of
    the children speak Italian - and, at least in the case  of  C,  he  has
    begun his education.  J is likely to follow soon.  Whilst  they  could,
    no doubt, attend school in Italy, it was not suggested before  me  that
    any education  would  be  other  than  conducted  through  the  Italian
    language.

57. As I have already indicated, Mr Richards relied upon  the  letter  from
    the Italian  authorities  dated  8  June  2015  as  regards  "reception
    conditions" for asylum seekers.  Whilst those reception  conditions  do
    not breach an individual's human rights on return, it does  not  follow
    that it is a situation which a British citizen child should be expected
    to  accept  as  living  conditions.   In  my   judgment,   absent   any
    consideration of the public interest, it cannot be said  reasonable  to
    expect three young children with a British citizen mother  to  relocate
    to live in Italy under the regime afforded to  asylum-seekers  in  that
    country.  In my judgment, discounting for the present the issue of  the
    public interest, the circumstances of all three children in the  UK  as
    British citizens, taking into account the impact upon them  of  leaving
    the UK and living  in  Italy,  leads  me  to  find  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable for them to leave the UK  in  the  sense  that  it  cannot
    objectively be expected of them.

58. However, I  must  also  have  regard  to  the  public  interest  as  MA
    (Pakistan) requires.  The position of the appellant is that he has been
    in the UK at all times without any lawful basis.   He  entered  the  UK
    illegally, most recently, according to his case in 2013.   He  had,  of
    course, previously entered on two occasions in 2004 and 2008 only to be
    removed to Afghanistan.  The appellant has a poor  immigration  history
    and background.

59. I do not accept that there  are  sufficiently  'strong'  or  'powerful'
    reasons, however, to displace the view  that  the  children  cannot  be
    expected to leave the UK.  I am  required  to  carry  out  a  balancing
    exercise weighing the circumstances of the three children  against  the
    appellant's immigration history.  I accept, as I have  already  stated,
    that the maintenance of effective immigration control is engaged.   The
    claim, however, of the three children to remain in the  UK  as  British
    citizens in their family unit is a strong one.  They have  a  right  to
    live in the UK, they have close extended family in  the  UK  and  their
    mother (who would be their primary carer if the appellant were removed)
    had recently obtained employment which,  she  hopes,  will  become  her
    career as a care assistant in a care  home.   There  would  be,  in  my
    judgment, significant instabilities if they were uprooted and moved  to
    Italy despite their young ages.  I bear in mind  the  evidence  of  JA,
    which was not disputed by Mr Richards, of the  importance  placed  upon
    paying due respect, by appropriate visitation, to the  grave  of  their
    sibling who died in 2011.

60. Carrying out the balancing exercise that I am required to undertake,  I
    am satisfied that it would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the  three
    children to leave the UK.  I am satisfied that s.117B(6)  applies.   On
    its own terms, that may mean that as a result  of  s.117B(6)  applying,
    that the public interest does not require the removal of the  appellant
    (see MA (Pakistan) at [17] and Rhuppiah at [51]).

61. In any event, having regard to all the circumstances,  I  am  satisfied
    that there are "compelling" circumstances, in particular having  regard
    to the impact upon the three children of the appellant's removal,  such
    that I find that the appellant's removal would be  disproportionate  in
    that the public interest does not outweigh any  interference  with  the
    protected rights of the appellant under Art 8.

62. Consequently, I am satisfied, on a balance of probabilities,  that  the
    decision to remove the appellant breaches Art 8 of the ECHR.

63. For completeness I should add that both representatives agreed that the
    decision in Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 was not  relevant  to  this
    appeal.

Decision

64. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appellant's appeal
    under Art 8 and the Immigration Rules involved the making of  an  error
    of law.  That decision was set aside by my decision dated 22  September
    2016.

65. I remake the decision allowing the appellant's appeal under  Art  8  of
    the ECHR.


                                 Signed



                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Judge Frazer made no fee award as no fee had been paid  or  is  payable.   I
see no reason to depart from that decision.


                                 Signed



                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date


