
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22666/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th January 2017                          |On 8th February 2017          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                     mr Mohamed Mubarak Mohammed Rafeek
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Sri Lanka, who was born  on  25th
    March 1989.   He  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent, taken on  2nd  June  2015,  to  reject  his
    application for  a  residence  card  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA  Regulations").   The  appeal
    was brought under Regulation 26 of the EEA Regulations.

 2. The Appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Shergill
    at Birmingham on 8th March 2016.  It  was  promulgated  on  18th  March
    2016.   At  paragraphs  20  to  29  of  the  determination,  the  judge
    determined the Appellant's claim to dependency and rejected  it  giving
    reasons for doing so.  He concluded that the appeal  was  dismissed  by
    reference to the EEA Regulations.

 3. In the Grounds of Appeal dated 1st April 2016, Mr Paramjorthy  appealed
    to the Upper Tribunal arguing that the judge made material mistakes  as
    to fact and listed the reasons for so stating.

 4. On 13th October 2016, permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis
    that the judge had not taken  into  account  the  documentary  evidence
    which bore relevance to the judge's resolution of the capacity  of  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor to give truthful evidence.

 5. On 21st October 2016, a Rule 24 response was entered by the  Respondent
    Secretary of State to the effect that there is a preliminary  point  in
    this appeal which concerns the existence of an appeal in relation to an
    extended family member following the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in
    Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal: Albania) [2016] UKUT 411, which determined
    that the Appellant does not have a statutory right  of  appeal  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State not to grant a residence card to
    a person claiming to be an extended family member.

 6. At the hearing before me on 30th January 2017, Mr  Paramjorthy,  having
    discussed this matter in relation to the availability  of  a  right  of
    appeal before the Tribunal with Mr Jarvis, submitted that it  did  very
    much appear to be the case that  there  was  no  jurisdiction  for  the
    Tribunal to determine this appeal in the first instance.  He  submitted
    that it was unfortunate that the appeal had been listed, and even  more
    unfortunate that it had been in the pipeline waiting to be  heard  ever
    since 13th October 2016 when permission  to  appeal  was  granted.   He
    asked that there should be a decision from this Tribunal  there  is  no
    jurisdiction for it to determine this appeal so that the Appellant  can
    make a judicial review application.

 7. For his part, Mr Jarvis submitted that he would have to  agree,  having
    discussed this matter also with Mr Paramjorthy, that this was the right
    course of action.  As a consequence of  Sala  there  was  no  right  of
    appeal and the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to determine this matter.

 8. In reply, Mr Paramjorthy submitted  that  the  only  other  outstanding
    matter was that the decision of this Tribunal should be  sent  directly
    to the Appellant at 5 Trafalgar Mews, Coventry,  CV6  5DQ,  as  he  was
    having recourse to the direct access  procedures  for  litigating  this
    matter before the courts.

 9. It is plain that  Rule  22  of  the  2014  FtT  (IAC)  Procedure  Rules
    identifies the circumstances in which the Tribunal  may  not  accept  a
    Notice of Appeal.  Rule 22(2)(a) provides that  the  Tribunal  may  not
    accept the Notice of Appeal where there is no appealable decision.  For
    he reasons given in Sala, there is no appealable decision in this case.



10. Where an appeal has been listed in error for a hearing then it is clear
    from Article  3(4)  of  the  Senior  President  of  Tribunals  Practice
    Statement of the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the  First-tier  and
    Upper Tribunal, that the judge shall issue a determination:

         "3.4.    The fact that a hearing may have been given to the parties
             does  not  mean  that  the  appeal  must  treated  as   valid.
             Accordingly, if at the hearing (including a  CMR  hearing)  it
             transpires that the Notice of Appeal  does  not  relate  to  a
             decision against which there  is,  in  the  circumstances,  an
             exercisable right of appeal, the Tribunal must so find; but it
             would do so in the form of a  determination,  rather  than  by
             means of a notice under First-tier Rule 22".

11. For the reasons given in Sala there is  no  jurisdiction  to  determine
    this appeal.  As there is no  jurisdiction  to  determine  this  appeal
    there can be no findings of fact or a decision.  Insofar as Article  33
    (procedural safeguards) of  the  Citizens'  Directive  (2004/38/EC)  is
    concerned, it is plain that a judicial  review  provides  an  effective
    remedy in terms of Article 33 (and this was made clear at paragraph  23
    of Sala).  Accordingly, it is open to the Appellant in this  matter  to
    bring a judicial review claim.  This Tribunal has  no  jurisdiction  to
    hear this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 7th February 2017

