
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22056/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Upper Tribunal            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 April 2014                              |On 23 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                           mrs Jackline Nakawunga
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Rutherford of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Smart, a Home Office Presenting Officer


       DETERMINATION AND REASONS FOR FINDING NO MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a  citizen  of  Uganda.   She  appeals  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal with the permission of First-tier Tribunal Judge Frances.
2.   The appellant arrived in  the  UK  on  2  January  2009  as  a  working
    holidaymaker.  Her leave was due to expire on 1 December 2010.  She was
    subsequently granted leave to remain from 8 March 2011  until  8  March
    2013.  On 6 March 2013 she applied for a  variation  of  her  leave  to
    remain on the basis that  she  had  started  a  relationship  with  one
    Selemani Safari Baha with whom she had a child,  Aiden  Selemani  Baha,
    born on 18 March 2013.

3.   The respondent rejected the application and on 21 May 2013 gave  notice
    of removal by directions under Section 47 of  the  Immigration,  Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006.  In  particular,  the  respondent  considered
    whether the appellant had established a family life  in  the  UK  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) within  the
    context of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules but had concluded  that
    the appellant's partner was not  a  British  citizen  living  with  the
    appellant in a relationship "akin to marriage" nor had they been living
    together for two years.  Accordingly, the appellant had not established
    a family life in the UK of such character  as  was  recognised  by  the
    Immigration Rules.  In particular, her private life had  not  continued
    for twenty years as was required by the Rules as  amended  by  Appendix
    FM.  The respondent did not see any  other  basis  for  permitting  the
    appellant to remain in the UK.

Proceedings before the Upper Tribunal

4.   Following the First-tier Tribunal  determination  on  24  January  2014
    grounds of  appeal  were  lodged  on  3  February  2014.   In  granting
    permission to appeal Judge Frances pointed out that the  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Stott ("the Immigration Judge") had  dismissed  the
    appeal without having proper regard  to  the  guidance  issued  by  the
    respondent.  It was pointed  out  that  the  appellant's  child  was  a
    British citizen and therefore relocation to Uganda  appeared  to  be  a
    disproportionate interference with the appellant and her child's family
    life.  It was at least arguable that the Immigration Judge  had  failed
    to consider whether the appellant's return to  Uganda  would  have  the
    effect of depriving Aiden of his right to reside here.

5.   Following the grant of permission on 13 February  2014  the  respondent
    submitted a response under Rule 24 indicating that  because  the  judge
    had found some family life here  the  respondent  did  not  oppose  the
    application for permission to appeal.   The  Tribunal  was  invited  to
    determine the matter at a fresh hearing where oral  evidence  could  be
    given to consider the strength of the Article 8 claim.

6.   A notice was sent out on 26 February 2014 informing the parties of  the
    hearing and requiring any fresh evidence to be the subject of a  formal
    application otherwise it would not be considered by the Upper Tribunal.



7.   At the  hearing  I  heard  submissions  by  both  representatives.   Mr
    Rutherford explained that the  marriage  between  Mr  Simpson  and  the
    appellant had broken down  in  2011.   She  had  subsequently  met  her
    present partner, Mr Baha, a Tanzanian national with indefinite leave to
    remain.  Aiden their son was a British citizen.  It was  accepted  that
    the appellant had not yet divorced her  former  husband  and  had  only
    cohabited with Mr Baha since 2012.  It was  also  accepted  that  their
    period of cohabitation fell short of the  two  years  required  by  the
    Rules.  Indeed, it was accepted  that  the  appellant  could  not  come
    within paragraph E-LTRPT.2.3.

8.   It was accepted that the appellant had the onus  of  showing  that  she
    was solely responsible for her child.   The  appellant  and  her  child
    ought to be allowed to remain in the UK if they wished.   There  was  a
    material error in the First-tier Tribunal's determination.

9.   Mr Smart sought to withdraw the  admission  made  in  the  respondent's
    Rule 24 response.  In his view the Secretary of State was not bound  by
    the contents of that notice.  I was then  referred  to  a  case  called
    Carcubuk. However, the reference I was given for that case  (00TH01426)
    appears to be incorrect so I was  unable  to  obtain  a  copy  of  that
    decision.

10.  The respondent went on to explain that the decision  was  lawful.   The
    appellant had rightly conceded  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  that  the
    Immigration Rules were not satisfied.  I was also referred to paragraph
    2  of  the  respondent's  guidance,  which  indicates  even  where  the
    respondent is required to consider a child's best interests there  must
    be exceptional circumstances warranting the grant of leave outside  the
    Rules.  EX1 set out the criteria to be satisfied but  I  understood  Mr
    Smart to say that those criteria were not met in this case  because  it
    would be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK on the facts of
    this case.  Mr Smart also referred to other recent case  law  including
    Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640.  In cases where the Rules did not  apply  it
    had to be shown that an unduly harsh outcome  would  be  occasioned  by
    failing to allow the application  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    thrust of the argument here by the appellant  was  that  the  appellant
    could not meet the Rules and  that  that  was  a  justified  basis  for
    refusal.  In any event the best interests of the child would be  served
    by requiring the appellant to travel to Uganda with Aiden for  her  her
    to apply for entry clearance there.  There was nothing in ZH (Tanzania)
    [2011] 2 All ER 783 that contradicted  that  assertion.   There  was  a
    reasonable test in EX1.  Mr Smart also relied on a case  called  Hayat,
    which he was also unable to provide a copy of.  However,  I  have  been
    able to find a copy of that case, which is a decision of the  Court  of
    Appeal (EWCA Civ 1054). Paragraph 30(b)  of  that  case  suggests  that
    those who enter the UK on a temporary basis would  have  no  legitimate
    expectation that they would be allowed to remain.   Family  life  would
    only be disrupted to a limited degree by a short period  of  return  to
    Uganda to regularise the appellant's immigration status.   Aiden  could
    travel there with his mother, it was submitted.

11.  On the other hand the appellant submitted that no proper assessment  of
    the child's best interests  had  been  carried  out.   The  issue  was:
    whether it was reasonable for Aiden to have to return  to  Uganda  with
    his mother?  Mr Rutherford accepted that  having a child in the UK  did
    not represent a "trump card"  when it came  to  being  given  leave  to
    remain but the appellant had an expectation that she  could  remain  in
    the UK as the parent of a child with British nationality.  Overall  the
    decision of the Secretary of State was disproportionate and the  matter
    not properly reasoned by the Immigration Judge.

Discussion

12.  The issue before the Upper Tribunal is  whether  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal contained a material error of law.   The  basis  of
    the attack on the Immigration Judge's decision is  that  the  appellant
    has a child, Aiden, who was born on 18 March 2013.  The appellant began
    her relationship with Mr Selemani in May 2011.  That relationship began
    after the breakdown of her marriage to Mr  Simpson,  which  formed  the
    basis for her coming to the UK in the first place.  They did not  start
    living together until August  2012.   The  appellant  claimed  that  by
    virtue of the birth of her son, who is entitled to British citizenship,
    she is entitled to remain in the UK outside the Immigration Rules.

13.  A preliminary issue arises as to whether the Tribunal should allow  the
    respondent's apparent concession (in its Rule 24  response)  to  stand.
    That Rule 24 response is not particularly clear, as  it  appears  on  a
    first reading to be aimed at the grant of permission  rather  than  the
    substantive  merits  of  the  issue  presently  before  the   Tribunal.
    Nevertheless, paragraph 3, by envisaging the need for an oral  hearing,
    appears to accept that the First-tier Tribunal  decision  ought  to  be
    overturned.

14.  Mr Smart applied to withdraw the concession made and I consider  having
    regard to the fact that both parties came prepared  to  deal  with  the
    substantive issues in this appeal  it  would  be  just  to  permit  the
    respondent to do so.  It would be wrong to compel  the  Tribunal  to  a
    course of action regardless of the  merits  just  because  one  of  the
    parties appears to have made a concession.  No reasons were  given  for
    that concession.  It is not clear to me that it was properly  made.   I
    do not detect any material prejudice to the appellant in treating it as
    an error.  Accordingly, the Upper Tribunal will proceed  to  deal  with
    the substantive merits of this appeal.

15.  The case law on Article 8 of the ECHR  is  now  voluminous  but  I  was
    particularly assisted by the  case  of  Hayat  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1054,
    referred to by Mr Smart.  In that case the Court of  Appeal  considered
    whether a short period of absence required  to  regularise  immigration
    status within the UK would constitute a  disproportionate  interference
    with an applicant's human rights.  It was  held  that  the  Immigration
    Judge in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  been  right  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal.  That case concerned with a Pakistani national  who
    unsuccessfully applied to the respondent for leave  to  remain  as  the
    partner of a points-based  system  migrant.  The  court   reviewed  the
    authorities and in particular  Chikwamba  [2008]  UKHL  40.  That  case
    concerned two Zimbabwean nationals, one of whom had indefinite leave to
    remain here by virtue of having established an asylum claim.  There had
    been a long period of residence in the UK.  Accordingly, in some  ways,
    the case was stronger from the appellants' point of view than this case
    . It was clear that the  father  of  the  child  could  not  return  to
    Zimbabwe to apply for entry clearance due to his former  asylum  claim.
    The mother, however, retained her Zimbabwean nationality.  It was  held
    that the requirement that the mother  should  return  to  Zimbabwe  and
    apply  for  entry  clearance  was  merely   procedural   and   in   the
    circumstances was disproportionate.  In Hayat, by contrast,  the  Court
    of Appeal held that a short period of family disruption  was  justified
    and interfered with the Upper Tribunal  decision to the contrary.

16.  The respondent's own guidance, which does not have the  force  of  law,
    reinforces the requirements of the rules by providing for  "exceptional
    circumstances" to be required before leave would be given  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  The expected course is for a  foreign  national  to
    return to his own country and apply from there rather than  calling  on
    the respondent  to  exceptionally  allow  him  to  remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

17.  It was accepted before the Immigration Judge and  before  me  that  the
    appellant did not qualify under the Immigration Rules.

18.  No issue seems to be taken in the grounds in relation to the manner  in
    which the Immigration Judge set out the burden and standard of proof in
    paragraph 6 of her determination.  She explained  that  the  burden  of
    establishing a  private  or  family  life  in  the  UK  rested  on  the
    appellants.  Furthermore, the appellants had the burden of showing that
    the interference with their private or family life was of such  gravity
    as to potentially engage Article 8.  This was decided on the balance of
    probability.  The burden then shifted to the respondent to show that it
    would nevertheless be unlawful to remove the appellant having regard to
    the wider public interest, including the need  to  control  immigration
    and the level of public expenditure consequent thereon.

19.  An attempt was made before the Immigration  Judge  to  argue  the  ill-
    health of the appellant or potential ill-health of  her  child,  Aiden,
    was a relevant  factor  to  be  taken  into  account  in  reaching  her
    decision.  However, this was not the subject of  a  specific  grant  of
    permission by First-tier Tribunal Judge Frances  and  neither  advocate
    suggested to me that it was a factor the  Upper  Tribunal  should  take
    into account in finding a material error of law.   In  any  event,  the
    Immigration Judge appears to have dealt fully with this  issue  in  her
    determination, for example at paragraph 16, where the Immigration Judge
    found as a fact that there was no material health risk to the appellant
    or her child  consequent on their return to Uganda.

20.  In this case, unlike in the case of Chikwamba,  there  was  nothing  in
    the past history of the  appellant  and  her  partner  to  prevent  the
    child's mother and/or possibly the father, travelling to Uganda to make
    an application for entry clearance there.   The  case  had  been  fully
    argued before her but clearly she did not  accept  that  there  was  "a
    lacuna" in the Immigration Rules.  She had full regard to the potential
    consequences on the child of the  appellant's  removal  (see  paragraph
    8(c)).  She was also aware that there  was  a  potential  problem  with
    being reunited with the sponsor if she returned to Uganda  due  to  the
    fact that their combined resources may not be sufficient  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  However,  she  pointed  to  the
    fact that the sponsor's future financial circumstances  may  change  in
    the future and there was a degree of speculation in the submission that
    the appellant would not be able to return to join the  sponsor  in  the
    UK.  The Immigration Judge  noted  that  the  appellant  had  a  family
    support network in Uganda to which she could turn (see paragraph 17).

21.  The Immigration Judge had at the forefront of her mind  the  fact  that
    there is potential at least for the child of this  relationship  to  be
    separated from one or other of the parents for a period of  time.   She
    did not regard it as plausible that the father would return  to  Uganda
    but she did regard it as reasonable for mother  and  child  to  do  so,
    particularly  having  regard  to  the  fact  that  family  support  was
    available there.

22.  It is only exceptionally that  an  application  that  fails  under  the
    Immigration Rules will succeed on a freestanding basis under Article 8.
     I find the matter to have been fully ventilated before the Immigration
    Judge and for her to have made full and  appropriate  findings  on  the
    evidence.  I can find  no  proper  basis  for  interfering  with  those
    findings or conclusions. Accordingly her decision ought to  be  allowed
    to stand.

Decision

23.  The appellant has not established that there was a  material  error  of
    law in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Accordingly,  the
    appeal against that decision is dismissed.

     There is no appeal against the decision to make no  fee  award  and  no
    anonymity direction and those decisions also stand therefore.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


