

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22177/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 August 2014                             |On 03 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Hetel Jayeshkumar Kataria
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z. Nasim, Counsel

                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

    1. The Secretary of State appeals against the determination  of  First-
       tier Tribunal  Judge  Herbert,  OBE,  promulgated  on  27  May  2014
       allowing the appeal of Mrs Kataria against the decision made by  the
       Secretary of State  refusing  her  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
       (Entrepreneur). For the sake of continuity, I  shall  refer  to  Mrs
       Kataria as the appellant, as she was before the First-tier Tribunal.


    2. The Secretary of State's decision was made on  22  May  2013.  Under
       Appendix A: Attributes, the decision maker, Ms Laura Malik,  awarded
       the appellant none of the  25  points  the  appellant  claimed.  Her
       reason for doing so related to the requirement in Appendix A to  the
       Immigration Rules, found in Table  4  (d)  that  the  applicant  was
       required to demonstrate (i) her job  title  and  (ii)  the  Standard
       Occupational  Classification  code  of  the  occupation   that   the
       applicant was working in drawn from the list of occupations  skilled
       to NQF level 4 or above. In addition, the applicant was required  to
       provide one or more contracts showing trading which  contracts  were
       required to contain certain specified information such as  the  name
       and address of the business and the service provided by it. Finally,
       the applicant was required to have  registered  a  new  business  in
       which  she  was  a  director  within  the  period  of  three  months
       immediately prior to the application.


    3. In her decision, the decision maker stated that  the  appellant  did
       not answer question G 21 of the application form and  therefore  did
       not specify either  her  job  title  or  the  Standard  Occupational
       Classification so as to establish it fell within the  categories  of
       those of NQF level 4 or above. Secondly, the decision  maker  stated
       that the application  did  not  contain  a  contract  sufficient  to
       demonstrate that her business was trading. Thirdly, the refusal  was
       made on the basis that the  documentation  provided  from  Companies
       House established the incorporation of a company on 13  August  2012
       which did not fall within the period  of  three  months  immediately
       prior to the date when the application was made.

    4. In  paragraph  15  of  his  determination,  the  Judge  recited  his
       conclusion that he found the appellant had  supplied  the  necessary
       documentation in the correct format at the  date  of  the  decision.
       Whilst acknowledging that the respondent's bundle did not contain  a
       copy of the application in which section G 21  had  been  completed,
       the Judge said in paragraphs 15 and 16

         I am satisfied [the form] was in existence at the date of  decision
         and was authorised and signed by the appellant in a tick  box  with
         the occupational code set out.


         I am also satisfied that the other documentation was in order.

    5. This falls lamentably short of a reasoned assessment of  the  issues
       in this case.

    6. It is not, perhaps, surprising that this  occurred  given  the  fact
       that the Judge did not set out what those requirements were, did not
       make any findings of fact as to what documents were submitted at the
       date of the application,  what  documents  were  considered  by  the
       decision maker, and in what way the decision maker was wrong in  the
       3 respects in which it was said by her the application fell short.

    7. The applicant has not  had  a  properly  reasoned  decision  on  her
       appeal.

    8. This is all the more surprising since the evidence  relied  upon  by
       the applicant called out for proper findings to be made upon it. The
       decision maker stated in terms that the application did not  contain
       a completed G 21. That admits of no qualification. It appears to  be
       supported  by  what  the  Judge  said  in  paragraph   12   of   the
       determination when he stated:

         The appellant submitted that the section G 21  of  the  application
         was returned blank by the Home Office,  however  the  original  had
         been filled in and was available and reproduced to demonstrate that
         she had not only filled that in but obtained a code  on  the  G  21
         part of the  application  illustrating  what  entrepreneurial  code
         applied to her work.


    9. The fact that the appellant accepted a copy of the form was returned
       to her with section G 21 left blank  is  material.  How  could  this
       arise if the form completed by her had a completed section G 21? The
       Judge was however provided with a copy of a document with section  G
       21 completed in which the appropriate box states

                       MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTANT-SOC CODE


   10. In this copy, the SOC code was not provided.


   11. This copy in the bundle contains the following manuscript addition:


         I confirm that this was the page we completed when we submitted the
         form. This form was also e-mailed to client for confirmation before
         submission.
                                                                    (Signed)
                                                                  D. Kadikar
                                                           HSMP Services Ltd


   12. There is also a letter dated 7 June 2013 from Mr Kadikar in which Mr
       Kadikar  had  confirmed  he  e-mailed  a  copy  of   the   completed
       application form to the appellant with the further completion of the
       SOC code before its submission to the Home Office.


   13. The Judge was also provided with a different copy of a document with
       section G 21 completed in which the appropriate box states

                       MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTANT-SOC 2422


   14. In this copy, the SOC code was provided.  This copy does not contain
       the manuscript addition which I have set out in paragraph 11 above.


   15. No dates are provided as to when this correspondence took place.

   16. This evidence is in contrast to the statement of Miss Laura Malik in
       the refusal decision who said the form before her did not contain  a
       completed G 21. Was she  mistaken?  Was  she  lying?  How  does  the
       Judge's comment in paragraph 12 to the  effect  that  the  appellant
       told him that the application form was returned with  section  G  21
       left blank?

   17. The Judge made no attempt to resolve any of these issues.


   18. I  am  quite  satisfied  that  this  is  sufficient  to  render  the
       determination fatally flawed. Unless adequate findings of  fact  are
       made  on  these  issues,  I  do  not  consider  that  it  is  either
       appropriate or necessary to deal with the other issues raised in the
       refusal letter which were not adequately dealt with by the Judge.


   19. I was told by Mr Nasim that the appellant had answers to all of  the
       points raised by the Secretary of State  in  the  refusal  decision.
       If she does or did, they are not referred to by the Judge.   In  the
       absence of what I consider to be an adequate hearing upon the issues
       raised in the appeal, I remit the  matter  back  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal  for  consideration  in  the  re-making  of  the  decision.
       Inevitably, it will require oral evidence to be provided.

   20. On 28 August 2014, I was provided with a copy of an e-mail  from  Mr
       Nasim sent at 13hrs40 on  27  August  2014  to  the  Tribunal  which
       included the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  Budhathoki  (reasons
       for decisions) [2014] UKUT with which I am  familiar  and  does  not
       make  good  the  absence  of  adequate  reasons   in   the   Judge's
       determination as well as documentation from the Home  Office  (which
       will be material at  the  re-making  of  the  decision)  as  to  the
       requirement for a new company to be registered in the 3-month period
       ending with the application.

DECISION

    The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.   The  Judge  made  an
    error on a point of law  and  his  determination  of  the  appeal  will
    require  re-making.   No  findings  of  fact  are  preserved  but   the
    determination shall stand as prima facie evidence of what the appellant
    told the Judge in evidence.

DIRECTIONS

      1. The appellant has 28  days  in  which  to  submit  a  comprehensive
         indexed and paginated bundle  containing  all  the  documents  upon
         which the appellant intends to rely before the Tribunal.  Documents
         not material to the issues which have previously been submitted  in
         earlier bundles must be omitted.
      2. The bundle is to include witness statements the contents  of  which
         will stand as their evidence-in-chief.
      3. The appeal is to be set down for hearing at  Taylor  House  on  the
         First Available Date after 28 days.  No interpreter.  Time estimate
         90 minutes.




                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
         28 August 2014


