
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22437/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14th February 2014                         |On 26th March 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                          Ebenezer Adeleke Adeliyi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Nasim, Counsel, instructed by Maliks &Khan
,Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 10th  October  1979.   He
    seeks the issue of a residence card  as  confirmation  of  a  right  to
    reside in  the  United  Kingdom  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.   The  application  was
    refused by the respondent on 26th September 2012.  The appellant sought
    to appeal against that decision, which appeal  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Fisher on 9th January 2013.

2.   It is the contention of the  appellant  that  he  was  married  to  the
    sponsor  in  Nigeria  on  23rd  May  2011.   He  produces  a   marriage
    certificate to that effect.  Neither he nor his sponsor in fact went to
    Nigeria for the purposes of marriage but contend that it  was  a  proxy
    marriage as evidenced by the various documents.

3.   In the alternative it was said that the appellant and sponsor  were  in
    a durable relationship such that the appeal should be allowed  on  that
    basis.

4.   An important document, which is relied upon by the  appellant,  is  the
    document issued  from  the  Lagos  State  Government  reference  number
    MCC/MLG/013/2011 purporting to be a marriage certificate  showing  that
    the marriage between  the  appellant  and  sponsor  was  one  performed
    according to native law and custom.  It is a document showing two dates
    namely 16th April 2011 and 23rd May 2011.

5.   Reliance was placed by the respondent in the reasons for  refusal  upon
    paragraph 24.23 of a COIS Report of Nigeria which stated as follows:-

         "The United States State  Department  Reciprocity  Schedule  in  an
         undated section on marriage certificates in the country accessed on
         17th April  2011,  recorded  that  both  parties  to  the  marriage
         technically must be physically present at the  same  location  with
         witnesses to sign certain marriage documents, proxy marriages  have
         ceased to be valid but still occur."

    Given that there was no evidence that the appellant or his sponsor  had
    been present at the marriage ceremony  the marriage certificate was not
    accepted as being valid.  The grounds argued on behalf of the appellant
    are that was a misunderstanding of the situation.  The  certificate  of
    marriage had been issued by  a  Nigerian  authority  as  proof  of  the
    marriage.  Reliance was placed upon the UKBA Nigerian Country of Origin
    Information Report dated 6th January  2011  at  paragraph  24.19  which
    indicates that  although  proxy  marriages  are  not  recognised  under
    Nigerian civil law they are allowed under customary law.   It  is  also
    contended in the COI 2012 Report at paragraph 12.12 that:-


         "A salient feature of customary law in Nigeria is that it  must  be
         accepted by the community in which it is practised...To the  extent
         that Islamic law is primarily written, it contains a certain  level
         of rigidity not available in the flexibility of unwritten customary
         laws.  Customary law in Nigeria is established either by the courts
         taking judicial notice of  the  fact  that  it  exists,  or  it  is
         established by proof.   Proof  of  customary  law  can  further  be
         distinguished by the forum in which such proof is called  for.   It
         could be in a non-customary or non-area court, or it  could  be  in
         those two systems of courts that are the primary Tribunals for  the
         adjudication of matters of customary and Islamic law".

6.   Thus it is contended that marriage  by  customary  law  in  Nigeria  is
    recognised and is established  either  by  the  court  taking  judicial
    notice of the fact that it exists or established by proof.  Thus it  is
    contended that the  respondent  was  incorrect  in  saying  that  proxy
    marriage were not customary marriage  and  was  not  capable  of  being
    recognised as such by the authorities.

7.   At the hearing the First-tier Tribunal Judge adopted  as  a  basis  for
    the consideration of the validity of the marriage whether  or  not  the
    parties had been present at the marriage ceremony itself.   Also   that
    proxy marriages had ceased to be valid although  they  still  occurred.
    The Judge found that the mere fact that a court  had  provided  written
    confirmation of the marriage was not sufficient proof that it was valid
    under Nigerian civil law.

8.   The Judge did not find that there was a durable relationship  nor  that
    Article 8 ECHR was engaged in this case.

9.   Grounds of appeal were submitted essentially  on  the  basis  that  the
    Judge had not fully looked at  the  background  material  dealing  with
    customary marriage and failed to take account that the marriage  was  a
    customary one recognised by a "local customary  court".   Reliance  was
    placed upon the Nigerian Marriage Act 1949 which provides that although
    a person married under the Act is  incapable  of  contracting  a  valid
    marriage under customary law, nothing in the Act affects  the  validity
    of any marriage conducted under or in  accordance  with  any  customary
    law.  It was contended therefore that the Judge erred in law in finding
    that the marriage was not valid, albeit that it was conducted by  proxy
    and was not valid under Nigerian law.

10.  Permission to appeal was granted on that  basis  and  thus  the  matter
    came before me for hearing on 22nd March 2013.  The background material
    relating to this question was very brief indeed.

11.  Paragraph 24.21 of  the  COIS  report  of  6th  April  2011  states  as
    follows:-

         "The United States State Department  Reciprocity  Schedule,  in  an
         undated section on marriage certificates in the  country,  recorded
         that both parties to the marriage technically  must  be  physically
         present at  the  same  location  with  witnesses  to  sign  certain
         marriage documents, proxy marriages have ceased  to  be  valid  but
         still occur."

12.  There was however  a  further  paragraph  in  the  same  report  namely
    paragraph 24.19 which reads as follows:

         "In an email from the British High Commission in Abuja to  UKBA  of
         1st December 2008 it was stated:
             'Although proxy marriages are not  recognised  under  Nigerian
             civil law, they are allowed under customary law'."

13.  It was argued before me that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  approached
    the matter  on  the  point  of  view  that  proxy  marriages  were  not
    recognised as such under Nigerian civil law and  failed  to  appreciate
    that such may be recognised under customary law.  It was contended that
    had the Judge noted paragraph 24.19 that the approach to the  case  may
    have been materially different.

14.  It seems to me that paragraphs  24.19  and  24.21  of  the  COI  Report
    present an extremely and unrealistically narrow  basis  upon  which  to
    resolve this issue.  No doubt in relation to  each  customary  marriage
    there is a manner and way in which that custom falls to  be  satisfied.
    Even taking 24.19 at its highest, for a proxy marriage to be recognised
    under customary law it obviously has to meet that customary requirement
    and in the current case there is no indication whatsoever,  as  I  have
    indicated before, of any detail.  Nevertheless it seems to me that  the
    Judge failed to pay any regard to paragraph 24.19 and it cannot be said
    with certainty as to what conclusion the Judge may or may not have come
    to on that particular passage. On ne  interpretation  that  is  clearly
    supportive of the appellant's case.  It is for that narrow reason  that
    I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  for  the
    decision to be remade.

15.  The matter came before me for  rehearing.   There  was  before  me  the
    bundle of documents that had been before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.
     The appellant also attended although the sponsor  did  not.   He  said
    that she was unwell.  I note that she did not  attend  on  the  hearing
    before me on 22nd March 2013, on 9th January 2013 the matter  had  been
    determined upon the papers.

16.  Some guidance has been given by the Tribunal to this issue as  set  out
    in the decision of Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014]  UKUT  0024
    (IAC).  That decision highlights a number  of  issues  which  fall  for
    consideration in cases such as these.

17.  The first issue is whether the documentation which has  been  presented
    by the appellant is such as to establish that a customary marriage took
    place.

18.  There is a document from the Mushin Local Government Grade A  Customary
    Court dated 23rd May 2011 confirming  that  the  parties  were  married
    under native law and custom on 16th April 2011  at  7  Mufutau  Street,
    Ilupeju, Mushin, Lagos State of Nigeria.  The basis for  that  document
    being  issued  was  the  oral  submission  of  the  appellant's  father
    supported by a six paragraph affidavit.

    The  affidavit from the appellant's father living at 7  Mufutau  Street
    merely states that the marriage took place at 7 Mufutau Street and that
    it was conducted with the consent of both parents.  The final  document
    is the certificate of marriage issued by Lagos State Government on 23rd
    May 2011 that the marriage was performed according to  native  law  and
    custom.  That is a somewhat curious  document  bearing  two  dates  but
    according to the appellant it was submitted to the  Nigerian  Consulate
    of the United Kingdom and was stamped by the consulate on 30th  October
    2012.

19.  Mr Nasim, who represents the appellant, submits that at  no  stage  was
    there any challenge made to the  authenticity  of  those  documents  in
    particular the marriage  certificate.   Therefore  that  the  documents
    ought to be accepted as being genuine and accordingly that the marriage
    did take place and has been recognised by the government.

20.  In the case of Kareem the production of a marriage  certificate  issued
    by a competent authority (that is issued according to the  registration
    laws of the country where the marriage  took  place)  will  usually  be
    sufficient.  A document which calls itself a marriage certificate  will
    not raise a presumption of marriage it purports to record unless it has
    been issued by an authority with legal power to create or  confirm  the
    facts it attests.

21.  The case of Kareem was indeed one based  upon  the  allegation  that  a
    customary marriage in Nigeria had been conducted.  The Tribunal was  at
    pains in that  determination  to  consider  the  ingredients  that  are
    required for the formalities of registration.

22.  In considering whether the appellant's marriage certificate was  issued
    by a competent authority  the  Tribunal  has  considered  the  Nigerian
    Births, Deaths etc. (Compulsory Registration) Act 1992 and two  letters
    from the British High Commission dated 4th February and 22nd May  2013.
    Those letters are not before me but there seems to be no reason why the
    approach taken by the Tribunal should not be followed in this case.

23.  The letter  of  4th  February  2013  confirmed  that  proxy  marriages,
    including those where neither the bride  nor  groom  are  present,  are
    fairly common and are recognised according to  Nigerian  customary  law
    because such marriages are not merely the union of a  couple  but  also
    the families.  Such marriages will be legally binding where  celebrated
    in accordance with the native law and custom of a particular community.
     The letter however describes the registration of such marriages.

24.  Proxy marriages can only be  accepted  as  valid  in  Nigerian  law  if
    conducted under customary law.  Where legal  requirements  prescribe  a
    marriage certificate to be presented then  only  a  certificate  issued
    under the Marriage Act will be acceptable.  Since most couples  conduct
    "registry weddings" in addition to their customary marriage.

25.  The letter of 22nd May  2013  confirms  amongst  others  the  following
    points which are relevant to this appeal:

    (1)  A Nigerian citizen can marry a foreigner by proxy under  customary
         law in a ceremony that is held in Nigeria.
    (2)  The validity of a customary marriage in Nigeria  does  not  depend
         upon it being registered within 60 days.


    (3)  No certificates are issued in respect of  customary  marriages  by
         any recognised official body and no official records are kept.

26.  The Tribunal considered the Nigerian Births,  Deaths  etc.  (Compulsory
    Registration) Act 1992 and in particular  part  5  of  that  Act  which
    relates to the registration of customary marriages or  divorces.   This
    legislation  appears  to  have  been  amended  and  supplemented  by  a
    statutory instrument  in  1996.   Part  VII  of  the  1996  legislation
    indicates that there is a requirement that a customary marriage  should
    be registered within 60  days  and  that  certain  details  are  to  be
    provided and included in any certificate issued.

27.  The details required for registration are the names of  the  bride  and
    groom, their marital status, their occupation, their ages, their states
    of  origin,  the  address  of   their   usual   place   of   residence,
    nationalities, the name of the persons who consented  to  the  marriage
    and the respective relationship of  those  persons  to  the  bride  and
    groom.  The certificate should include most of these  details  together
    with  a  registration  number,  the  date  of  marriage,  the  date  of
    registration and the signature of the court registrar.

28.  It was recognised by the Tribunal at paragraph 40 that such  provisions
    appear to give a  different  picture  to  that  provided  by  the  High
    Commission as to whether a customary marriage could be  registered  and
    whether certificates  could  be  issued.   That  perhaps  reflects  the
    difficulties which arise in the absence  of  independent  and  reliable
    evidence regarding how the laws of a country are applied.

29.  On one reading therefore if the marriage was  conducted  by  custom  it
    did  not  require  the  documents  that  have  now  been  presented  as
    confirmation that it took place.  If that be so it raises  starkly  the
    question as to the status of such documents and why they were issued if
    not required.

30.  If however the documents purport to be the proper registration of  that
    wedding in accordance with the statute then clearly the  document  from
    the Lagos State Government does in no way conform to that  requirement,
    many of the ingredients are missing from it.

31.  The Tribunal were also aware that the  same  Nigerian  laws  also  make
    provision about who can be a registrar.  There was no evidence that the
    person who signed the certificate or court order was a registrar.   The
    mere fact that it is said that  the  document  from  the  Mushin  Local
    Government is signed by a registrar with a stamp  does  not  of  itself
    mean that that registrar is properly constituted for that purpose.   In
    any event that document from  the  Mushin  Local  Government  does  not
    contain much of the information that is required  by  statute  for  the
    proper registration of marriage.

32.   I am unpersuaded that the certificate has been issued by  a  competent
    authority in Nigeria upon the balance  of  probabilities.   Indeed  the
    document issued by the Mushin Local Government does  little  more  than
    reflect the affidavit signed by the appellant's father contending  that
    the marriage did take place.

33.  It is not clear upon what basis the Lagos State Government  certificate
    was issued but presumably on the basis of the Mushin  Local  Government
    document and the sworn affidavit.  As I have  indicated,  much  of  the
    required detail for registration is missing and in those  circumstances
    I do not find that the certificate was issued by a competent  authority
    in Nigeria or that it was from an authority with legal power to  create
    or confirm that which it attests.  Indeed as I have  said  the  reverse
    situation may be the case that no official certificates are  issued  to
    confirm customary marriage in which case the issue starkly arises   why
    these documents are in existence at all.

34.  Even if  the  marriage  certificate  itself  is  not  evidence  of  the
    marriage it is  open  to  the  Tribunal  to  look  at  the  surrounding
    circumstances to determine whether  or  not  the  proxy  marriage  took
    place.

35.  The difficulty which I highlighted in my  decision  and  directions  of
    22nd April was that there are many customary marriages, no  doubt  very
    particular in custom, style and content to the community who recognises
    them.  There is nothing by way of  detail  in  the  evidence  that  was
    provided in written form to assist as to the form and substance of  the
    marriage.

36.  The appellant in his statement  of  21st  December  2012  produces  the
    documents as proof of the marriage but gives little detail about how it
    was conducted and in what form it was conducted.  The  sponsor  herself
    makes an even shorter witness statement of 21st  December  2012  simply
    saying as follows:-

         "We discussed this with our parents and would have  wished  to  get
         married in the UK registry but were unable to do so  due  to  Ade's
         status.  We discussed this with our parents and with their  consent
         our marriage was done according  to  Ade's  custom  and  tradition.
         Once  this  was  done  we  were  issued  with  a   certificate   as
         confirmation of our marriage which was sent to us."

37.  It begs the very question as to what was actually done in pursuance  of
    the customs of the appellant or his family.  The sworn affidavit by the
    appellant's father is equally  uninformative  merely  saying  that  the
    marriage took place at the address in Nigeria and that the marriage was
    conducted with the consent of both parents.  The form  of  marriage  is
    not stated.

38.  The appellant gave further evidence on that matter. He  said  that  the
    two families met together at his father's house, the sponsor's  parents
    travelling to Nigeria.  It  was  traditional  that  the  wife's  family
    produce a dowry of cash and other items or items of clothing and fruit.
     5,000 nairi was to be paid.
39.  The staff from the local government also had to be present and  observe
    the marriage and a representative of the local government  was  present
    and took a report to the local government.  A treasury  receipt  showed
    the official money paid by the  parents  to  the  council  issuing  the
    certificate.

40.  The affidavit from the father does not speak  to  the  fact  that  both
    parents were actually present and no doubt that would be  a  fact  that
    could be established by the production of flight tickets from  Portugal
    to Nigeria in the name of the sponsor's parents.

41.  Ms Everett, who represents the respondent, invited me to find that  the
    evidence was not credible that there would have been  a  representative
    of the local authority present at the  wedding.   It  was  a  customary
    wedding and not a formal civil wedding.  Indeed even if there had  been
    such a representative there is no affidavit  from  that  representative
    presented.  It is unclear why a statement or affidavit from the  father
    concerning  the  events  in  his  house  should  be   required   if   a
    representative  of  the  Mushin  administration  was  present  to  have
    confirmed that.  The only document that is capable  of  being  seen  as
    possible verification is the treasury receipt  representing  250  nairi
    paid by the appellant's father to the Lagos State  Government  for  the
    production of this certificate.  It does not assist with the  form  and
    the substance of the marriage.

42.  Having heard the appellant and having considered the evidence I do  not
    find the appellant to be credible as to the circumstances in which  the
    alleged marriage took place.   I do  not  find  it  credible  that  the
    sponsor's parents went to Nigeria to conduct the wedding that is stated
    as having occurred.  I do not find on the balance of probabilities that
    a proxy marriage or customary marriage took place as alleged or at all.



43.  There is a third complication or hurdle that needs to be surmounted  in
    cases involving EEA nationals and that is as found by the  Tribunal  in
    Kareem that any wedding that has been conducted must be  recognised  by
    the appropriate EEA country, in this case Portugal.  As indicated there
    is little evidence that it was recognised by the  Nigerian  authorities
    and, even if it were, it also falls to be recognised by the  Portuguese
    authorities.  There is no evidence at all that that is the  case.   The
    Tribunal in Kareem set out why it came to the conclusion that that  was
    an important matter in these cases.  There is a lack of any  expert  or
    legal evidence on that matter.

44.  Thus I do not find that the appellant is validly  or  lawfully  married
    to the sponsor.

45.  I turn therefore to consider the alternative aspect namely  that  of  a
    durable relationship. The statement of 21st December  2012  gives  very
    little detail at all as to any family  life  that  exists  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor.  The detail provided is to state:-

         "Jacqueline and I are married and we live together as  husband  and
         wife.  We have been married for over one year and  I  believe  that
         the substance of our relationship should be considered as we have a
         long term relationship."


    There was no indication as to when the appellant first went out or  met
    the sponsor. There was even less  information  about  the  relationship
    from her in her statement.  Significantly she does not  appear  at  the
    hearing.  There has been no more detailed statement from her as to  her
    situations and circumstance.  I indicated in the decision of 4th  April
    2013 that on the rehearing any  expert  evidence  or  any  evidence  in
    connection with family or private life should be served.  None has been
    provided.  The appellant has although  present  at  the  hearing  given
    little detail as to his relationship.

46.  The documents that were submitted in the bundle really add very  little
    to the nature of the relationship that is claimed.  There are some wage
    slips in relation to the sponsor, various Customs and Revenue forms  to
    show that she is working in the United Kingdom.  There are a number  of
    bank statements, documents to show that she lives at 168 Rye Hill  Park
    in London.  There is a mobile phone  document  with  the  name  of  the
    appellant at that address dated August 2011 and  a  tenancy  agreement,
    the names of the appellant and the sponsor 95 Woolmore Street in London
    as from 23rd April 2011 for a term of twelve months.  Finally there are
    photographs purporting to show signs of affection between  the  sponsor
    and the appellant although the date of  those  photographs  it  is  not
    clear.

47.  Therefore is there little material that is before me to  conclude  that
    a durable relationship is in existence.   Significantly the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge highlighted the paucity of any information  or  evidence
    concerning  durable  relationship  in  paragraphs  8  to  10   of   the
    determination.  Despite the lapse of time since that  decision  nothing
    further has been presented.

48.  In all the circumstances therefore I do not find that the appellant  is
    validly married according to the laws and customs of Nigeria nor  do  I
    find that he is in a durable relationship with the sponsor.

49.  In those circumstances his appeal against the  decision  to  refuse  to
    grant him a registration certificate is dismissed.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
