

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration   and   Asylum    Chamber)                   Appeal    Number:
IA/22051/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On April 23, 2015                      |On April 27, 2015         |
|                                       |                          |


                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD BANNATYNE
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MS QIULIAN ZENG
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Nath (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Represented by Sponsor, John Bailey

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall,  in
       the  interests  of  convenience  and  consistency,   replicate   the
       nomenclature of the decision at first instance.

    2. The Appellant is a citizen of China. The appellant is married  to  a
       British citizen, John Bailey, and together they have a child who  is
       a British citizen. On June 3, 2012 the appellant entered the  United
       Kingdom on a family visit visa that was valid until May 21, 2014. On
       January 12, 2014 she applied for a  derivative  residence  card  but
       this application was refused by the respondent on April 15, 2014.

    3. The appellant appealed this decision on May 19, 2014  under  section
       82(1) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and
       Regulation  26  of  the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
       Regulations 2006.

    4. The appeal came before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Thomas
       (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") on October  22,  2014,  2014
       and in a decision promulgated on November 18, 2014  he  allowed  the
       appeal.

    5. The respondent  lodged  grounds  of  appeal  on  November  20,  2014
       submitting the FtTJ had erred by materially in law.

    6. On January 6, 2015 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Bartlett  gave
       permission to appeal finding the FtTJ may have erred by allowing the
       appeal outright because  he  had  found  the  decision  was  not  in
       accordance with the law.

    7. The matter came before me on the above date  and  the  parties  were
       represented as set out above. The appellant and her husband were  in
       attendance.

PRELIMINARY ISSUE

    8. We asked Mr Nath what actions the respondent had taken in  light  of
       the content of paragraph [3] of the FtTJ's determination,  paragraph
       [7] of the grounds of appeal and  paragraph  [6]  of  the  grant  of
       permission. After taking instructions Mr Nath indicated that nothing
       further had been done despite what the respondent having  given  the
       impression she would be reviewing the same.

    9. We explained to both Mr Bailey and the appellant that  as  the  FtTJ
       had found the decision was not in accordance with the law  the  FtTJ
       should have remitted the decision  back  to  the  respondent  for  a
       lawful decision to be taken.  By  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal
       outright the FtTJ had  erred.  Both  Mr  Bailey  and  the  appellant
       understood this reasoning.

   10. Mr Nath was unable to give an undertaking that the matter  would  be
       reviewed  either  within  twenty-eight  days  or  within  any  other
       suitable time frame and we indicated to him  that  the  respondent's
       behaviour was unacceptable.

   11. We found for the reason given above and identified at paragraph  [5]
       in the grant of permission there had been an error in law. We  remit
       this matter back to the respondent so she can  review  the  decision
       and make a lawful decision having regard to all  the  facts  of  the
       case.

   12. We would expect the respondent to  review  this  application  within
       twenty-eight days and to issue a lawful decision.

DECISION

   13. There was a material error. We have set the decision  aside  and  we
       remit the matter back to the respondent for a lawful decision to  be
       taken.

   14. The First-tier Tribunal did not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
       pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 and we see no reason to alter that order.


Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the decision was not in  accordance  with  the  law  we  uphold  the  fee
decision made by the First-tier Tribunal.  have allowed the appeal  we  make
no fee award.

Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
