

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                Appeal number:
IA/22465/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons           |
|On January 8, 2015                   |Promulgated On  January 12,  |
|                                     |2015                         |
|                                     |                             |
|                                     |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                          mrs mussarat tahira khan
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Aslam (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, born January 28, 1968, is a  citizen  of  Pakistan.  The
    appellant entered the United Kingdom on  July  20,  2012  as  a  family
    visitor. She had been issued with a visa that was valid until June  26,
    2014 albeit any stay was limited to a maximum of six months at any  one
    time. On March 11, 2013 she applied for leave to remain on human rights
    grounds but because she was an overstayer her application  was  refused
    without a right of appeal. On January 14, 2014 she was served with form
    IS151A and on May 6, 2014 the respondent served her with a decision  to
    remove her together with a refusal letter that  considered  her  rights
    under the Immigration Rules.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under  Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on May 23, 2014 and
    on August 19, 2014 Judge of the First Tier Tribunal Lever  (hereinafter
    referred to as the "FtTJ") heard her  appeal  and  in  a  determination
    promulgated on September 5, 2014 he refused her appeal on the basis she
    had failed to satisfy the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  or
    demonstrate that removal would breach her article 8 human rights.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on September  12,  2014  and  on
    October 16, 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Gibb gave  permission
    to appeal finding there were grounds that the FtTJ had  arguably  erred
    by confusing exceptional  circumstances  and  compelling  circumstances
    with insurmountable obstacles.

 4. The matter came before me on the  above  date  and  on  that  date  the
    appellant and her husband were in attendance.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 5. Mr Aslam submitted the FtTJ had erred by  failing  to  have  sufficient
    regard to the personal circumstances of the  appellant's  husband.  The
    respondent had accepted all the suitability requirements were  met  and
    identified that if the appellant demonstrated there were insurmountable
    obstacles to family life with her husband occurring outside the  United
    Kingdom then she should succeed under Section EX.1 of  Appendix  FM  of
    the Immigration Rules. The FtTJ misdirected himself in paragraph [3] of
    his determination because he wrongly recorded the respondent's approach
    and this may have infected his whole approach to the appeal.  The  FtTJ
    failed to have full regard to the fact the appellant was  90  years  of
    age, wheelchair bound and enjoying facilities  in  the  United  Kingdom
    that he would not be entitled to in Pakistan because Pakistan does  not
    have a welfare state. In paragraph [34] of his determination  the  FtTJ
    wrongly considered if there  were  compellable  circumstances  when  he
    should have considered whether there insurmountable obstacles and  this
    amounted to an error in law.


 6. Mr Harrison relied on the Rule 24 letter his  office  had  filed  dated
    November  6,  2014  and  maintained  the  FtTJ   had   given   detailed
    consideration to the appellant's claim under Section EX.1 in paragraphs
    [29]  to  [32]  of  his  determination  and  had  full  regard  to  the
    appellant's husband's medical condition. The  majority  of  Mr  Aslam's
    submission amounted to nothing more than re-arguing  of  the  case  and
    there was no error in law. Whilst it was accepted the FtTJ wrongly  set
    out the respondent's position in paragraph [3]  of  his  determination,
    this did not  affect  his  assessment  of  the  case.  His  comment  in
    paragraph [29] was not a misapplication of the law or the  test  to  be
    met as he merely identified that the application  could  be  considered
    under EX.1. The FtTJ did not use this as the test but  demonstrated  in
    paragraphs [32] and [33] of his determination that  he  had  considered
    all of the pertinent factors and at the end of paragraph [32] he  found
    that there would be little hardship or difficulty in the appellant  and
    her husband returning to Pakistan. Whilst a different  judge  may  have
    allowed the appeal on the facts this did not amount to an error in law.




 7. Mr Aslam had no new submissions to make in response.

 8. I reserved my decision to consider the representations.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

 9. I have carefully considered the  submissions  in  this  matter  and  in
    particular whether the FtTJ has erred in applying the correct test that
    had to be applied in this appeal.


10. I accept Mr Aslam's  submission  that  the  FtTJ  wrongly  recorded  in
    paragraph [3] of  his  determination  the  respondent's  position.  The
    refusal letter  makes  clear  in  paragraphs  [9]  and  [11]  that  the
    mandatory requirements of Section E-LTRP were met and in paragraph [12]
    the respondent stated the claim could be considered under Section  EX.1
    of Appendix FM. However, in light  of  the  detail  assessment  of  the
    appellant's claim in the remaining  part  of  the  determination  I  am
    satisfied that this had no impact on his reasoning and consequently  it
    does not amount to an error in law.

11. Mr Aslam spent considerable time inviting me  to  find  that  the  FtTJ
    failed to have  full  regard  to  the  appellant's  husband's  personal
    circumstances. I disagree with his submission on this because the  FtTJ
    considered all of the matters raised in paragraphs [31] to [32] of  his
    determination. In other areas of his determination he made reference to
    the family's immigration history as well as the  conditions  both  here
    and in Pakistan. The FtTJ's assessment took into account a large number
    of factors both for and against him as well as  having  regard  to  the
    appellant's owns circumstances and the fact she had family and  a  home
    in  Pakistan.  The  FtTJ  noted  the  appellant's  husband   had   dual
    nationality and was not only a British citizen but also a  national  of
    Pakistan. He concluded in paragraph [34] there would be little hardship
    or difficulty in the appellant and her husband returning to  Pakistan-a
    place they had lived together for seven years.

12. The FtTJ reminded himself of the case of Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules
    - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) and the  Tribunal  in  that
    case  stated  at  paragraph  [24(c)]  that  "the  term  "insurmountable
    obstacles" in provisions such as Section EX.1 ... concern the practical
    possibilities of relocation.  In the  absence  of  such  insurmountable
    obstacles, if removal is to be disproportionate it is necessary to show
    other non-standard and particular features demonstrating  that  removal
    will be unjustifiably harsh."

13. The FtTJ had regard to all of the relevant  facts  and  concluded  that
    there were no insurmountable obstacles and  I  am  satisfied  that  his
    assessment of the claim cannot be faulted. He applied  the  right  test
    and I am satisfied there is also no error in paragraph [34].  The  FtTJ
    confirmed the appellant did not meet Section EX.1 and  then  considered
    article 8 outside of  the  Rules.  All  of  the  information  that  was
    considered under Section EX.1 was equally relevant to a  claim  outside
    of the Rules. He did not dispute there was family or private  life  but
    concluded that the interests of immigration control and the  fact  they
    had family in Pakistan together with the fact the  appellant's  husband
    was estranged from his own children led to him the conclusion he  could
    continue to be with his wife in Pakistan-a  country  both  he  and  the
    appellant were nationals of.

14. I find that most of Mr Aslam's submissions  were  a  mere  disagreement
    with the FtTJ's findings and I find there was no error in law.

Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not disclose an error.  The
    original decision shall stand.

16. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended)  an  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    such order was made in the First-tier and I see no reason to make  such
    an order now.

Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT

I make no fee award as the appeal was dismissed.

Signed:                           Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
