
IAC-HW-AM-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/22807/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 June 2015                               |On 6 July 2015                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                              REGA AHMED KAREEM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K McCarthy, Counsel, instructed by Alsters Kelley
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clark, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Iraq born on 21 April  1989.   The
    full immigration history of the Appellant is not available to  me,  but
    suffice it to say that on 11 December 2011 she  was  granted  leave  to
    remain in the UK until 11 March 2014 as a spouse.  On 6 March 2014  the
    Appellant applied for further leave to remain on the same basis.   That
    application was refused on 21 May 2014 for the  reasons  given  in  the
    Notice of Decision of that  date.   The  Appellant  appealed,  and  her
    appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal E M M  Smith  (the
    Judge) sitting at Nottingham on  29th  January  2015.   He  decided  to
    dismiss the appeal for the  reasons  given  in  his  Decision  dated  4
    February 2015.  The Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and
    on 7 April 2015 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules  because  he
    was not satisfied that  the  appellant  had  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 284(ix) of HC 395.  That decision was  not  impugned  in  the
    application for leave to appeal.

 4. The Judge then went on to consider the  Appellant's  Article  8  rights
    within the scope of the Immigration Rules.  He found that the Appellant
    did not meet the requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  HC  395,  nor
    Appendix FM thereof.  In the latter  case,  the  Judge  considered  the
    provisions of paragraph EX.1. as the Appellant had a spouse who  was  a
    British citizen resident in the UK and also two young children born  in
    the UK.  However, the Judge found, that there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to the Appellant continuing  family  life  with  her  husband
    outside the UK.  Finally, the Judge decided that  there  were  no  good
    arguable grounds to consider the Appellant's Article 8  rights  outside
    of the Immigration Rules.

 5. At the hearing, Ms McCarthy argued that the Judge had erred in  law  in
    coming to those decisions.  She  did  not  rely  upon  the  grounds  of
    application which had been drafted by the Appellant  herself  when  not
    legally represented.  Instead, she argued that the Judge had been wrong
    to have considered the Appellant's Article 8 rights under  Appendix  FM
    because the Appellant's  application  for  leave  to  remain  had  been
    decided under an earlier version of the Immigration Rules.  That  being
    the case, the Judge should have carried out a full assessment following
    the decision  in  R  (Razgar)  v  SSHD  [2004]  UKHL  27  including  an
    assessment of proportionality by carrying  out  a  balancing  exercise.
    The Article 8 assessment outside of the Immigration Rules  carried  out
    by the Judge at paragraph 31 of the  decision  was  wholly  inadequate.
    There was no consideration of the best interests of the  children,  and
    no proper proportionality assessment.

 6. Finally, Ms McCarthy asked me to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should I find an error of law in the decision  of  the  Judge.
    This was because there had been no proper assessment of the Appellant's
    Article 8 rights, and those rights had to be assessed at  the  date  of
    hearing.  There had been developments in the Appellant's  circumstances
    since the previous hearing in January 2015.

 7. In response, Mr Clark at first  submitted  that  the  arguments  of  Ms
    McCarthy could not be entertained as they departed  from  the  original
    grounds of application and the reasons given by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Deans for granting leave to appeal.

 8. Mr Clark then agreed that the Appellant's Article 8 rights  should  not
    have been considered under  Appendix  FM  of  HC  395  for  the  reason
    explained by Ms McCarthy.  However, that error was not material because
    the Appellant did not qualify for leave to remain under the  provisions
    of paragraph 284 of HC 395 and  therefore  it  would  follow  that  the
    public interest would outweigh the circumstances of the Appellant.  The
    Judge had carried out a Section 55 Borders, Citizenship and Immigration
    Act 2009 assessment at paragraph 31 of the Decision, and following  the
    decision in MK (section 55 - Tribunal option) Sierra Leone [2015]  UKUT
    00223 (IAC), the duty was upon the  Appellant  to  show  a  Section  55
    breach, and therefore as there had been no evidence of such put  before
    the Tribunal, it could not be an error of law by the Judge not to  have
    dealt with Section 55.

 9. I found an error of law in the decision of the Judge which I set aside.
     That error of law is that it is agreed between the  parties  that  the
    appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights should not have been considered under
    Appendix FM of HC 395, but instead by way of a full Razgar exercise and
    assessment.  As Ms McCarthy argued, what the Judge wrote  at  paragraph
    31 of  the  Decision  cannot  be  described  as  such.   There  was  no
    assessment of the weight to be attached to the public interest,  nor  a
    decision as to whether the interference with the Appellant's Article  8
    rights was of such a degree of gravity as to engage them, and  more  to
    the point, no balancing exercise to assess the proportionality  of  the
    respondent's decision.  There are two young children in this family who
    are British citizens, and there was no consideration by  the  Judge  of
    their best interests which ought to have  been  treated  as  a  primary
    consideration.

10. I consider myself  able  to  make  this  decision  notwithstanding  the
    wording of the grounds of application because in my view the  reference
    by Upper Tribunal Judge  Deans  in  his  grant  of  permission  to  the
    decisions in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 and  Zoumbas  [2013]  UKSC  74
    opens the door to a consideration of the  appellant's  Article  8  ECHR
    rights.

11. Having set aside the decision of the Judge, and on the basis that there
    has been no proper assessment of the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights,
    I remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal under  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statements  for  the  decision  to  be
    remade.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.  That decision will be remade  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made no order as regards anonymity  and  I  find  no
reason to do so.

Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
