

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/22236/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Sheldon Court Determination Promulgated
On 7th October 2014    On 11th November 2014
Prepared 8th October 2014


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                GURMAIL SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant: Mr A Jaffar (Solicitor, Mayfair Solicitors)
For the Respondent: Mr N Smart (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant entered the UK in 2002.  In 2005 he made an application to
   remain on the basis of marriage, that application was dealt with in 2009
   when he was granted Discretionary leave until June 2012.  In May 2012 he
   applied for an extension which was refused in June 2012.  The Appellant's
   appeal was heard by First-Tier Tribunal Judge Ferguson on the 11th of
   October 2013 and allowed to the extent that he found that there was no
   lawful decision and remitted the case to the Secretary of state to make a
   decision.  This is considered further below.

2. The Secretary of State challenged that decision in the Upper Tribunal.
   That application was considered by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Robertson
   on the 28th of January 2014.  In a determination of the 12th of February
   she found that Judge Ferguson had erred and that the case was to be
   remitted to the First-tier tribunal for a decision on the Appellant's
   article 8 claim.

3. The case then came before First-Tier Tribunal Judge Pirotta at
   Birmingham on 29th of April 2014.  In a determination promulgated on the
   16th of May 2014 she dismissed the appeal finding that the Appellant had
   not shown that he benefited from a Home Office policy and that his
   removal was proportionate under article 8.

4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in
   grounds of the 25th of May 2014.  The grounds refer to paragraph 134 of
   the Statement of Changes in HC194 and to paragraph 134 in particular.
   The argument being that the Appellant having applied before the 9th of
   July 2012 he was entitled to have his circumstances considered under the
   Discretionary Leave Policy that applied on the 8th of July 2014.  It was
   also argued that the Judge erred in appearing to apply the new
   Immigration Rules to the Appellant's article 8 claim, considered
   irrelevant matters and erred in the approach to article 8.

5. Permission was granted by Judge Kamara on the 6th of June 2014.  In
   doing so the Judge suggested that Judge Pirotta had arguably erred in
   failing to apply and consider the case of EB Kosovo [2008] UKHL 41.

6. At the hearing Mr Smart on behalf of the Home office provided a copy of
   the Immigration Directorate Instructions for Family Members under
   Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules Chapter 8 Transitional Provisions
   dated April 2013.  The relevant part of this document is part 2.3
   starting on page 5.  The submissions of the representatives are set out
   in the Record of Proceedings and referred to where relevant below.

7. When the Appellant first applied for leave to remain on the basis of his
   marriage in 2005 there was a delay in the consideration of his
   application by the Secretary of State and in 2009 he was granted
   Discretionary Leave until 2012, this was on the basis that at the time he
   was married.  His application for an extension pre-dated the significant
   rule changes introduced from the 9th of July 2012 and so was potentially
   subject to transitional provisions.  Being an application for
   Discretionary Leave it was an application outside the rules and subject
   to any policies issued by the Secretary of State.

8. Under Odelola [2008] EWCA Civ 308 the general rules is that applications
   are to be dealt with under the rules that are in force at the date a
   decision is made.  In relation to applications under the Immigration
   Rules made before the 9th of July 2012 transitional provisions apply.
   These are that such applications are to be considered under the rules
   that applied on the 8th of July 2012.

9. However no such transitional provisions apply to article 8 which is
   covered by paragraph 400 of the Immigration Rules.  This rule allows the
   Secretary of State to require a separate private or family life
   application to be made and requires consideration of a claim that removal
   would be in breach of an applicant's article 8 rights that claim to be
   assessed against the provisions of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE.
   Paragraph 400 came into force on the 9th of July 2012 and is not subject
   to transitional provisions; it applies to all cases where article 8 is
   considered outside the rules after that date.

10. The above approach is confirmed by the Court of Appeal cases of
   Edgehill [2014] EWCA Civ 402 and Haleemudeen [2014] EWCA Civ 558.
   Edgehill confirms that the transitional provisions mean that applications
   made before the 9th of July 2012 are to be considered under the
   Immigration Rules that were in force on the 8th of July 2012.
   Halleemudeen confirms that article 8 considerations are to be assessed
   against the provisions of paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM although there
   is no reference to paragraph 400 of the Immigration Rules.

11. It is trite law that article 8 is not a stand alone right or a by pass
   to the Immigration Rules and the fact that a person cannot meet the
   provisions of the Immigration Rules does not improve or enhance an
   article 8 claim.  It is only if the rules are not a complete code and
   there are compelling circumstances justifying consideration outside the
   rules that article 8 arises.  If article 8 does arise outside the rules
   it is only if the result is unjustifiably harsh that an individual can
   succeed.

12. In neither the determination of Judge Ferguson nor that of Judge
   Pirotta are the provisions of the policy that applied to Discretionary
   Leave applications set out; it appears that neither Judge was provided
   with a copy of the underlying policy.  Judge Pirotta noted at paragraphs
   25 to 29 that the Appellant had not provided a copy of the policy despite
   directions being made that he should and the time that had been
   available.

13. In the grounds of application for permission to appeal to the Upper
   Tribunal the Appellant's Representative quoted from paragraph 134 of
   HC194.  However those transitional provisions have been superseded by the
   terms of the 2.3 in the April 2013 IDIs.  The significant difference
   between the 2 versions is that the April 2013 version provides that the
   old Discretionary Leave policy will apply "provided they continue to
   qualify for leave and [my emphasis] their circumstances have not changed
   ...".

14. In Judge Ferguson's determination at paragraph 18 he referred to
   paragraph 134 of HC 194 but not to the applicable IDIs.  At 19 he
   referred to the Refusal letter and the reason given that the Appellant's
   marriage was no longer subsisting.  For reasons that were not his fault
   Judge Ferguson erred as he had not had his attention drawn to the correct
   transitional provisions and as the Appellant's circumstances had changed
   with the breakdown of his marriage the underlying policy relating to
   Discretionary Leave did not apply to his circumstances.  Accordingly
   Judge Robertson was right to find that Judge Ferguson ought to have
   considered the Appellant's circumstances under article 8.

15. So far as Judge Pirotta was concerned she did not err in her approach
   to the policies involved.  She had not been provided with a copy of the
   underlying policy and was entitled to find that the Appellant had not
   discharged the burden of proof that required him to prove that which he
   asserted.  In any event reference to the correct transitional provisions
   shows that the policy did not apply.

16. So far as an assessment under article 8 was concerned, following
   Haleemuden and paragraph 400 of the Immigration Rules, that had to be
   undertaken with reference to any relevant parts of Appendix FM and
   paragraph 276ADE.  The Appellant's circumstances were analysed fully by
   Judge Pirotta who considered the length of time he had spent in the UK
   and the life that he had established here against his history in India
   and the connections he had there.

17. The point raised about EB (Kosovo) is misconceived.  Delay by the
   Secretary of State in making a decision does not give rise to any rights
   as such, delay gives an applicant more time in which to establish
   themselves in the UK and it is those connections that have to be assessed
   in an article 8 evaluation.  So far as private life is concerned the
   ambit of article 8 has been limited by the decision in Patel [2013] UKSC
   72 from which it is to be seen as limited to cases involving the physical
   and moral integrity of the individual.

18. Applying the relevant principles Judge Pirotta was right to dismiss the
   Appellant's appeal under article 8.  The determination is properly
   reasoned and contains no error of law in relating to either the
   Appellant's failure to demonstrate that he was entitled to benefit under
   a policy outside the Immigration Rules or under article 8.

19. In summary the Appellant was not entitled to benefit from the
   Discretionary Leave policy as his circumstances had changed by the time
   the decision was made and the IDIs that applied then disapplied the
   underlying policy.  Judge Ferguson was wrong to consider that the policy
   applied.  In any event the burden was on the Appellant to show that he
   benefited from the policy and had failed to provide relevant evidence to
   Judge Pirotta was entitled to find that he had not discharged the burden
   of proof.  The Appellant's claim under article 8 was properly considered
   and dismissed applying the relevant Immigration Rules and case law.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error of a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.


Anonymity

The First-Tier Tribunal made/did not make an order pursuant to rule
45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.


Fee Award

In dismissing the appeal I make no fee award.



Signed

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)
Dated 9th October 2014
