
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/23517/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 May 2013                                 |On 5 June 2013               |
|Prepared 9 May 2013                           |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                             DORA AMPOFOAH KOTEY

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Khosla instructed by DJ Webb and Co
For the Respondent:    Miss A Holmes, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national  of  Ghana,  date  of  birth  26  June  1969,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision of 13 October 2012 to refuse
    her application of 10 August 2012, for leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant under the  points-based  system.   A  removal
    direction under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum  and  Nationality
    Act 2006 was also made.  The appeal against the Respondent's  decisions
    was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Courtney( the judge)  on  13
    March 2013 in respect of the refusal to  vary  leave  to  remain.   The
    judge allowed the appeal against the removal decision under Section 47.



2.   Before the judge it was undisputed that the Appellant who  had  been  a
    student in the  United  Kingdom  since  2004,  at  all  material  times
    lawfully, could not meet the financial requirements under Appendix C of
    the Immigration Rules particularly paragraph 14 or 1A(h) of Appendix  C
    of the Immigration Rules.

3.   Accordingly the appeal could not succeed under  the  Rules.   Therefore
    the Appellant had pressed a case with reference to Article 8 ECHR as to
    the fact of both the duration and type of presence she had had  in  the
    United Kingdom constituted a private life as  contemplated  by  Article
    8(1) of the ECHR.  Reliance was placed therefore upon the case  of  CDS
    (PBS: "Available:" Article 8) Brazil [2010] UKUT 305 (IAC) and in  that
    context the exercise in the analysis of an Article 8  claim  identified
    in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.

4.   There is  no  dispute  concerning  the  factual  circumstances  of  the
    Appellant disclosed by the judge's decision.

5.   Permission to appeal the judge's decision  was  granted  by  Designated
    Judge French of the First-tier Tribunal on 4 April 2013.  In a nutshell
    the grounds of challenge, in what are  exceptionally  poorly  laid  out
    grounds, are as follows:  First, the judge failed to take into account,
    when considering proportionality, the weight that should be attached to
    the Respondent's response to  a  Freedom  of  Information  Act  request
    concerning the objective behind paragraph  11  of  Appendix  C  of  the
    Rules.  The response to that request was provided  after  the  date  of
    decision 13 October 2012 but was before the judge hearing the appeal.

6.     Secondly,  the  judge  failed  to  make  adequate  findings  on   the
    Appellant's established ability to maintain herself,  without  recourse
    to public funds through permitted employment. Thus even though she  did
    not meet the Appendix C requirements she  nevertheless  over  time  had
    demonstrated that she could support herself,  meet  the  costs  of  her
    education and not have recourse to public funds.  In particular it  was
    relied upon by her representatives that the Appellant had  started  the
    course after the date of  application,  but  before  the  date  of  the
    Respondent's decision, for a  postgraduate  degree  in  leadership  and
    management at South Thames College, a level 7 degree which was  awarded
    by Edexcel.

7.     The Appellant wished to then undertake a masters degree in  the  same
    subject, which would be examined by  the  University  of  Cumbria,  and
    completed in about July 2014.  Essentially the evidence relied upon was
    the Appellant's ability, through her work with the newsagents WH  Smith
    of which she was a shop manager, to  meet  the  costs  of  funding  her
    studies and  maintenance  as  indeed  she  had  previously  done.   The
    Appellant  provided  to  the  judge  a  statement  which  set  out  the
    background of her financial circumstances, the  courses  she  had  been
    undertaking, and the evidence relating to  the  maintenance  and  costs
    which she previously had met.

8.     Thirdly, the judge erred in distinguishing the Appellant's case  from
    that in CDS (Brazil) so as to discount the proper consideration of  the
    claim under Article 8 ECHR.

9.   For my part I was also concerned, as I indicated to the  parties,  that
    the determination by no means clearly set out what factors, if any, had
    been  taken  into  account  by  the   judge   in   an   assessment   of
    proportionality.  There was an additional point of concern, although it
    does not particularly form part of the grounds, doing the best I can to
    read the poorly copied document, that the judge appears to have taken a
    number of points  against  the  Appellant's  credibility  or  qualified
    acceptance of the evidence which do not seem to have  featured  in  the
    cross-examination noted in the Record  of  Proceedings  nor  were  they
    raised with the parties in their submissions at the hearing.  There  is
    no suggestion that the Appellant would  not  return  to  Ghana  at  the
    conclusion of her studies or that the application was simply  a  device
    to avoid returning to Ghana.

10.  The Appellant emphasised to  the  judge  the  considerable  expenditure
    that she had embarked upon, the benefits to her from completing studies
    in the United Kingdom, the effect on her work opportunities that  on  a
    return to Ghana would have and the self-evident advantage of  having  a
    masters degree obtained in the United Kingdom.

11.  The judge in what may be part of the assessment of Article  8  and  the
    implications of removal said

         "I do not consider that it has been shown  that  Miss  Kotey's  job
         prospects would be unduly prejudiced if her appeal is dismissed and
         she is required to leave the UK."


     On what evidence that conclusion was reached is of itself difficult  to
    tell nor does it seem to have been a matter upon  which  the  Appellant
    was invited to comment by the judge.  It is also  unclear  as  to  what
    "unduly prejudiced" is intended to mean.  Is it simply prejudice  which
    is of no significance even if it is prejudicial?  Or is it a measure of
    prejudice which moves between prejudice which  is  not  disadvantageous
    and that which is disadvantageous?  Be  that  as  it  may  Miss  Holmes
    argued that broadly speaking  the  judge  had  made  decisions  on  the
    evidence, findings of fact and essentially  the  Appellant's  challenge
    was no more or less than arguing that a  different  decision  ought  to
    have been  reached  on  the  evidence.   If   Ms  Holmes  argument  was
    sustainable then in the light of the case of R (Iran) [2005]  EWCA  Civ
    and E and R [2004] QB 1044 that would not demonstrate an error  of  law
    on the part of the judge.

12.  I find the third ground of  objection  is  sustainable  as  a  starting
    point in that in this appeal the judge accepted  the  Appellant  had  a
    private life and  one  likely  to  be  built  up  over  time  with  the
    educational sequence as well as social ties during study.  At paragraph
    15 of the determination, having accepted the Appellant's evidence or at
    least not rejected it, the judge stated:

         "... I am prepared to  accept  that  removal  would  constitute  an
         interference with the Appellant's private life  which  crosses  the
         minimum level of severity to engage Article 8."

     In those circumstances  the  judge  with  reference  to  the  questions
    raised in Razgar moved on to  the  legality  and  the  purpose  of  the
    Respondent's decision and perhaps unsurprisingly found that  the  Rules
    served a proper purpose and were justified under  the  requirements  of
    Article 8(2) ECHR.    Miss Holmes submited that CDS is not a case which
    is on all fours with the Appellant's.

13.    However, I find Article 8 private life was engaged, as  paragraph  19
    of CDS identified, through the Appellant's undertaking  the   past  and
    current courses. The judge, as I have  noted, accepted that there was a
    private life which was centred around the Appellant's studies and  life
    in the United Kingdom.  In CDS  the Tribunal stated:-

         "19. Nevertheless people who have been  admitted  on  a  course  of
             study at a recognised UK institution for higher education, are
             likely to build up a relevant connection with the course,  the
             institution,  the  educational  sequence  for   the   ultimate
             personal qualification sought, as well as social  ties  during
             the period of study.  Cumulatively this may amount to  private
             life  that  deserves  respect  because  the  person  has  been
             admitted for this purpose, the purpose  remains  unfilled  and
             discretionary factors such as  misrepresentation  or  criminal
             conduct have not provided grounds for refusal of extension  or
             curtailment of stay.


         20.  In the present case a change in sponsorship Rules  during  the
             course of a period of study has had a serious  effect  on  the
             ability of the Appellant to  conclude  her  course  of  study.
             Some requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  or  applicable
             public policy scheme may be of such importance that a miss  is
             as good as a mile, but this is not always the case.


         21.  The points-based system aims to provide objective criteria for
             what funds are needed to be demonstrated before  an  extension
             of stay is granted.  If we are wrong on our first  conclusion,
             we shall here assume that it may also set strict  criteria  as
             to how the availability of such funds is  to  be  demonstrated
             and in  whose  account  the  funds  may  be.   But  where  the
             Appellant establishes by evidence that she has funds available
             to support her if needed, the strength of the public  interest
             in refusing her an extension based on the  somewhat  arbitrary
             provisions of guidance attached to an Appendix to the Rules is
             in our judgment somewhat less  than  a  failure  to  meet  the
             central requirement of the Rules."


14.  In this  appeal  the  position  is  that  on  a  fair  reading  of  the
    determination the judge did not, other than  reciting  the  Appellant's
    evidence, really address the fact  that  the  Appellant  had  not  been
    meeting the immigration rules but has paid her way  and  completed  her
    education thus far.  The judge also, of course while noting that  there
    has been an interruption  in  her  education  does  not  seem  to  have
    considered that the Appellant was completing what was a  logical  chain
    of education founded upon her earlier qualifications and experience.

15.  In these circumstances, whilst factually the case is not on  all  fours
    with CDS (Brazil), the point  needed  to  be  considered  in  assessing
    proportionality what were the reasons for the financial requirements in
    the rules?  In this respect it is clear  that  requirements  to  obtain
    entry are there so a person knows what  they  must  provide  for.   The
    position for someone, who has been allowed into  the  country  and  who
    has, over time, renewed and extended leave  to  remain  is  here  on  a
    different basis to other students. It appeared from the  answers  given
    in response to the FOI request that the Secretary of State acknowledges
    that for persons who are here and working  hard  on  courses  the  same
    limitations and requirements of funding are not looked at in  the  same
    way.  It might seem to  this  extent  unusual  that  there  is  such  a
    relaxation but that is what the Secretary of State's view of the matter
    is and it cannot be ignored: However, the judge failed to get to  grips
    with its significance in terms of the assessment of proportionality.

16.  Miss Holmes reasonably relies upon the  generality  of  paragraphs  17,
    18, particularly 20 and perhaps 21 of the determination.   However  the
    judge in the assessment of proportionality, whilst making reference  to
    consistent immigration control outweighing the rights of the  Appellant
    to respect for her private  life,  the  analysis  never  addressed  the
    public interest in the context that there are  variations  in  how  the
    Secretary of State chooses  to  apply  the  Rule;  however  it  may  be
    expressed in Appendix C.

17.   For  the  above  reasons  I  find  that  the  judge's   assessment  of
    proportionality shows errors of law which demonstrate that the original
    Tribunal decision cannot stand. I find the only fair and just course is
    for the matter to be re-made.

18.  The parties are in agreement that, on the material before  me,  I  have
    sufficient upon which I can re-make the decision.  I therefore do so on
    the basis of the evidence that was before the judge which fully set out
    the extent of the Appellant's continuing studies and the benefits of  a
    UK-based education on a return to Ghana.  It is to be noted  there  was
    no issue, taken by the Respondent, that the Appellant has been  a  poor
    student or has failed to show  progress  in  her  studies  nor  was  it
    suggested that her intended postgraduate  diploma  and  future  masters
    degree is at odds with her past academic achievement or  her  abilities
    or a progression in educational sequence.  It was unchallenged that the
    Appellant has funded for almost nine years her studies  in  the  United
    Kingdom without claiming benefits or recourse to public funds.  Nor was
    it suggested that there has been some change of circumstance such  that
    there is  a  reasonable  doubt  about  the  future  employment  of  the
    Appellant in the UK.  It is also plain as a fact that the Appellant has
    met the costs of her present course.  Over �5,000  has been  paid,  not
    including the costs of books and other materials which have  been  paid
    for, but also the Appellant has maintained herself without being a cost
    to public funds.  The accomodation arrangements she has  are  going  to
    continue. Again it is not  suggested  that  there  is  some  change  in
    circumstances likely to be in the offing so as to affect the assessment
    of the continuing maintenance ability that the Appellant has previously
    demonstrated over a significant period of time.

19.   I take  into  account  the  Secretary  of  State's  answer,  dated  14
    December 2012, to the request under  the  Freedom  of  Information  Act
    2000.  In which the Secretary of State's position  is  said  to  be  as
    follows:

         "The purpose of the Tier 4 maintenance requirements are  to  ensure
         that applicants can adequately fund themselves during their  course
         without taking illegal employment or accessing  public  funds.   We
         therefore require students  to  demonstrate  they  have  sufficient
         maintenance funds for the length of the course or for  nine  months
         whichever is the shorter (nine months is the average length of  the
         course of study lasting one academic year). ..."


20.  There  is  no  challenge  to  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    undertaken illegal employment or been in breach of  conditions  of  her
    leave nor had she accessed public funds, although  on  what  basis  she
    would have been able to do so is difficult to tell. It would appear, if
    a different  view  is  taken  of  longer  standing  students  or  those
    currently undertaking education, then the Appellant has done more  than
    might be expected because she has  in  fact  studied,  worked  and  met
    course and maintenance costs.


21.  The Appellant has not been involved in illegal/criminal  activities  or
    acted against the  public  interest  in  the  United  Kingdom.  On  the
    contrary the Appellant has through paying for her education  benefitted
    UK  based  educational  establishments.   The  Appellant  has  not  had
    recourse to housing benefits, public  funds  or  been  a  cost  to  the
    National Health Service.

22.  I find weighing up  all  the  circumstances,  including  the  time  the
    Appellant has been in the United Kingdom,  and  on  the  basis  of  the
    findings of fact made by the Judge that first the Appellant has had and
    remains with a private life  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Secondly,  the
    Appellant has undertaken a course of study and is currently undertaking
    one. In relation to her  private  life  I,  as  the  judge  found,  the
    Respondent's decision does give rise to interference of  the  necessary
    level of severity to engage Article 8(1) of the ECHR.  I therefore find
    the  first  two  questions  raised  in  Razgar  are  answered  in   the
    affirmative.  I find that the Respondent's decision is on the  face  of
    it lawful and properly serves legitimate Article  8(2)  objectives  and
    the third and fourth questions are answered in the affirmative.

23.     I find  the  public  interest  is  a  significant  factor  to  which
    substantial weight should be given.  I  fully  take  into  account  the
    Respondent's views on  private  life  issues  as  demonstrated  by  the
    alterations to the immigration rules.   Simply for  those  who  do  not
    comply with the Rules, Article 8 ECHR cannot be a way of  avoiding  the
    consequences of managed UK immigration: A near miss is  just  that  (MB
    [2010]UKUT 282).  However, the public interest and objectives of  a  UK
    education to overseas students must not be underestimated both  in  its
    benefits to the United Kingdom and educational institutions as well  as
    to students who return to their home countries with UK  qualifications.
    In some cases those qualifications may well enhance the person's career
    prospects and opportunities to take advantage of their training as well
    as provide long term benefits for trade and UK businesses.  I find that
    the unchallenged evidence as  to  the  Appellant's  past  conduct,  the
    absence of her acting in breach of any conditions, her self-support and
    her substantial financial commitment of tens  of  thousands  of  pounds
    indicates that this is one of those cases, of which there will be  few,
    where  the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  the   application   was
    disproportionate.


24.  I do not speculate about the Appellant's future job  prospects  or  the
    impact of curtailing her education in the UK.  It seems to me that,  as
    a matter of commonsense ,if a person has the full set of qualifications
    obtained from a UK educational institution or institutions  that  would
    be a benefit to the student and to the reputation and  standing  of  UK
    educational institutions.  I can find no sensible reason for  requiring
    this Appellant to return to Ghana to make a new  application  to  study
    here nor was any argued by the Respondent at the hearing

25.  I am satisfied that  the  Appellant  has  had  a  sustained  period  of
    employment with  WH  Smith  and  that  she  is  "permanently  part-time
    employed."  I  do  not  find  the  Appellant's  health  is  a  relevant
    consideration one way or another save insofar as there  is  nothing  to
    suggest that she has any health problems which has meant recourse to UK
    medical institutions.

26.  Similarly the Appellant's evidence was not  cross-examined  to  on  the
    evidence of her connections and friends with students.  Whilst I accept
    she would be able to make friends and new friends on a return to  Ghana
    I find that it is a neutral factual issue that takes the  decision  and
    the assessment  of  the  public  interest  and  proportionality  in  no
    particular direction and is of little assistance.  However the presence
    of the many friends which she has in the UK is  an  indicator,  but  no
    more than that, that she is not the kind of person who  could  properly
    be regarded as undesirable to remain longer in the United Kingdom   nor
    has the Secretary of State ever advanced the case  on  that  basis.   I
    therefore find looking at all  the  evidence  in  the  round  that  the
    Respondent's decision is not proportionate.

27.  There is no issue that the  Appellant's  claim  does  not  engage  with
    private life issues arising under the new Immigration Rules.

28.  The appeal is allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

                          Approval for Promulgation


|Name of Deputy Judge issuing       |Mr T B Davey                          |
|approval:                          |                                      |
|Appellant's Name:                  |Dora Ampofoah Kotey                   |
|Case Number:                       |IA/23517/2012                         |

Oral determination (please indicate)


I approve the attached Determination for promulgation

Name:

Date:


Amendments that require further action by Promulgation section:

Change of address:

           Rep:                         Appellant:
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |

Other Information:
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |


