
[pic]
IAC-FH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23032/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|and decision given orally            |On 29 January 2016                   |
|on 12 January 2016                   |                                     |


                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey
                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


                                   Between

                           Babatunde aliu adedeji
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant:    No appearance or representation
Respondent:   Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. We shall deal with this appeal in the following way.   We  dismiss  the
    appeal with a stay of seven days.  That gives the Appellant seven  days
    from  the  date  of  transmission  of  our   decision   to   make   any
    representations that he may wish to make.  That is perhaps  excessively
    generous but in the circumstances we  cannot  exclude  the  possibility
    that this is genuine in his belated protestations of indisposition  and
    we think that is the fair and reasonable way of proceeding.

 2. As regards our reasons for dismissing the appeal we find  no  error  of
    law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.   Indeed  we  consider
    that permission to appeal should not have been granted in this case.

 3. The Appellant did not attend at first instance and the judge  therefore
    determined the appeal on the papers.  He did so by  explicit  reference
    to the Secretary of State's decision.  This records that the  Appellant
    sought and was refused indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom
    outside  the  Immigration  Rules  on   compassionate   grounds.    That
    application was dated 26 February 2014.  It was made two days prior  to
    the expiry of the Appellant's two year spousal visa.   The  application
    was made by representatives on behalf of the Appellant.

 4. The gist of the application was, and I quote:

         "Our client's relationship with  spouse  is  strained  now  so  our
         client needs time for reconcile [sic] with his spouse and therefore
         requests you to allow our client further leave to remain until  the
         differences are sorted out".

    Pausing there  this  was  a  thoroughly  hopeless  application  on  any
    showing.  If it were not hopeless on those  facts,  whatever  shred  of
    merit it may have  evaporates  in  the  information  disclosed  in  the
    following sentence, uncontested, that in  fact  the  parties  had  been
    divorced on 28 August 2013. The decision maker considered  the  various
    potentially applicable provisions of the Rules and concluded  that  the
    application must be refused.

 5. In the circumstances which materialised on the day of  the  hearing  at
    first instance we are  entirely  satisfied  that  nothing  further  was
    required on the part of the judge.  He adverted to the refusal  letter,
    he recorded that he had read it carefully, that he  had  paid  specific
    attention to the justifications advanced for the negative decision  and
    that  he  had  taken  into  account  the  relevant  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules, together with the new provisions  of  the  2002  Act
    introduced by the  Immigration  Act  2014.   This  thoroughly  hopeless
    application which was refused by the Secretary of State matured into  a
    thoroughly hopeless appeal.  The  FtT's  approach  and  conclusion  are
    unassailable.

 6. What gives rise to most concern in this case is the  treatment  of  the
    application for permission to appeal.  It is said in the grant that the
    decision makes no attempt to address the issues in the  appeal  and  is
    devoid of findings of fact.  That ignores  the  context  entirely  and,
    furthermore, does not engage at all with what the judge  actually  said
    in his concise but adequate decision.  We record in  this  context  our
    cognisance of the decision of the Immigration and  Asylum  Tribunal  in
    the case of BT [2004]  UKIAT  00311  and  in  particular  [6]  and  [7]
    thereof.

 7. In conclusion permission to appeal should not have  been  granted.   We
    dismiss the appeal on its merits.  We allow the Appellant a  period  of
    seven days within which to make representations following  transmission
    of our decision.  The effect of that is that our decision does not take
    immediate effect but rather will take effect  on  a  slightly  but  not
    excessively delayed date.  We repeat, we take that  course  to  account
    for two possibilities.  One is this may  be  a  genuine  case  of  real
    incapacity to attend the Tribunal this morning.  Secondly, though  less
    likely, there may be some knockout blow in the Appellant's favour which
    has not found its way into the deliberations of the panel.  We make  it
    clear that in a surprisingly large majority of cases those who claim to
    be unable to attend a  court  or  tribunal  very  rarely  are  able  to
    substantiate their incapacity in an acceptable way.   It  is  a  truism
    that the great majority of those who are able to travel to  a  hospital
    or doctor's surgery are also able to travel  to  a  tribunal  or  court
    building and are able to give evidence or present  their  case  without
    undue handicap.


                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                       Date: 25 January 2016

