
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
IA/23960/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:    Columbus House,       |          Decision promulgated|
|Newport                            |                              |
|On 23 June 2015                    |          On 7 July 2015      |
|                                   |                              |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 TIANQI GAO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:           Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:          Mr R Roberts, Cromwell Wilkes


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Suffield-Thompson in which she allowed the
    appeal of Tianqi Gao, a citizen of  China,  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to refuse leave to remain and to remove him  from  the
    United Kingdom. I shall refer to Mr Gao as the Applicant,  although  he
    was the Appellant in the proceedings below.
 2. The Applicant arrived in the United Kingdom on 4 January 2003 (aged 13)
    with a valid student visa. This was subsequently  extended  on  various
    occasions eventually expiring on 30 January 2014. On  26  January  2014
    the Applicant applied for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of 10
    years lawful  residence  in  accordance  with  paragraph  276B  of  the
    Immigration Rules (HC395). His application was refused on 13 May  2014.
    The Applicant exercised his right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.
     This is the appeal which came before  Judge  Suffield-Thompson  on  15
    January 2015 and was allowed on human rights grounds. The Secretary  of
    State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    application was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Chambers  on  19
    March 2015 on the basis that having found that the  Applicant  did  not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules the  reasons  the  Judge
    gave for undertaking the Article 8 ECHR  assessment  gave  rise  to  an
    arguable error of law.




 3. At the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Richards  appeared  to  represent  the
    Secretary of State and Mr Roberts represented the Applicant. Mr Roberts
    submitted copies of  the  authorities  of  Sunassee  [2015]  EWHC  1604
    (Admin), Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74 and MM (Tier 1 PSW;  Art  8;  private
    life) Zimbabwe [2009] UKAIT 00037.


Background


 4.  The  history  of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
    challenged, are that the Applicant was born in China on 2 May 1989.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 4 January 2003 as a  student  and  has
    remained studying firstly  at  school  and  later  at  university.  The
    Applicant's last leave to remain expired on 30 January  2014  and  just
    prior to its expiry he applied for indefinite leave to  remain  on  the
    basis of 10 years lawful residence.


 5. The Secretary of State refused the Applicant's application on the basis
    that he had not completed 10 years lawful residence and so did not meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules. The Secretary of State noted
    that there was a  hiatus  in  the  Applicant's  lawful  residence.  His
    initial leave to remain expired on 31 October 2007 and  two  subsequent
    applications made out of time on 21 November 2007 and 1  December  2007
    were rejected. The Applicant made a further application  for  leave  to
    remain on 7 February 2008 and this was  granted  on  26  February  2008
    valid until 30 November 2008 and his  next  application  was  not  made
    until 27 March 2009 and was granted on 15 July 2009. The  Secretary  of
    State calculated that the Applicant was without lawful leave to  remain
    from 31 October 2007 to 26 February 2008 and from 30 November  2008  to
    15 July 2009. These periods  broke  the  claimed  10  years  of  lawful
    residence. The Secretary of State went on to consider  the  application
    under the private and family life provisions of the  Immigration  Rules
    but decided that the Applicant did not meet those requirements and that
    there were no factors of a  sufficiently  compassionate  or  compelling
    nature to  warrant  the  grant  of  leave  outside  the  terms  of  the
    Immigration Rules.


 6. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal did not challenge  the
    decision to refuse the application  under  the  Immigration  Rules  but
    asserted that the decision was unlawful  because  it  was  incompatible
    with the Applicant's rights protected by  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human  Rights.  At  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal the Applicant was represented by Mr Roberts who accepted  that
    he did not meet the requirements of paragraph 276B of  the  Immigration
    Rules although he did  not  accept  that  there  were  two  periods  of
    unlawful residence.  The Judge found that the Applicant  did  not  meet
    the family and private life provisions of  the  Immigration  Rules  but
    went on to find that the Respondent's decision was  a  disproportionate
    interference in the Applicant's private life and allowed the appeal  on
    that basis.


 7. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal assert that the Judge  made
    a material misdirection in law firstly in finding that the  Applicant's
    claimed 10 years residence  had  only  one  gap  rather  than  two  and
    secondly by failing to identify compelling circumstances causing her to
    consider the appeal outside the family and private life  provisions  of
    the Immigration Rules. The grounds  further  assert  that  the  Judge's
    Article 8 proportionality findings are perverse to the degree that they
    are irrational in respect of her finding that the Applicant had severed
    ties with China and considered himself British.


Submissions


 8. On behalf of the Secretary of State Mr Richards  said  that  there  was
    little materiality in the grounds and that he relied on the  Article  8
    findings. They are wrong in law. The grounds point out that  the  Judge
    has considered Maslov v Austria (1638/03) [2008] ECHR 00046 (IAC)  when
    this is not comparable being a deportation case where the applicant was
    to be excluded form the United Kingdom for 10 years. Maslov refers to a
    person who had been settled for all or a major part of  his  life.  The
    Applicant has never held settled  status  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    having arrived in the United Kingdom at the age of 13 had not spent the
    majority of  his  life  here.  The  reasoning  does  not  show  that  a
    meaningful   balancing   exercise   was   undertaken.   There   is   no
    acknowledgment  of  the  public  interest  in   maintaining   effective
    immigration control. The Judge's conclusion refers to the Applicant  as
    a 'bright, hardworking, law abiding young  man'  but  this  is  not  an
    acceptable reason for the finding that  returning  to  China  would  be
    disproportionate. There is no acknowledgment of the fact that  he  came
    here to study in the expectation that he would return to China. He  has
    family in China. Mr Richards said that he struggled  to  come  up  with
    words  to  find  any  justification  for  the   Judge's   extraordinary
    conclusion. It cannot be that someone who comes here to study and is  a
    thoroughly nice person merits being granted permission to stay on  that
    basis alone. The findings are so unreasonable as  to  be  perverse  and
    irrational.


 9. For the Applicant Mr Roberts confirmed that the Applicant was supported
    by his family and could not be said to be  self-sufficient.  Responding
    to Mr Richards he said that he could not see the Secretary  of  State's
    position. Where Mr Richards says that students should not expect to  be
    granted permission to stay the Immigration Rules provide  a  route  for
    settlement for students and it was under those rules that the Applicant
    honestly believed he could apply after 10 years residence.  Mr  Roberts
    agreed that Maslov was not an appropriate comparison.  So  far  as  the
    question of gaps in the 10 year period is concerned this did  not  mean
    that the Applicant met the requirements of the rules but it did reflect
    upon the substance of the Article 8  appeal.  Mr  Roberts  referred  to
    paragraphs 33-36 of the recent decision in Sunassee  [2015]  EWHC  1604
    (Admin) and said that there is no test of exceptionality or  compelling
    circumstances to be passed before it  is  permissible  to  consider  an
    Article 8 appeal outside the terms of the Immigration Rules. Article  8
    is engaged when the circumstances are not fully provided for within the
    rules. Mr Roberts pointed out that the Applicant has  not  simply  been
    refused permission to remain. The Secretary of State  has  gone  on  to
    issue removal directions. This is entirely disproportionate.


Decision - Error of law


10. The grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  are  two-fold  asserting
    firstly that the Judge made a material misdirection in law and secondly
    that her findings are perverse or irrational.


11. The circumstances have been detailed above. In summary the Applicant is
    a young man who came to the United  Kingdom  to  study  in  school  and
    carried on to university and  postgraduate  level.  Believing  that  he
    qualified for indefinite leave to  remain  following  10  years  lawful
    residence he applied accordingly and this is the application  that  was
    refused and is now under appeal. It is now accepted that the  Applicant
    did not meet the strict requirements of the Rules having  been  without
    leave for a short period or periods during  his  claimed  10  years  of
    lawful residence. Whether this was one or more periods does not  in  my
    judgment make any significant difference. The Applicant  did  not  meet
    the requirements of the rules but there can be little reasonable  doubt
    that his failure to meet the requirements of the rules  was  caused  by
    the administrative error of either himself or those advising him. I  do
    not attach any particular degree of culpability  to  the  Applicant  in
    this respect although I do note that the Judge (at  paragraph  23)  was
    under the incorrect impression that the Applicant was a  minor  at  the
    time when in fact he achieved his legal majority on 2 May 2007 and  the
    periods when he was without leave are said by the Secretary of State to
    be 31 October 2007 to 26 February 2008 and from 30 November 2008 to  15
    July 2009. The latter period only is  accepted  by  the  Applicant  and
    indeed was accepted by him in his application (D8).


12. It having been accepted by the Applicant  that  he  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules the Judge goes on to consider (at
    paragraph 25) whether he meets the family and private  life  provisions
    of the Immigration Rules and finds that he does  not.  The  finding  in
    this respect is not challenged. The Judge then  considers  whether  she
    should deal with the matter outside the terms of the Immigration  Rules
    and directs herself in the following way at paragraph 26

        "To make this assessment I first have to find that there  are  good
        reasons that lead me to consider the appellants  case  outside  the
        Immigration Rules and I find that there are. A good reason  is  one
        that it compelling but it does not have to be anything extreme  for
        me to move to Article 8. In this case I find that  the  Immigration
        Rules do not provide discretion to examine whether the decision  is
        propionate (sic)  in  the  light  of  this  appellant's  particular
        circumstances and I find  that  the  decision  is  likely  to  have
        significant impact on the private life of this appellant"


13. In my judgement, and  whereas  the  self  direction  may  be  a  little
    convoluted  conflating  as  it  does  the  reason  to  go  outside  the
    Immigration Rules with the second stage of the Razgar test, it is not a
    misdirection in law. In Sunassee Edis J confirms the  approach  already
    prescribed by Deputy High Court Judge Grubb in R (Aliyu) v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2014] EWHC 3919 (Admin)

        With great respect to the Upper Tribunal which decided  Gulshan  it
        seems to me to go a little further than the source  from  which  it
        purports to be derived. It  is  the  origin  of  the  problem  with
        paragraph 55 of the decision  in  the  present  case,  and  I  have
        already averted to the difficulty with it. It is unclear to me  how
        a Tribunal could decide whether it was arguable that there  may  be
        good grounds for granting leave to remain outside the Rules without
        first considering whether there may be compelling circumstances not
        sufficiently recognised under them




14. In my judgement the Judge's reasoning in  paragraph  26  is  sufficient
    explanation of why she has gone on to consider Article 8 directly.


15. The actual consideration of Article 8 is however another matter. Having
    properly self directed to Razgar [2004] UKHL  27  and  there  being  no
    claim that the Applicant has family life  in  the  United  Kingdom  the
    Judge finds (paragraph 29) that he has a private  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It  is  unclear  whether  the  following   paragraph   is   a
    justification for the finding that the Applicant has a private life  in
    the United Kingdom or an examination of the qualitative aspects of that
    private life but  this  paragraph  and  the  first  three  sentence  of
    paragraph 33 are the sum of the Judges findings


        "The appellant is a 25 year old young man who came here at the  age
        of 13 and has spent his formative years here  in  the  UK.  He  has
        little contact with China now. His  family  have  invested  a  huge
        amount of  money  into  the  system  here  by  way  of  school  and
        university fees. He is  an  exemplary  student  who  has  and  will
        undoubtedly continue to contribute to the world of Science and I am
        assisted in finding this by virtue of the letter from Dr  Wang  who
        is the Professor of Electronic and Electrical Engineering  at  Bath
        University  (contained  within  the  appellant's  bundle).  It   is
        abundantly clear that the  appellant  has  integrated  to  such  an
        extent that he has now, in his eyes, become British. He  has  moved
        away from China in all regards other than some phone contacts  with
        his parents.


        This appellant is bright, hardworking, law-abiding  young  man  who
        had lived and studied here for almost 10 years of his life.  He  is
        studying and is self-funding that study, he is part way through his
        Master's and would be unable to  complete  it  if  her  (sic)  were
        removed. He has a girlfriend and a large  network  of  friends  and
        colleagues in the world of science."



16. There are in my judgement two issues that  cause  me  to  come  to  the
    conclusion that the Judge  has  materially  erred  in  law.  The  first
    relates to the findings quoted above and the second to the balancing of
    those findings against the public interest.


17. So far as the first of these issues is concerned there are a number  of
    findings that are either wrong or irrational. Firstly the finding  that
    the Applicant has spent his  formative  years  in  the  United  Kingdom
    appears as a conclusion without an assessment in order  to  reach  that
    conclusion. There  is  of  course  no  definition,  in  age  terms,  of
    formative years. Such years, being the period that shapes the rest of a
    person's  life,  can  vary  from  individual  to  individual.  In  this
    instance,  without  there  being  reasons  behind  the  finding  it  is
    impossible to ascertain how the conclusion that the years spent in  the
    United Kingdom are the Applicant's  formative  years  rather  than  the
    earlier part of his childhood or indeed  a  combination  of  both.  The
    finding that the Applicant has little contact with China  now  and  the
    later finding that he has moved away from China in  all  regards  other
    than some phone contact with his parents is contrary to  the  evidence.
    The Applicant's application for  leave  to  remain  details  (D3)  nine
    separate visits to China between 2003 and 2011 with a cumulative  total
    of 372 days,  which  is  more  than  one  year,  spent  in  China.  The
    Applicant's written witness statement refers to a 'contented and  happy
    childhood in a comfortable middle-class background before being sent to
    be educated in England' but is silent as to his contact with China. His
    oral evidence to the First-tier  Tribunal  was  that  his  parents  and
    grandparents remain in China along with his aunts and  uncles.  It  was
    confirmed to me, and indeed it is implicit although so far as I can see
    not detailed in the evidence  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  that  the
    Applicant was at all  times  and  still  is  wholly  dependent  on  the
    financial support of his family in China. The finding that  his  family
    have invested a huge amount is no doubt correct but this was not a huge
    amount invested 'into the system here' rather  it  was  a  huge  amount
    invested in the Applicant's education. In my judgement  this  is  clear
    evidence of continuous contact with his family in  China.  The  finding
    that the Applicant 'has integrated to such an extent that he  has  now,
    in  his  eyes,  become  British'  again  lacks  reasoning  and  such  a
    conclusion without detailed reasons is on the face of it perverse.


18. Turning to the second issue the only reference to a balancing  exercise
    is the finding (paragraph 33) that the removal of the Applicant  'would
    be disproportionate to the legitimate public aims sought to be achieved
    (under 117B) by the Secretary of State'. There is no self direction  as
    to the provisions of section 117B of the  Nationality  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 other than the reference at paragraph 3 to the  Judge's
    awareness of its provisions. The Judge is considering this appeal under
    Article 8 ECHR with this being the only live issue before her.  Section
    117A of the 2002 requires the Judge in all cases to have regard to  the
    provisions  of  section  117B  when  considering  the  public  interest
    question. The decision does not show that the Judge has considered  the
    public interest question or had regard to  the  provisions  of  section
    117B in doing so. This is a manifest and material error of law. If  the
    Judge had regard to  the  provisions  of  section  117B  the  following
    findings would, on the evidence before her, have been made.

          i) The Applicant speaks English and therefore there is no negative
             factor in this regard (117B(2))


         ii) The Applicant  is  not  financially  independent  being  wholly
             reliant upon his family in China (117B (3)).

        iii) Little weight should be given to the Applicant's  private  life
             because it was established  at  a  time  when  his  immigration
             status was  precarious  (117B  (5).  In  this  respect  I  take
             guidance from the recent decision of the Upper Tribunal  in  AM
             (s.117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) to which I will refer  in
             greater detail below.


19. My conclusion from all of the above is that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal contains errors of law material to the decision to  allow
    the appeal. The appeal of the Secretary of State is  therefore  allowed
    and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


Remaking the decision


20. Both representatives agreed that if an error of law was found I  should
    remake the decision based upon the evidence that was before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.


21. In remaking the decision I accept firstly  that  the  Applicant  having
    been in the United Kingdom for most of the time since the age of 13 has
    established a  private  life  here.  This  private  life  has  involved
    spending most of his adolescent years, and in  this  respect  no  doubt
    some if not all of his formative years, in this country.  It  has  also
    involved being educated in this country up to  Master's  degree  level.
    Indeed I note that, according to  the  Applicant's  chronology  of  his
    student history, he has two Master's degrees  from  the  University  of
    Bath the one in Electrical Engineering (MEng) and the  other  in  Power
    Engineering (MSc) and at the time of his witness statement was studying
    for a third  Master's  degree  in  Theoretical  Physics  at  University
    College London with a view to carrying on thereafter to a PhD.  I  have
    no doubt that he has built  up  a  wide  network  of  friends  in  this
    country.  I  accept  that  the  Respondent's  decision  will  cause  an
    interference in his private life of sufficient gravity  to  engage  the
    Convention.


22. The Applicant dos not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules
    either in respect of long residence or private  life  and  he  did  not
    apply for leave to remain on the basis of his  continuing  studies.  In
    these  circumstances  the  Respondent's  decision  is  lawful  and   in
    pursuance of the legitimate  aim  of  immigration  control.  The  issue
    becomes one of proportionality.


23. On the positive side of the proportionality balance I take into account
    the factors referred to in paragraph 21 above  and  add  to  those  the
    Applicant's undoubted good character  and academic achievements.


24. Against that I weigh  the  public  interest  in  effective  immigration
    control and in doing so I take no adverse account of any periods  spent
    in the United Kingdom without leave. Whilst such  periods  prevent  the
    Applicant  from  meeting  the  long  residence  requirements   of   the
    Immigration Rules they are periods where the Applicant simply failed to
    make proper application to remain rather than periods during  which  he
    showed any disregard or disrespect for the law.


25. In weighing the public interest in the  balance  I  am  bound  to  have
    regard to section 117B of the 2002 Act (see  paragraph  18  above).  In
    doing so I note that the Applicant speaks English. I note also that  he
    is not self-sufficient but is reliant on his family in China. Crucially
    I am required to give little weight to the private  life  that  he  has
    established in this country because it has been established at  a  time
    when his immigration status was  precarious.  In  this  regard  I  have
    regard to the Upper Tribunal authority of AM (s.117B) Malawi

          To put the matter shortly,  it  appears  to  us  that  a  person's
          immigration status is "precarious" if their continued presence  in
          the UK will be dependent upon their obtaining a further  grant  of
          leave. It is precisely because such a  person  has  no  indefinite
          right to be in the country that the relationships they form  ought
          to be considered in the light of the potential need to  leave  the
          country should that grant of leave not be forthcoming.  (paragraph
          32)




26. The Applicant has held precarious  immigration  status  throughout  his
    stay in the United Kingdom because he has always held limited leave  to
    remain and his  continued  presence  has  always  been  dependent  upon
    obtaining a further grant of leave. The difficulty for  this  Applicant
    is that his case is based upon his private life and I  am  required  by
    statute to afford little weight to that  private  life.  Little  weight
    does not however mean no weight and in this respect I consider  whether
    there are other matters in the balance of either a positive or negative
    weight.


27. Having detailed all the positive factors above there is in my judgement
    nothing further that can usefully be added. So far as matters that must
    add to the negative weight there are considerations that are  relevant.
    The first is that it is quite clear that the Applicant  has  family  in
    China who being ready willing and able to support  him  throughout  the
    time he has spent in the United Kingdom are clearly concerned as to his
    best interests and have the resources to look after him  in  China.  It
    must be the case that the qualifications that he has obtained  in  this
    country will stand him in good stead upon a return to China.  There  is
    also nothing to stop the Applicant making an application to  return  to
    the United Kingdom to continue his studies or potentially to  undertake
    employment using the qualifications that he has obtained.


28. Finally I must comment briefly on Mr Roberts' suggestion, both  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal and in submissions to the Upper Tribunal that  even
    if the refusal of the application was justified the decision to  remove
    was a disproportionate response. In  my  judgement  this  is  a  facile
    submission. Where a decision is made that a  person  has  no  right  to
    remain in the United Kingdom there can be nothing  disproportionate  in
    issuing removal directions to enforce their removal.


29. Taking account of all  of  the  above  it  is  my  judgement  that  the
    proportionality  balance  is   overwhelmingly   weighed   against   the
    Applicant. His appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  is
    dismissed.





  Summary

30. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law. I allow the Secretary of State's appeal and  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


31. I remake the decision and I dismiss the Applicant's appeal against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to refuse leave to remain  and  to  issue
    directions for removal.

Signed:                                                  Date:

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
