
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/23015/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4 August 2015                                |On 14 August 2015          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              mr richard bamfo
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                         Respondent/Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P. Duffy, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Lady Tattey, Counsel instructed by Ronik Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State ("SSHD") appeals to the  Upper  Tribunal  ("UT")
    from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Morgan  sitting  at
    Taylor House on 21  January  2015)  allowing  outright  the  claimant's
    appeal against the decision by the SSHD to refuse to issue him  with  a
    residence card as confirmation of his right to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom as the spouse or extended family  member  of  an  EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights here. The First-tier Tribunal ("FTT") did  not
    make an anonymity order, and I do not consider that such  an  order  is
    warranted for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The claimant is a Ghanaian  national,  and  his  sponsor  is  a  German
    national of Ghanaian heritage. The appellant entered the  UK  in  April
    2008 on a visit visa, and overstayed. He met the sponsor in  2011,  and
    she gave birth to a son by him in Germany on 14 December 2012.

 3. SSHD gave lengthy reasons for refusing the claimant's application.  The
    burden was on him to prove that  his  asserted  customary  marriage  by
    proxy to the sponsor on 11  March  2012  was  valid,  and  he  had  not
    discharged this burden. The SSHD went on to consider in the alternative
    whether the claimant could be considered  as  unmarried  partner  under
    Regulation 8(5). To assess whether their relationship was durable,  she
    would expect to see evidence of cohabitation for at least two years. No
    evidence had been provided that they had resided together as  a  couple
    prior to the issue of their marriage certificate,  or  even  that  they
    knew other or had met prior  to  the  issue  of  the  certificate.  The
    child's birth certificate did not name the claimant as the father,  and
    the documents provided did not show that he  was  cohabiting  with  the
    sponsor and the child.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The judge dismissed the appeal under  Regulation  7  as  there  was  no
    evidence of the validity of  the  customary  marriage  by  proxy  under
    German law. The judge allowed the appeal under Regulation  8(5)  as  he
    was satisfied that the couple had been living together as  husband  and
    wife for a period of over two years, and they now had a young son.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 5. The SSHD applied for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    arguing that the judge had erred in law in allowing the appeal outright
    as she had not yet considered whether to exercise her discretion  under
    Regulation 17(4) to issue him with a residence card.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 6. On 16 March 2015 Judge Andrew granted the SSHD permission to appeal  on
    the above ground.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

 7. If the claimant had established that he was married to his sponsor,  he
    would have been entitled without more to be  issued  with  a  residence
    card pursuant to Regulation 7 (it not being disputed that  his  sponsor
    was exercising treaty rights here). But as an  extended  family  member
    (referred to  by  the  shorthand  "OFM"  in  some  of  the  leading  UT
    authorities) under Regulation 8(5), the claimant did not, and does not,
    have this automatic entitlement.

 8. Regulation 17(4) provides that the SSHD may issue a residence  card  to
    an extended family member if two conditions are satisfied.  The  second
    condition is  that,  "in  all  the  circumstances  it  appears  to  the
    Secretary of State appropriate to issue the residence card".  In  order
    to exercise discretion under Regulation 17(4) the SSHD is  required  by
    Regulation 17(5) to "undertake an extensive examination of the personal
    circumstances of the applicant and if he refuses the application  shall
    give reasons justifying the refusal".

 9. The SSHD refused the application on the sole ground that  the  claimant
    had not shown himself to be in a durable relationship, and  so  he  was
    not eligible to be issued with a residence card as an OFM. The SSHD did
    not purport to exercise the discretion under Regulation 17(4) to  issue
    a residence card, if she deemed it appropriate, to  a  person  who  had
    demonstrated to her satisfaction that he was an OFM.

10. So the judge could not allow the appeal outright. The most that he  was
    entitled to do was to allow the appeal on the ground that the  decision
    was not in accordance with the law, "leaving the matter of  whether  to
    exercise this discretion in  the  appellant's  favour  or  not  to  the
    Secretary of State": see Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT
    00340.

The Remaking of the Decision

11. There is no challenge by the SSHD to the judge's  primary  findings  of
    fact. So  the  claimant  has  established  that  he  is  an  OFM  under
    Regulation 8(5). He thereby  meets  the  gateway  requirement  for  the
    exercise of the discretion to issue him with  a  residence  card  under
    Regulation 17(4). Only the SSHD can exercise this discretion.

Conclusion

12. The decision of the FTT contained an error of law, and accordingly  the
    decision is set aside and the following decision  is  substituted:  the
    claimant's appeal  is  allowed  on  the  ground  that  the  refusal  to
    recognise him as an OFM under Regulation 8(5)  was  not  in  accordance
    with the law, and the claimant's application for a residence card as an
    OFM is remitted to the SSHD for the exercise of  her  discretion  under
    Regulation 17(4).

Anonymity

No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

