
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23313/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 December 2016                  |On 12 January 2017                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    m S A
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Hosein, Counsel, instructed by Hanson Young
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly.  This order  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this order could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  her
    refusal to vary leave and her decision to remove him on  the  basis  of
    reliance  on  false  documents  and  a  fraudulently   obtained   TOEIC
    certificate dated 21st March 2012 which by  the  date  of  the  refusal
    letter on 12th June 2015 had  been  withdrawn  by  ETS.   The  material
    passage in the letter of refusal is as follows:

         "For the purposes of your application dated 27th  April  2012,  you
         submitted a TOEIC  certificate  from  Educational  Testing  Service
         ('ETS') to the Home Office.

         ETS has a record of your speaking test.  Using  voice  verification
         software, ETS is able to detect when a single person is undertaking
         multiple tests.  ETS undertook a check of your test  and  confirmed
         to the SSHD that there was significant evidence  to  conclude  that
         your certificate was fraudulently obtained by the use  of  a  proxy
         test taker.  Your scores from the test taken on 21st March 2012  at
         Synergy Business College of London have now been cancelled by ETS.

         On the basis of the information provided to her by ETS, the SSHD is
         satisfied that there is substantial evidence to conclude that  your
         certificate was fraudulently obtained.

         In light of this the Secretary of State has deemed that refusal  is
         appropriate under paragraph 322(2) and is not prepared to  exercise
         discretion in your favour.

         In this application, you have also once again  submitted  the  same
         test certificate as evidence that you meet the requirements for the
         award of points for English  Language.   As  above,  the  SSHD  has
         already found this document to be non-genuine.

         For the above reasons, I am  also  satisfied  that  you  have  used
         deception in this application.

         This means that any future  applications  for  entry  clearance  or
         leave to enter the UK you make  will  be  refused  under  paragraph
         320(7B) of the Immigration  Rules  (unless  it  would  breach  your
         rights under the Human Rights Act or the  Refugee  Convention)  for
         the following period starting on the date on which you leave the UK
         following this refusal: [details given]."

 2. The claimant relies on  SM and Qadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof)
    [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC) arguing that the burden of proof had not  shifted
    to him because the evidence  of  Ms  Collings  and  Mr  Millington  was
    inadequate to shift the evidential burden borne  by  the  Secretary  of
    State, alternatively, that the First-tier Judge was entitled  to  allow
    the appeal, because even if the burden had shifted to the claimant, she
    had given a satisfactory explanation to support her contention that she
    had taken the TOEIC test herself.

 3. The Secretary of State appealed against the allowing of the decision on
    two grounds.  The first, which is not pursued, relates to  the  judge's
    finding that the Secretary of State's investigation  of  bank  evidence
    relied upon was inadequate.  The second relates to paragraph 43 of  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision, which is as follows:

         "43. Neither Ms Collings' nor Mr Millington's evidence  was  tested
             by cross-examination in this appeal and as stated above; their
             evidence was not particular to the  [claimant].   While  I  am
             prepared to accept that their  evidence  just  discharges  the
             respondent's  burden  of  establishing  that  the   [claimant]
             submitted a fraudulently obtained test score in respect of the
             21st March 2012 test only; without more I am not  prepared  to
             accept that the burden is discharged in relation to  the  19th
             September 2012 score, which may  have  been  cancelled  solely
             because the test was taken in a centre where other  tests  had
             been found to have been taken by a proxy.

         44.  It is therefore for the [claimant] to  show  that  he  has  an
             innocent explanation.  In considering whether or not he  does,
             I have considered a number of factors including what he  would
             have to gain from being dishonest; whether or  not  there  are
             any other questions about his good character; and  what  other
             evidence  there  is  of  his  English  language  ability,   in
             particular evidence that predated the TOEIC test."

 4. In support of the finding that the claimant had taken the test himself,
    the First-tier Tribunal relied on its own  assessment  of  whether  the
    claimant was the type of person to do  so,  and  also,  on  alternative
    evidence of his English language abilities: the claimant had  asserted,
    through Counsel, that he studied in Bangladesh in English before coming
    to the United Kingdom; in 2007, he passed an IELTS test  at  Level  B1;
    and in 2016, he gave evidence in English to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The First-tier Tribunal concluded as follows:

         "48. I find when considering the evidence in  the  round  that  the
             [claimant] through his oral evidence and documentary  evidence
             he adduced has given a satisfactory explanation regarding  the
             allegations of dishonesty made by the respondent against  him.
             Having made that finding I need to consider whether or not the
             respondent has discharged the  legal  burden  of  establishing
             that  the  [claimant]  obtained  his  TOEIC   certificate   by
             dishonest means."

 5. Pausing there, that analysis is legally erroneous because the  evidence
    relied upon does not have a nexus with the fraudulent  event  in  March
    2012.  The First-tier Tribunal's assessment inverts the approach  which
    SM  and  Qadir  requires  the  Tribunal  to  take,  which  is  that  of
    considering first  whether  the  legal  burden  is  discharged  by  the
    respondent. and second, whether there is a satisfactory basis  for  the
    claimant's assertion that they did take the TOEIC test in person.   The
    decision continues:

         "49. I consider that at the time the [claimant] took his test there
             was no need for him to  cheat.   As  set  out  above,  he  had
             already demonstrated that he met a higher standard of  English
             in order to obtain entry clearance as a student.   I  consider
             that he would have been aware that to submit false information
             or documents was a serious matter given that he had made  more
             than one immigration application by the time he submitted  the
             application in question in this appeal.  I take  into  account
             the fact  that  there  was  no  other  evidence  to  call  the
             [claimant]'s character into question generally.  I  note  that
             the [claimant] was enrolled as an advocate of  the  Bangladesh
             Bar Council on 17th  January  2008.   I  would  find  it  very
             surprising if there was not a good character requirement as  a
             prerequisite for enrolment as an advocate.

         50.  I find that the respondent has not established on the  balance
             of  probabilities  that  the  [claimant]  obtained  his  TOEIC
             certificate by dishonest means.  ..."

    The appeal was allowed under the Rules.

 6. It is difficult to see what satisfactory evidence was before the  judge
    in relation to the disputed TOEIC test in March 2012,  apart  from  the
    claimant's assertion that there were a lot  of  people  there  for  the
    speaking test on that day, and his evidence that on other occasions  he
    had demonstrated a knowledge of the English language.

 7. Paragraphs 9 to 10 of her decision contain an incomplete summary of the
    evidence  recorded  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  Record   of
    Proceedings.  At [9]-[10], the judge said this:

         "9.  The [claimant] was asked whether or not he had  contacted  ETS
             since  receiving  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  his
             application in June 2015.  The [claimant] stated that  he  had
             not.  Ms Ahmed put  it  to  him  that  the  fact  he  had  not
             contacted ETS suggested that he did not take the test himself.
              The [claimant] stated that  if  ETS  had  provided  incorrect
             information then he would need to complain about it, but  that
             it should be done by his lawyer.  ...

         10.  The [claimant] stated that in March  the  classroom  was  full
             when he was taking the test.  When he took his  speaking  test
             he  stated  that  the  speaking  area  was  almost  full.   He
             described being tested by computer and when asked  if  he  saw
             anyone cheating he replied 'I have no idea'.  ..."

 8. In the Record of Proceedings, the judge  records  cross-examination  in
    the following terms:

         "Presenting Officer    -   English test

                        -  Since refusal 06/2015 - contacted ETS?

         Answer   -    No.

         Presenting Officer     -   Fact that didn't  contact  ETS  suggests
                           that you didn't take test.

         Answer   -    I might complain if they gave wrong information.

         Presenting Officer     -   Refusal says you did not take the test.

         Answer   -    Not true, I took the test.  If ETS says this, I  need
                           to complain about it.

         Presenting Officer     -   Why didn't you?

         Answer   -    Should be done by lawyer."

 9. The documentary and witness evidence adduced by  the  claimant  of  his
    passing an  IELTS test in 2007 and his  ability  to  give  evidence  in
    English in 2016 is immaterial when considering whether  he  dishonestly
    relied upon a test in March 2012 taken fraudulently  by  a  proxy  test
    taker,  or whether he was himself at the hearing centre in March  2012,
    taking the test in person.

10. I have had regard to the Upper Tribunal's  guidance  in  SM  and  Qadir
    that:

         "(i) The Secretary of State's generic evidence, combined  with  her
             evidence particular  to  these  two  appellants,  sufficed  to
             discharge the evidential burden of proving  that  their  TOEIC
             certificates had been procured by dishonesty. ..."

    The reasoning is amplified in the Tribunal's decision at [67]-[68]:

         "67. We begin by asking ourselves whether the  Secretary  of  State
             has discharged the  evidential  burden  of  proving  that  the
             appellants were, or either of them was, guilty  of  dishonesty
             in the respects alleged.   Bearing  in  mind  that,  as  noted
             above, all of the Secretary of State's  evidence  was  adduced
             first, reflecting the burden of proof, it  is  appropriate  to
             record that at the stage when the Secretary  of  State's  case
             closed there was no submission on behalf of  either  appellant
             that  the  aforementioned  evidential  burden  had  not   been
             discharged.  ...

         68.  As our analysis and conclusions in the  immediately  preceding
             section make clear, we have substantial reservations about the
             strength and quality of the  Secretary  of  State's  evidence.
             Its shortcomings are  manifest.   On  the  other  hand,  while
             bearing in mind that the context is one of alleged  deception,
             we must be mindful of the comparatively modest threshold which
             an evidential burden entails.  This calls  for  an  evaluative
             assessment on the part of  the  Tribunal.   By  an  admittedly
             narrow margin we are satisfied that the Secretary of State has
             discharged this burden.  The effect of this is that there is a
             burden, again an evidential one, on the appellants of  raising
             an innocent explanation."

11. That has been reinforced by the guidance recently given  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in R (on the application of Mohibullah) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department (TOEIC -  ETS  -  judicial  review  principles)
    [2016] UKUT 561 (IAC) at (vi) in the judicial headnote:

             "(vi)    The student's knowledge of an allegation by ETS  that
             he has  procured  his  TOEIC  certificate  by  deception  will
             normally suffice to convey the gist of the case  against  him,
             thereby rendering the Secretary  of  State's  decision  making
             process (in this respect) procedurally fair."

12. The question whether there is an innocent  explanation  supporting  the
    claimant's assertion that he took the test personally is a question  of
    fact for the fact-finding Tribunal, with which the Upper  Tribunal  can
    interfere only on the basis of the   guidance  given  by  Lord  Justice
    Brooke at paragraph 90 subparagraphs 2 and 3 of R (Iran) v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982.  The Upper  Tribunal
    must be satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal's reasoning as to  facts
    is perverse, Wednesbury unreasonable or incomprehensible  and  contrary
    to the evidence.

13. I find on examination of this decision that in relation to the 21 March
    2012 test, there was in effect no evidence to rebut the fraud assertion
    by ETS, other than the claimant's uncorroborated assertion that he  did
    take the test himself.  ETS has satisfied itself that he  did  not  and
    withdrawn the certificate in question.

14. I have regard to the claimant's failure in June 2015 to challenge  ETS'
    withdrawal of the  certificate.   He  did  not  challenge  it  when  he
    received the refusal letter and still had not done so by  the  date  of
    the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal in April 2016.   He  said  quite
    frankly in his evidence that he might have complained if ETS had  given
    wrong information.

15. In the light of that evidence and in the absence of any other  evidence
    I do consider that the finding that a satisfactory explanation  can  be
    deduced from an entirely different test in 2007, the claimant's general
    good character and his oral evidence in 2016  is  perverse,  Wednesbury
    unreasonable and to me at least incomprehensible.

16. Accordingly, that there is a material error of law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's  decision.  I  set  it  aside  and  substitute  a   decision
    dismissing the appeal.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.


Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson   Date: 11 January 2017
     Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

