
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/23925/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |     Decision & Reasons           |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On 11th December 2017                    |     On 22nd December 2017        |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                          MR TUDONU ABIDEMI GANDONU
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs S Hall of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born  on  20th  of  May  1975.  He
    appeals against a decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Thew
    sitting at Taylor  House  on  22nd  of  March  2017  who  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Respondent  dated  11th  of
    June 2015. That decision was to refuse to issue  the  Appellant  with  a
    permanent right of residence card pursuant to Regulation 15(1)(b) of the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the   2006
    Regulations"). This Regulation provides that a family member of  an  EEA
    national who is not himself an EEA national but who has resided  in  the
    The United Kingdom with the EEA national in  accordance  with  the  2006
    Regulations for a continuous period of 5 years shall acquire  the  right
    to reside in the The United Kingdom permanently. The burden of proof  of
    establishing this requirement rests upon the Appellant and the  standard
    of proof is the usual civil standard of balance of probabilities.  Facts
    and matters are established as at the date of hearing.


 2. The Appellant met his wife Mrs Eila Maria  Gandonu,  a  Finnish  citizen
    ("the Sponsor"), in Finland in 2000. They married in 2002 and  a  child,
    M, was born on 7th of May 2007. The Appellant  entered  the  The  United
    Kingdom to join the Sponsor on a visa valid from 15th of  November  2004
    to 15th of November 2005 and again on a visa to join the  Sponsor  valid
    from 31st of October 2006 to 30th of April 2007. The Appellant,  Sponsor
    and their child  moved  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  August  2008.  The
    Appellant applied for a residence card on the basis of his  marriage  to
    the Sponsor which was issued by the Respondent on 20th of  January  2010
    to expire on 20th of January 2015. On 3rd of February 2015 the Appellant
    applied for permanent residence as a confirmation of his right to reside
    in the United Kingdom and it was the refusal of this application by  the
    Respondent on 11th of June 2015 that gave rise to  the  basis  of  these
    proceedings.

The Appellant's Case

 3. The Appellant argued that he and the Sponsor were still in a genuine and
    subsisting marriage albeit that he was living in the United Kingdom  and
    she was now in Finland having returned there to look after her  parents.
    The Sponsor had exercised her treaty rights as a worker from her arrival
    in the United Kingdom in August 2008. In 2009, she had started  her  own
    business as a self-employed cleaner. The Appellant  was  issued  with  a
    residence card from 5th of July 2010 and the Respondent must  have  been
    satisfied at that time that the Sponsor was genuinely self-employed.


 4. The Sponsor had travelled back to Finland on 14th  of  January  2015  to
    care for her mother who had been diagnosed with cancer and  subsequently
    passed away in October 2016. The Sponsor continued to reside in  Finland
    thereafter to care  for  her  father  whose  health  had  been  affected
    following the death of his wife.  Although  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor
    lived apart the Appellant's case was that the marriage  was  subsisting.
    The Sponsor had  visited  the  Appellant  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    Appellant could not visit the Sponsor in Finland to  see  his  wife  and
    child because the Respondent had retained his passport from the time  of
    his application in early 2015.


Explanation for Refusal


 5. The Respondent refused the application on the grounds that the Appellant
    had not supplied sufficient evidence to show that the Sponsor  had  been
    self-employed for a continuous period of five years. There was no  proof
    of registration with HM Revenue and Customs,  no  evidence  of  national
    insurance contributions being paid or invoices for work done or  a  copy
    of the Sponsor's business accounts. The  only  documents  provided  were
    three  self-assessment  letters   and   an   HMRC   national   insurance
    contributions letter. The HMRC letters did not indicate that the Sponsor
    had been actively trading as a self-employed person and did not cover  a
    5-year period. The  national  insurance  contributions  letter  did  not
    confirm that any payment had been made to the  Sponsor.  The  Respondent
    concluded that the Sponsor had not been exercising her treaty rights  as
    a qualified person and the application was refused.


 6. The Appellant appealed against that decision arguing  that  the  Sponsor
    was self-employed between 2011 and  2014  before  she  left  the  United
    Kingdom. The Appellant blamed a previous solicitor who had not submitted
    all the relevant documents that the Respondent required to establish the
    Sponsor's self-employed status. The grounds of appeal  produced  further
    documents from HMRC, tax returns and payslips for the Sponsor  and  bank
    statements for the Appellant.

The Decision at First Instance

 7. The Judge was satisfied that there  was  adequate  evidence  by  way  of
    payslips and an employer's letter dated 7th of  December  2009  together
    with a tax return to establish that the Sponsor  was  employed  at  that
    stage but there was less evidence  relating  to  the  Sponsor's  claimed
    period of self-employment thereafter. The Judge attached some weight  to
    the fact that there was no evidence from any customers of  the  Sponsor,
    no receipts and no way of identifying the income claimed except  by  way
    of the tax return. A letter from the accountants  to  identify  evidence
    submitted to them in order to prepare the tax return  would,  the  Judge
    held, have been of considerable assistance.


 8. At paragraph 16 the Judge stated that the  evidence  to  show  that  the
    Appellant, Sponsor and their  son  had  lived  together  in  the  United
    Kingdom between 2008 and January 2015 was limited. The  latest  date  on
    the documents addressed to the Sponsor and Appellant was a joint council
    tax bill dated 2010/2011. The  tenancy  agreement  for  the  Appellant's
    address in Southampton was dated 1st  of  April  2014  but  was  in  the
    Appellant's sole name. There was no explanation why there  should  be  a
    tenancy in his name only when the evidence was that she  did  not  leave
    the United Kingdom until January 2015.


 9. There was a mistake in a date given in the  Sponsor's  statement  as  to
    when she left Finland to take a holiday in the United Kingdom to see the
    Appellant. Her statement said it was from August  2016  to  August  2015
    which was clearly wrong. The Appellant's evidence was that  the  holiday
    was from  the  3rd  until  10th  of  August  2015.  A  letter  from  the
    Appellant's sister referred to a holiday in August 2016 and that was the
    date the Appellant gave as  the  last  time  the  Sponsor  was  in  this
    country. However, there was no reference to any further visits in August
    2016 in either the Sponsor's statement, which was dated  2017  and  thus
    after any such holiday or in the Appellant statement which was dated 7th
    of September 2016 and would therefore been signed within a  month  after
    the claimed visit in August 2016.  The  Judge  was  concerned  that  the
    Appellant had made a statement which referred to a holiday in  2015  but
    not a more recent one in 2016. The only holiday the  Judge  decided  was
    for one week in 2015.


10. Evidence had been given to  the  Judge  of  communications  between  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor in  What's  App  which  lacked  any  terms  of
    endearment and did not indicate that this was a subsisting marriage. The
    basis of the refusal  by  the  Respondent  was  inadequate  evidence  to
    establish that the Sponsor had been exercising treaty rights as required
    over a 5-year period. On the evidence before the Judge the Appellant had
    not discharged the burden which was upon him to establish on  a  balance
    of probabilities that the Sponsor had been exercising treaty rights over
    a 5-year period and the appeal was dismissed.

The Onward Appeal

11. The Appellant appealed against this  decision  in  lengthy  grounds  for
    permission arguing that the Judge had considered irrelevant  matters  in
    arriving at  her  decision  such  as  the  content  of  the  What's  App
    communications. The Respondent's refusal of the application  was  solely
    on the grounds of insufficient evidence provided for the period 2010  to
    2015. This was an appeal by a family member of an EEA national  and  the
    case fell to be treated differently to unmarried  partners  who  had  to
    demonstrate they were in a durable relationship.


12. At paragraph 13 of the determination there was a list of  the  documents
    provided within the Appellant's bundle which related  to  the  Sponsor's
    self-employment. The Tribunal had been provided with tax returns for the
    Sponsor from 2010 to 2015 prepared by an accountant. The grounds  quoted
    the Judge that "there is no evidence of any gap in  the  self-employment
    declared in these returns". I pause to note here that that  was  not  an
    acceptance by the Judge  that  the  Appellant  had  provided  sufficient
    evidence. At that point in the determination the  Judge  was  quoting  a
    submission made to her by counsel for the Appellant. The grounds claimed
    that the Judge had imposed a higher standard of proof on  the  Appellant
    than the balance of probabilities.


13. It was further argued that there was no specific  list  of  documents  a
    self-employed EEA Sponsor had to provide to  demonstrate  their  working
    status in contrast to the specified documents found in Appendix  FM  for
    non-EEA Sponsors. The Appellant had provided reasonable evidence of  the
    Sponsor's self-employment. Hers was a  modest  business  of  a  domestic
    cleaning  nature  which  was  advertised  through  word  of  mouth.  The
    Respondent must have been satisfied at the time of issuing  a  residence
    card in July 2010 that the Sponsor was genuinely self-employed  at  that
    stage. There was no reason to  doubt  this  continued  over  the  5-year
    period which gave rise to the entitlement to a permanent residence card.




14. The application for permission to  appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes on 18th of October  2017.  In  granting
    permission to appeal he wrote that it  was  arguable  that  the  Judge's
    focus was not upon whether the Appellant had acquired a permanent  right
    of residence by January 2015 or subsequently and that as such immaterial
    issues and  irrelevant  evidence  were  considered  by  the  Judge.  The
    Respondent had accepted that the Appellant lawfully entered  the  United
    Kingdom as the spouse of an EEA citizen  exercising  treaty  rights  and
    issued the Appellant with  a  residence  card  as  a  result.  HMRC  had
    accepted that the Appellant was a self-employed person and no issue  was
    raised over the accounts of his business.  Arguably  the  Appellant  had
    provided in evidence all that could reasonably be expected of him  given
    the nature of his business and arguably the Judge failed to ask  himself
    how the Appellant supported himself  if  he  was  not  self-employed  as
    claimed. It is arguable that the Judge misdirected himself either as  to
    the burden and standard of proof or that [she] focused  upon  irrelevant
    material.


15.  I pause to note here  that  Judge  Holmes  in  granting  permission  to
    appeal referred to the Appellant's business and evidence provided of his
    self-employment. I assume that they are typographical errors and that he
    meant to refer to the Sponsor not the Appellant. In any event on 8th  of
    November 2017 the Respondent replied to the grant  of  permission  under
    rule 24 stating  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  found  the
    Appellant had not established that the  Sponsor  was  exercising  treaty
    rights for a 5 year period which was  a  finding  open  to  her  on  the
    evidence.

The Hearing Before Me

16. At the hearing before me counsel relied on the grounds of  appeal  which
    I have summarised above. The  Judge  had  placed  undue  weight  on  the
    documents before her. The only concern the Respondent  had  was  whether
    the Sponsor was exercising treaty  rights.  The  Sponsor  was  still  in
    Finland as she was nursing her father. She was there with her son M. The
    Judge  had  focused  on  irrelevant  matters  such  as  the  What's  App
    communications. The best evidence of the Sponsor's  employment  was  the
    HMRC evidence. The Appellant had had indefinite leave to  remain  status
    in Finland. There was now a letter from the accountants  Tahira  and  co
    dated 6th of December 2017 confirming that they had acted as accountants
    for the Sponsor giving the Appellant's current address for her. She  had
    worked as a self-employed sole trader trading as  a  freelance  cleaning
    service. They had prepared her business profit and loss accounts for the
    tax years from 2009 to 2015 from the documents and information  provided
    by her.


17. Counsel argued that the issue raised by the Judge over  the  holiday  of
    the Sponsor had no relevance to the  case.  The  Appellant  and  Sponsor
    enjoyed a relationship until January 2015 when the Sponsor had to  leave
    to nurse her sick mother. The  Sponsor  had  not  come  to  the  hearing
    because it was not  necessary  as  the  refusal  concerned  whether  the
    Sponsor was exercising treaty rights. She had made a statement and there
    was evidence in that statement. She had come back to see  the  Appellant
    for a short visit in 2015.

18. In reply, the Presenting Officer stated that he relied  on  the  refusal
    letter and his rule 24 response. The grounds of  onward  appeal  were  a
    mere disagreement with the Judge's determination. The Judge's point  was
    that she had not seen  evidence  that  discharged  the  burden  for  the
    relevant period. In conclusion counsel reiterated that  the  family  had
    arrived in the United Kingdom in 2009  when  the  Sponsor  started  work
    which the Respondent was aware of  and  which  continued  until  January
    2015.





Findings

19. The issue in this case was whether the Appellant  could  establish  that
    the Sponsor had been exercising treaty rights for a continuous period of
    5 years while he was living with her. The  issue  was  not  whether  the
    marriage itself was genuine and subsisting. As there was no evidence  of
    a divorce, following jurisprudence from the  Court  of  Justice  of  the
    European Union such as Diatta v Land Berlin, the marriage would continue
    to be subsisting even if the parties had separated and  were  living  in
    different countries as was the case here. What the Appellant had to show
    was the continuous self-employment of the Sponsor over a 5-year period.


20. I would respectfully disagree with the grant of permission in this  case
    that the Judge had not focused upon whether the Appellant had acquired a
    permanent right of residence  by  January  2015.  At  the  beginning  of
    paragraph 16 the Judge made it clear that she  was  concerned  that  the
    evidence for the Appellant and Sponsor living  together  in  the  United
    Kingdom between 2008 and the middle of January 2015  was  limited.  What
    the Judge was concerned about was whether the Sponsor really was working
    as a self-employed cleaner as claimed.


21. The Appellant had to prove two things. Firstly, that he and the  Sponsor
    had lived together for a continuous period of 5 years and secondly  that
    during that time the Sponsor had  been  continuously  exercising  treaty
    rights. The Judge found against the Appellant on both  points.  She  was
    satisfied that there was evidence  of  continuing  contact  between  the
    Appellant and Sponsor and noted that the Sponsor had sent in a statement
    for the hearing. However, there were some errors in that statement whose
    resolution was not assisted by the  absence  of  the  Sponsor  from  the
    hearing.


22. I do not accept the argument that was made to me that there was no  need
    for the Sponsor to attend  the  hearing  based  on  the  nature  of  the
    Respondent's refusal. The Respondent's refusal went directly to what the
    Sponsor had or had not done and she was best placed to answer  questions
    about that. This was an important hearing  for  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor's absence was a significant one. Whilst I  appreciate  that  the
    Sponsor may have wished to be in Finland to look after her sick  father,
    it would not have been difficult for her as an EEA citizen  to  come  to
    the United Kingdom for a short period in order  to  be  present  at  the
    appeal hearing.


23. There were a number of matters of concern which the Judge had which  the
    Sponsor should have dealt with by way of oral evidence since the Sponsor
    had not dealt with them in her statement. These  included  the  lack  of
    documentation to show that she and the Appellant  were  living  together
    for the whole of the relevant  period.  The  tenancy  agreement  in  the
    Appellant's sole name was dated 1st of April 2014  eight  months  before
    the Sponsor was said to have gone back to  Finland  to  look  after  her
    parents. Even if she had had concerns about her parents  at  that  early
    stage it is difficult to see why she would still not have been put on  a
    tenancy agreement for  the  matrimonial  home  particularly  as  on  the
    Appellant's case the Sponsor was based in the United Kingdom as she  was
    continuing to run her self-employed business for the rest of  the  year.
    The  Judge  quoted  the  Appellant's  description  of  the  marriage  at
    paragraph 17 of her determination that it was not "as it  had  been"  by
    the time of the hearing. The state of the marriage  by  that  stage  was
    irrelevant. The  Judge  found  at  paragraph  18  there  was  inadequate
    evidence to  establish  that  the  Sponsor  had  been  living  with  the
    Appellant or exercising  treaty  rights  as  required  over  the  5-year
    period.


24. The Appellant now seeks to put in as evidence (if the  determination  is
    set aside) a letter from the Sponsor's accountants dated 6th of December
    2017 which is in answer to the point made by the Judge at  paragraph  14
    that a letter from the  accountants  would  have  been  of  considerable
    assistance to her.  That  letter  has  come  into  existence  after  the
    determination and therefore the failure to  consider  it  cannot  be  an
    error of law. In submissions, I was referred to it but it is apparent on
    the face of the letter that it raises as many questions as  it  purports
    to answer.


25. The accountants state they prepared business profit  and  loss  accounts
    for the period 2009 to 2015 from documents including income receipts and
    expenses invoices and information  provided  by  the  Sponsor.  No  such
    documents were produced to the Respondent or the Judge at first instance
    to establish the existence of the Sponsor's business. It might have been
    of assistance to the Judge to be told what documents had  been  provided
    to the accountants by the Sponsor. In considering whether the Judge made
    a material error of law in her  determination,  the  existence  of  this
    letter from the accountants is of no importance since  it  was  produced
    after the hearing. Were the matter to proceed  to  a  rehearing  of  the
    appeal on the basis that the decision at first instance was set aside, I
    would  want  clarification  of  the  contradiction  between   what   the
    accountants say they were given and  what  the  Appellant  was  able  to
    produce at first instance. I do not find  that  the  letter  of  itself,
    indicates that the Judge may have made a material error of law.


26. The submission to me that there was a  material  error  of  law  by  the
    Judge centred on one particular issue namely what was  said  to  be  the
    inadequate consideration by the Judge of the HMRC  documentation.  There
    were tax returns in respect of the Sponsor dated April 2010 dealing with
    employment and for each of the  years  from  2010/2011  until  2014/2015
    inclusive in respect of self-employment. As I have indicated,  see  [12]
    above, it was counsel for the Appellant who submitted that there was  no
    evidence of any gap in the self-employment declared  in  those  returns.
    The Judge's concern was  that  there  was  no  evidence  supporting  the
    claimed income stated in the  tax  returns,  see  paragraph  14  of  the
    determination.


27. The weight to be placed on these  tax  returns  was  a  matter  for  the
    Judge. One might ask the question why would someone prepare a tax return
    if they were not working? The difficulty for  the  Appellant  with  that
    argument is that the Sponsor's claimed earnings were modest which  would
    mean that no tax liability would arise from the  tax  returns  and  thus
    they could be submitted, assuming that was what  happened,  without  any
    repercussions since they were below the  �10,000  tax  threshold.  There
    were some oddities in the tax returns such as that the  tax  return  for
    April 2013 to April 2014 had been submitted to HMRC in October 2015 some
    months after the Sponsor had  left  the  United  Kingdom  to  return  to
    Finland. The tax return for April 2014 to April 2015 the  period  during
    which it is said the Sponsor returned to Finland was not submitted until
    26th of January 2016 raising the question of how  the  accountants  were
    given the information to  prepare  a  tax  return  for  the  Sponsor  in
    Finland. The accountants had been employed by the Appellant in  relation
    to his company Precedents Care Ltd. They had  produced  a  letter  dated
    20th of April 2016 confirming that they were acting for the company.  If
    they had been preparing accounts for the Sponsor for the period  between
    2010 and 2015 it is difficult without further  explanation  to  see  why
    those tax  returns  were  not  submitted  to  the  Respondent  when  the
    Appellant made his application for permanent residence,  an  application
    made a few weeks after the Appellant and Sponsor had separated when  the
    Sponsor had returned to Finland.


28. These points are somewhat speculative (and were not raised by the  Judge
    at first instance) because I  am  concerned  at  this  stage  only  with
    whether the Judge made a material error of law.  What  is  important  is
    that the Judge did not consider  that  the  tax  returns  by  themselves
    proved the Appellant's case that the Sponsor had been exercising  treaty
    rights for a continuous period of 5 years. If such questions as  I  have
    set out at [27] above had been raised it would not have been possible to
    have investigated them given the absence of the Sponsor from the hearing
    at first instance.


29. I do not consider that the Judge can be criticised for  placing  greater
    weight on the absence of supporting documentation which the tax  returns
    are said to be based on rather than the tax returns themselves.  It  was
    for the Appellant to prove his case but the Judge was not satisfied that
    the Appellant  had  done  this.  There  were  unexplained  gaps  in  the
    documentation for the period during which the Appellant and Sponsor were
    said to have lived together which I have referred to above.  Importantly
    there was a lack of evidence to show the existence of the Sponsor's self-
    employment when such evidence could reasonably have been expected to  be
    obtained. If the accountants letter of 6th of December  2017  is  to  be
    relied on, that evidence did exist because it  is  said  it  formed  the
    basis of the tax returns making  it  even  more  inexplicable  that  the
    supporting evidence had not been presented  at  first  instance  to  the
    Judge.


30. I  do  not  find  that  there  was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination. The Judge could only decide the case on the basis of  the
    evidence before her and there were problems with that evidence. I do not
    accept the criticism made in the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  and
    repeated in submissions to  me  that  the  Judge  considered  irrelevant
    matters. Nor do I accept the criticism that the Judge decided  the  case
    on  a  basis  higher  than  the  balance  of  probabilities.  The  Judge
    specifically directed herself on that standard of proof at paragraph  18
    and there is nothing in the determination to indicate  she  decided  the
    case on any different basis. Nor do I  consider  it  relevant  that  the
    Respondent had granted a residence card to the Appellant  apparently  on
    the basis that she was  satisfied  the  Sponsor  was  exercising  treaty
    rights in 2010. The test was not whether that card  had  been  correctly
    issued but whether the Sponsor could show five  years  continuous  self-
    employment from 2010 until 2015 which required an  examination  of  what
    had happened since the residence card was issued. The  Judge  considered
    the evidence of that such as it was and  gave  cogent  reasons  why  the
    Appellant's claim failed on that basis. I find  there  was  no  material
    error of law and I dismiss the Appellant's onward appeal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 15th of December 2017


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.


Signed this 15th of December 2017


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



