
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23723/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 May 2013                                 |On 5 June 2013               |
|Prepared on 9 May 2013                        |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                Mr md younus

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Islam Khan, Counsel, instructed by M Q Hassan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Martin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, who was born on 27  December  1985,  is  a  national  of
    Bangladesh.  On 30 October 2011, he made  a  combined  application  for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    Migrant under the points-based system and  for  a  biometric  residence
    permit, but this application  was  refused  by  the  respondent  on  11
    October 2012.  The refusal letter is dated the same date.  There were a
    number of grounds for refusal.  Amongst them was that the appellant was
    awarded no points for Confirmation of Acceptance for  Studies  and  was
    also awarded no points for maintenance (funds).   His  application  was
    also refused under paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules,  because
    it was considered that bank statements said to have been in respect  of
    an account with the Agrani Bank were false.   At  the  same  time,  the
    respondent made a decision to remove the appellant from the UK  by  way
    of  directions  under  Section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum   and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The appellant appealed against these  decisions,  and  his  appeal  was
    heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge Rastogi, sitting at Hatton Cross
    on 1 February 2013.

 3. In a determination promulgated on 13 February 2013, Judge Rastogi found
    that the respondent's decision to remove the appellant from the  United
    Kingdom under Section 47 had not been made in accordance with the  law,
    and to that extent the appellant's appeal was allowed.  However,  Judge
    Rastogi dismissed the appellant's appeal on all other grounds.

 4. Insofar as the respondent had relied upon the failure of the  appellant
    to submit  an  appropriate  CAS,  Judge  Rastogi  found  that  the  CAS
    submitted was reliable and that this objection by  the  respondent  was
    unfounded.  Judge Rastogi did not make  findings  with  regard  to  the
    authenticity of the bank account submitted, because he considered  that
    the maintenance requirements were not met.  His reason for  so  finding
    was that the statements provided did not meet the requirements  of  the
    Rules, because they did not cover a consecutive 28 day period ending no
    earlier than 31 days before the date of the application as required  by
    the Rules (at paragraph 33 of his determination).   The  bank  accounts
    which he had in mind were those which  had  been  submitted  and  which
    covered a period ending on 18 October 2011.  I refer to this below.

 5. The appellant now appeals against this decision, with leave.



The Hearing

 6. At the hearing I heard submissions on behalf of both parties, following
    which I did not need to hear any  further  evidence.   I  recorded  the
    submissions which were made contemporaneously, and these are  contained
    in the Record of Proceedings, so I shall only refer below  to  such  of
    those  submissions  as  are  necessary  for  the   purposes   of   this
    determination.  I have, however, had regard  to  everything  which  was
    said to me during the course of the hearing, and to all  the  documents
    contained within the file, whether or not they are referred to below.

 7. Notwithstanding what had been contained within the grounds,  there  was
    only one issue which was argued before me, and this related to  whether
    or not Judge Rastogi should have rejected the evidence which  had  been
    submitted regarding the money available to the appellant on  the  basis
    that it did not cover the relevant period.  It was submitted on  behalf
    of the appellant that the evidence which  had  been  submitted  by  the
    appellant, including the documents which  were  submitted  on  25  July
    2012, which was after the date of the application, but before the  date
    of the decision, included accounts from the Agrani Bank  ending  on  25
    July 2012, which was within the 31 day period  immediately  before  the
    date of application required in the Rules.  It is not disputed that the
    sums shown as available in this bank account (which was  in  the  joint
    names of the appellant and his father) would have  been  sufficient  to
    meet the maintenance requirements.  I also  note  that  although  Judge
    Rastogi had said at paragraph 31 that he did not need to make  findings
    as to whether or not the bank statements were reliable, at paragraph 25
    he had found that the respondent  had  not  discharged  her  burden  of
    proving that the bank statements were false, because she had not  filed
    any evidence to explain or justify on what basis she asserts them to be
    false.  Accordingly, I proceed on the basis that it has not been  shown
    that the bank statements are not genuine.

 8. The sums which it has been shown in these bank accounts were  available
    to the appellant are sufficient to meet  the  maintenance  requirements
    under the Rules, and, in the absence of evidence  to  show  that  these
    bank accounts cannot be relied upon, Judge Rastogi  should  have  taken
    these statements into consideration.  I find that his failure to do  so
    was a material error of law, such that his decision must now be  remade
    by the Upper Tribunal.

 9. I note that the respondent did take into account all the evidence which
    had been submitted on behalf of the appellant, including  the  evidence
    (containing the later bank statements)  which  had  been  sent  to  the
    respondent after the date of the application, but before  the  date  of
    decision, which had only been rejected on the basis that  the  evidence
    had not been genuine.  As Judge Rastogi has effectively found that  the
    respondent's objection on this basis has  not  been  substantiated,  it
    would follow that the respondent should have considered  this  evidence
    on the basis that the  bank  statements  were  genuine.   I  take  into
    account  in  this  regard  the  respondent's  "evidential  flexibility"
    policy.  Although the Court of Appeal in Alam [2012] EWCA Civ  960  has
    stated that this policy does not oblige the  respondent  to  check  all
    applications  and  then  notify  all  applicants  where  the   evidence
    submitted on their behalves is insufficient, in light of  the  decision
    of this Tribunal in Rodriguez (flexibility policy) [2013] UKUT  42,  it
    does  require  the  respondent  at  the  very  least   to   take   into
    consideration documents which she has seen which have been  put  before
    her before the date of consideration.  In this regard, I also  have  to
    take into consideration the guidance given  by  this  Tribunal  in  the
    presidential Tribunal decision in Khatel.

10. Accordingly, in my judgment, I must take into account all the  evidence
    which was submitted to the respondent before the date of decision,  but
    must also do so on the basis of what were the effective  findings  made
    by the First-tier Tribunal.  The First-tier Tribunal had found that all
    the objections to this application  were  not  made  out,  save  as  to
    maintenance,  but  this  finding   was   made   without   taking   into
    consideration the bank statements which went up to 25 July 2012,  which
    covered the relevant period, and which ended within 31 days ending with
    the date of application.   Once  I  take  these  bank  statements  into
    account, I am satisfied that the  maintenance  requirements  under  the
    Rules are also made out.

11. It follows that this appeal must be allowed.

12. There has been no challenge to the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    with regard to the Section 47 removal decision, but in the light of  my
    finding, this is no longer relevant.



Decision

I set aside the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  as  containing  a
material error of law, and substitute the following decision:

The appellant's appeal is allowed, under the Immigration Rules.






Signed:                                 Date: 4 June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


