









UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23546/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House              |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 15 June 2017                   |On 29 June 2017                          |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between

                           Mr Md Fazlur Rasul Khan
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Rahman, legal representative (Londonium
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born on 2 December 1981. He
      appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Monson, promulgated on 10 October 2016,  dismissing  his  appeal
      against the decision of the respondent to refuse to vary his leave  to
      remain as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  Migrant.   The  respondent  had
      asserted that he was not entitled to receive any points for his CAS.


   2. In granting the appellant permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly found that it was arguably an error of
      law for the Tribunal to conclude firstly that the  appellant  was  the
      author of his own misfortune in failing to chase the respondent for  a
      60 day letter and secondly, that  the  duty  to  act  fairly  did  not
      therefore operate so as to require the respondent to issue of her  own
      volition a notice granting him a 60 day period within which to  obtain
      such a certificate.


   3. Mr Rahman adopted the grounds  of  appeal.  The  Judge  was  wrong  to
      conclude that the appellant should not receive a 60 day letter  simply
      because he ought to have known when his sponsor  lost  their  licence.
      Such knowledge does not spare the respondent from her duty  to  follow
      her own published policy and to act fairly.


   4. It was also submitted that the appellant "genuinely" does not have any
      idea when his sponsor lost their licence. He is therefore a bona  fide
      student. The Judge failed to  consider  the  material  fact  that  the
      sponsor lost its licence before  the  respondent  made  her  decision.
      Accordingly, the Judge failed to deal with the issue  of  fairness  in
      accordance with the decision in Patel (Revocation of sponsor  licence-
      fairness) India [2011] UKUT 00211 (IAC).


   5. The appellant had provided a  CAS  which  was  valid  on  the  day  he
      submitted his application. However, no heed was paid to  that  by  the
      First-tier Judge. The loss of  his  sponsor's  licence  was  an  event
      beyond his control and he is not "blameworthy" for the revocation.


   6. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Ahmad adopted the  Rule  24  response.
      The Judge directed himself appropriately. In order to benefit from the
      grant of  a  reasonable  opportunity  to  vary  his  application,  the
      appellant  had  to  demonstrate  that  he  was  both  unaware  of  the
      revocation and not a party to the reasons for it.


   7. She submitted that the appellant was aware that the sponsor's  licence
      had been revoked well before the decision  was  taken  in  this  case.
      Indeed the decision was not taken for another four  months  after  the
      licence was revoked.


      Assessment


   8. In Patel, supra, the Upper Tribunal held that where a sponsor  licence
      has been revoked by the secretary of state during an  application  for
      variation of leave and the applicant is both unaware of the revocation
      and not party to any reason why the  licence  has  been  revoked,  the
      secretary  of  state  should  afford  the   applicant   a   reasonable
      opportunity to vary the  application  by  identifying  a  new  sponsor
      before the application is determined. A 60 day  period  to  amend  the
      application would provide such a fair opportunity.


   9. It is contended on behalf of the  appellant  at  paragraph  6  of  the
      grounds of appeal, that the Judge  was  wrong  to  conclude  that  the
      appellant should not receive a 60 day letter simply because "he  ought
      to have known" when the sponsor lost the licence.


  10. However, that contention is misleading as Judge Monson had  regard  to
      the appellant's evidence at the hearing, namely, that  he  had  become
      aware that the college had lost its licence  before  he  received  the
      refusal decision. He heard about it from  a  friend  and  checked  the
      information on the website. News of the revocation had reached him one
      week after the event happened. He learned that the  college  had  lost
      its licence within three months of making the application in September
      2014. He had not contacted the Home Office to vary his application but
      had decided to wait for the decision on the current application.


  11. Judge Monson accepted at paragraph [15] of his decision that there was
      no documentary evidence to show that the Home Office formally notified
      the appellant of the revocation of the sponsor's licence and issue him
      with 60 day letter to enable him to approach an  alternative  sponsor.
      He found however, that if there was an omission in this regard, it did
      not operate to the appellant's detriment as he became aware  that  his
      sponsor had lost  his  licence  within  three  months  of  making  his
      application in September 2014. Accordingly he knew, or ought  to  have
      known, that his pending Tier 4 application was bound to fail.


  12. He went on to find that the appellant  needed  to  be  pro  active  in
      obtaining a 60 day letter from the Home Office to enable him to obtain
      a new CAS. It was not open to the appellant to sit on  his  hands  and
      wait for the inevitable refusal. It is in that context that the  Judge
      found that he was the author of his own misfortune and not a victim of
      common law unfairness.


  13. The Judge has properly directed himself in accordance with  authority.
      He has  properly  applied  the  facts  pertaining  in  this  case.  He
      concluded on the basis of the appellant's own  evidence  that  he  had
      been well aware that his sponsor had lost its licence in three  months
      of making his application. It  is  not  disputed  that  he  had  ample
      opportunity to obtain a new CAS. In the circumstances the finding that
      the appellant was not the  victim  of  common  law  unfairness  was  a
      decision to which the Judge was entitled to come.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      any error on a point of law. It shall accordingly stand.


      No anonymity direction is made.






      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer              Date  28 June 2017

