
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/23904/2014
                                                               IA/23907/2014
                                                               IA/23909/2014
                                                             & IA/23910/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 11th November 2015                |On 13th November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              MR LIAKET ALI (1)
                            MRS FATIMA JAHAN (2)
                       MISS TANSUBA MEHJABIN LAMIA (3)
                       MASTER MASRUR LIAQAT FAHIM (4)
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Islam, instructed by City Link Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



       Introduction

    1. The first claimant is a citizen of Bangladesh  born  on  26th  August
       1976. The other claimants are also citizens of Bangladesh. The second
       claimant is his wife born on 7th February 1977. The third and  fourth
       claimants are their children born  on  17th  October  2005  and  12th
       October 2010. The first claimant arrived in the UK on  7th  September
       2005 with leave to enter as a student. He had leave in this  capacity
       until 30th April 2010. He was then granted as  a  Tier  1  post-study
       work migrant until February 2012. He then was granted  further  leave
       as a Tier 4 (general) student  migrant  until  30th  Aril  2014.  The
       claimants then made an application to remain in the UK on  the  basis
       of their private life ties with this country.  This  application  was
       refused on 28th May 2014. The claimants' appeal against the  decision
       was  allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   MPW   Harris   in   a
       determination promulgated on the 22nd February 2015.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Martin  on
       29th July 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that the  First-tier
       judge had erred in law  in  considering  the  third  claimant's  case
       first, and then finding that due to her success  in  her  appeal  the
       other claimants were also entitled to succeed. It was  also  arguable
       that the First-tier Tribunal had conflated the best interests of  the
       child with the reasonableness of  her  returning  to  Bangladesh  and
       elevated  the  best  interests  of  the   child   above   a   primary
       consideration.

    3. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law

Submissions

    4. The Secretary of State argues in her grounds of appeal and also in an
       expanded grounds of appeal  document  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       erred firstly by failing to assess the third claimant's circumstances
       in the context of her family circumstances; secondly  by  not  giving
       the  welfare  of  the  child  an  integral  part  in  the  Article  8
       proportionality assessment; thirdly by not  giving  consideration  to
       the public purse costs of educating and maintaining the health of the
       two children; fourthly by failing to acknowledge  that  the  families
       are citizens of Bangladesh who have no expectation of  being  allowed
       to remain in the UK; and fifthly by not considering the situation the
       family would face in Bangladesh if they were expected to return.

    5. Mr Melvin added the following, in summary, in  oral  submissions.  He
       said that the fact that the third claimant had been  in  the  UK  for
       more than 7 years had been wrongly used as a trump card to allow  the
       appeal. Whilst he accepted that it was correct to look at the appeals
       under the Immigration Rules first he argued that the finding that  it
       was not reasonable to expect  the  third  appellant  to  go  back  to
       Bangladesh lacked a careful  consideration  of  all  relevant  facts.
       There was a lack of consideration of a real world view and  the  fact
       that the third  claimant's  parents  were  well  educated  and  could
       support her on her return. In reality education was the  only  reason
       for it being seen as in her best interests to remain  and  there  was
       insufficient consideration of the links she had made after the age of
       four years. As a result in the overall  consideration  of  the  other
       claimants the public interest had not been given  sufficient  weight,
       and the other appeals should not have been allowed even if the  third
       claimant was entitled to succeed. There was a lack  of  consideration
       of the public purse cost of  educating  the  children  and  providing
       healthcare to the family.

Conclusions

    6. There can be no error of law on the part of the  First-tier  Tribunal
       in assessing the appeal of the claimants under the Immigration  Rules
       to start with, and as it was conceded that all claimants  other  than
       the third claimant could not meet  the  Immigration  Rules  then  the
       assessment of the third claimant's appeal under the Immigration Rules
       was rightly the first issue. This approach is  clearly  correct  from
       many authorities: the assessment of an Article 8 ECHR  appeal  should
       commence with an assessment as to whether the Immigration  Rules  can
       be met and only proceed to a consideration  outside  of  those  Rules
       where the Rules are not a complete code,  see  MF  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
       [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.

    7. The First-tier Tribunal, at paragraph 12 of  the  decision,  directed
       itself correctly on the test to be met by the  third  claimant  under
       paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the  Immigration  Rules:  as  she   was
       indisputably a child who had been in the UK for more than seven years
       the question was whether it would be  reasonable  to  expect  her  to
       leave the UK.

    8. It is clear that the First-tier Tribunal appreciated that the removal
       of the third claimant would only take place in  the  sense  that  the
       third claimant would be removed with her family, and that this is the
       starting point at paragraph 13 of the decision, and further weight is
       given to the help  they  would  give  her  if  she  were  removed.  I
       understand this as meaning that the Tribunal were satisfied that  she
       would be provided for and assisted by  them  in  all  senses  on  her
       return to Bangladesh.

    9. The Tribunal then moves correctly to look at the  best  interests  of
       the child, again correctly directed itself to look  at  these  "as  a
       primary consideration" at paragraph  15  of  the  decision.  In  this
       context the Tribunal reminds itself that the correct  starting  point
       for a young child regarding these best interests will be to live with
       and be brought up by its parents, see paragraph 16 of  the  decision.
       At paragraph 17 the Tribunal is  clear  that  simply  disrupting  her
       education would not suffice to show it would  not  be  reasonable  to
       expect her to leave the UK as there is a functioning education system
       in Bangladesh, and an expectation of return to Bangladesh would  have
       been there for the family as they had come to the  UK  only  for  the
       purpose of study. It is therefore  clear  that  academic  success  or
       disruption of studies has not been seen here as a trump card.

   10. The decision that it would be in the  best  interests  of  the  third
       claimant to remain in the UK is based on her wider private life  ties
       with the UK, and in particular on her own evidence (written and  oral
       to the First-tier Tribunal) of these ties, see paragraphs 20  and  21
       of the decision.

   11. The Tribunal then weighs all the matters before it and concludes that
       it would not be reasonable to expect her to leave the UK at paragraph
       23.

   12. I do not find that the First-tier Tribunal has fallen into any of the
       errors in the assessment of the  third  claimant's  claim  to  remain
       under the Immigration Rules argued for by the Secretary of State.

   13. In circumstances where the third claimant had made out an entitlement
       to remain under the Immigration Rules it was entirely correct for the
       Tribunal to conclude that there were compelling reasons  to  consider
       whether the remaining claimants  could  succeed  on  Article  8  ECHR
       ground outside of the Immigration Rules:  this  decision  is  clearly
       consistent with MM (Lebanon) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985, and with  SS
       (Congo) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

   14. In considering the  proportionality  of  the  interference  with  the
       claimants' private and family lives by removal from the UK the First-
       tier Tribunal rightly has regard to the considerations at  s.117B  of
       the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.  A  very  fair
       consideration of all factors under s.117B takes place  at  paragraphs
       37 to 39 of the decision, which  included  a  careful  assessment  of
       their English language abilities and finances, noting currently  that
       the first and second claimants were not financially independent,  and
       giving  significant  weight  to  the  need  to   maintain   effective
       immigration control in the  public  interest.  The  fact  that  these
       claimants came to the UK for studies and had no expectation of  being
       allowed to remain in this country is also placed in the balance.

   15. It was  entirely  open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  ultimately
       conclude however  that  the  remaining  claimants  were  entitled  to
       succeed in their appeal given the fact that the public interest  does
       not require the first and second claimants' removal when they have  a
       genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying  child
       when it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK
       (namely with the third claimant), in accordance with  s.117B(6).  The
       First-tier Tribunal had already reached the conclusion that the third
       claimant was a qualifying child who could not reasonably be  expected
       to leave the UK in their  analysis  under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
       Immigration Rules, and in accordance with AM (s.117B)  Malawi  [2015]
       UKUT 260 conclusion (6) did not need to perform this process a second
       time having properly assessed the third claimant under the same  test
       under the Rules.





       Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
       the making of an error on a point of law.

    2. I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal.


Fiona Lindsley
Signed:     Date: 11th November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

