
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/23287/2012
     IA/23286/2012
     IA/23288/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 June 2013                               |On 10 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                  ms sandra theresa smith (first appellant)
                miss janesia amanda smith (second appellant)
                 Miss janell alicia smith (third appellant)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Finch, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is a rehearing of the appeals of the appellants  under  Article  8
    of the ECHR following the Upper Tribunal's decision on 1 May 2013  that
    the first Tribunal erred in  law  in  not  dealing  with  several  very
    important issues relevant to the assessment  of  proportionality.   The
    Upper Tribunal also found that  the  First-tier  Judge  restricted  his
    assessment of proportionality to the strength of the private  lives  of
    the appellants and whether they could reasonably be expected  to  enjoy
    their private lives in Guyana.  In doing so,  he  omitted  to  consider
    other factors including the effect of the closure of the Tier  2  route
    to settlement and the length of time the appellants have lawfully  been
    in the UK.

2.   The Upper Tribunal further found that although the  judge  referred  to
    the changes to the Immigration Rules (HC 194)  effective  from  9  July
    2012, he failed to consider whether or not any of the appellants  could
    satisfy the requirements of those Rules.  This error was not pursued at
    the hearing before me today.

3.   The appellants are citizens of Guyana.  They are a mother and  her  two
    daughters, born on 4 March 1960, 27 November 1993 and 8  November  1987
    respectively.  The second and third appellants were dependants  on  the
    first appellant's application for leave to remain as a Tier 2  Migrant.
    They continue to remain as dependants on the appellant's  appeal  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  Their appeals against the respondent's  refusal
    on 15 August 2012 to vary their leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    were dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard.

4.   The appellants  submitted  a  bundle  of  documents  including  various
    witness statements  and  documents.   Mr  Finch  submitted  a  skeleton
    argument for the  appellants  dated  13  June  2013  and  an  index  to
    supplementary bundle of the same date.

5.   The facts of this case are as set out in the respondent's  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter  and  the  statements  of  the  appellants.   The  first
    appellant arrived in the UK on 9 November 2005 as a work permit  holder
    valid until 27 October 2008.  The second and third  appellants  entered
    the UK with the first appellant as her dependants.

6.   The first appellant was recruited in Guyana  by  a  recruitment  agency
    because there was  a  shortage  of  nurses  in  the  UK.   It  was  her
    understanding that after four years she would  be  granted  settlement.
    At the time she was working in Guyana at the Linden Hospital Complex as
    a nurse/midwife.  She  had  been  in  that  job  since  1984  when  she
    qualified as a nurse and gave up that  position  to  come  to  the  UK.
    Before she left Guyana she sold all her household furniture in order to
    raise money for the move.

7.   The work permit entitled her to work at the Donness Nursing Home.   She
    left in 2005 because of the treatment she was receiving from the  staff
    there.  She suffered harassment and  bullying  from  other  members  of
    staff for racial reasons.  The home withheld a week's salary  from  her
    and eventually paid it to her in July 2009.

8.   In or about the end of January 2006 she went  to  the  Home  Office  in
    Croydon to let them know that she was no longer  with  Donness  Nursing
    Home.  The Immigration Officer told her that there was three years left
    on her visa, and she should be sure to obtain another employer  in  the
    next couple of months.   She  was  not  informed  that  her  leave  was
    curtailed.

9.   She worked as a bank nurse at Prime Care Group in  South  Croydon  from
    18 April 2006.  In September/October 2006 she went to Brendon Care also
    as a bank nurse until October 2008.  During that time they  applied  to
    the Home Office for a work permit.  The Home Office refused it on 1 May
    2009.  A further application was refused on 29 June 2009.

10.  When she left Brendon Care she was unable to work until  December  2009
    when she was able to get a work permit to be employed as  a  Registered
    General Nurse with Vigcare.  She worked for Vigcare until 31 March 2012
    when the contract ended and that was the date her leave to remain as  a
    Tier 2 (General) Migrant also ended.

11.  Before her contract ended she applied  for  employment  with  different
    homes and hospitals.  She had an interview  with  Lynton  Hall  Nursing
    Centre in March 2012 which was successful, and  they  said  they  would
    sponsor her for a  work  permit.   However  they  failed  to  make  the
    application and told her they could not sponsor her because  they  were
    obliged to advertise the job for 28 days, and the 28  days  would  have
    been  the  next  Tuesday,  3  April  2012.   Her  solicitors  made   an
    application prior to the expiry of her leave to remain and sent details
    of her employment with Bupa to the respondent.  In April she received a
    phone call from Bupa recruitment team apologising for what had happened
    and saying they were prepared to help her and offer her a position  for
    a home in Clapham Common.  She went for the interview which  was  again
    successful and they offered her a job again.  Bupa sent  her  an  offer
    letter on 30 April 2012 which she accepted.  She was however told  that
    she could not start work until she had the sponsorship from  UKBA,  but
    they called her in for induction and training in  June  2012.   On  the
    morning she started the induction she was told by Bupa that they  would
    not be able to sponsor her without the original passport  and  original
    bank statements which the appellant had already submitted to the  UKBA.
    On 9 October 2012 she went to her solicitors and they told her that her
    application had been refused on 15 August 2012.  She felt she had  been
    badly let down by Bupa and would never normally have continued  on  and
    become an overstayer.  Since then she has been trying  to  get  another
    sponsor.  In the supplementary bundle was a letter  from  the  Managing
    Director of the Abbey Total Care Group Limited dated 13 June 2013.  The
    letter stated that the first appellant had  applied  for  the  post  of
    registered nurse at their nursing home  in  Cheam,  Surrey.   They  had
    interviewed her and she had been successful and had  been  shortlisted.
    They have done the necessary checks for the purpose of  employment  and
    wish to sponsor the first appellant on Tier 2 (General) category as per
    UKBA guidelines and subject to the successful outcome of  the  Tribunal
    hearing of her appeal.  The appellant confirmed in oral  evidence  that
    this was the case.

12.  In cross-examination she said that she  was  successful  because  Abbey
    Total Care Group Limited needed  someone  with  her  experience  as  an
    Intermediate Care Nurse.   It  is  a  mixed  care  home  with  dementia
    patients, physically fragile patients and those who need rehabilitation
    with a view to returning home or into  the  community.   She  would  be
    working with all three types of patients.

13.  The second witness to give evidence was Janell Smith.   She  relied  on
    her statement dated 21 January 2013.  She said in  her  statement  that
    she lived in Guyana until she was 18.  Her father  Richard  Smith  left
    when her younger sister Janesia was about 3 years  old.   She  has  not
    seen him since.  She came to the UK on her  eighteenth  birthday.   She
    was at secondary school at the time they moved to the  UK.   Since  she
    came to the UK she has been working and studying.  She started studying
    when she was 19.   Her  first  job  was  as  a  junior  waitress  in  a
    restaurant, then a waitress and also training new staff.   She  was  in
    this job for a year and a half after which she did various jobs in  the
    hospitality industry.  She left her last job as  a  waitress/supervisor
    shortly before their visas expired.  She has not worked  since  because
    of their immigration problem.

14.  She went to South Thames College in 2006 and studied IT, BTEC  Level  1
    and gained an award in July 2007.  At the  same  time  she  did  a  Key
    Skills Certificate course in Maths and English and  completed  that  in
    August 2007.

15.  In 2010/11 she studied at Croydon College and did Level 2 of  the  BTEC
    course and gained an award in August 2011.  At the same time she did  a
    BTEC Level 1 in Work Skills and got an award in September 2011.

16.  With reference to paragraph 8 of the statement she said  that  she  was
    still studying for a BTEC Level 3 National Diploma  in  IT  at  Croydon
    College.  She is due to finish this course at  the  end  of  July  this
    year.  She had hoped to study for a degree  in  Information  Technology
    Management for Business but she has been unable to apply  through  UCAS
    because of her uncertain immigration status.

17.  She would prefer to stay in this country because going back  to  Guyana
    would be difficult for her.  She has lived in the UK  for  seven  years
    and sees the UK as her home now.  Having studied IT in the UK she would
    not be able to use it  in  Guyana.   The  way  of  life  in  Guyana  is
    completely different from the UK.  When  she  left  Guyana  she  was  a
    teenager.  Anything they have built here in the UK in  the  last  seven
    years will be gone and they would have to start again.

18.  The next witness to give evidence was Janesia  Smith.   She  relied  on
    her statement dated 18 January 2013.  She came to the  UK  in  November
    2005 and has lived with her mother and sister since they arrived here.

19.  She completed her sixth form education in  the  UK  in  the  summer  of
    2012.  She had been hoping to do psychosocial studies at University  of
    East London.  She had five offers of places  at  university  and  chose
    UEL.  She found out in September 2012 on enrolment day that  she  would
    not be able to start because of her uncertain immigration status.   She
    would be classed as an international student and would not be  able  to
    afford the university fees.

20.  She has not yet  worked  in  the  UK.   She  provided  evidence  of  an
    invitation to a recruitment day being organised  by  Elite  Advertising
    and Marketing Limited for a position as a  sales  executive.   She  was
    offered a job but was unable to take up  the  offer  because  of  their
    uncertain immigration status.  She has also  been  invited  by  another
    company to attend a recruitment day on 17 June at 2pm in Tolworth.

Findings

21.  I concur with Mr Walker's submission  that  the  appellants  have  been
    credible witnesses.

22.  The immigration history of  the  appellants  speaks  for  itself.   The
    first appellant Mrs Sandra Smith was recruited by an employment  agency
    based in the UK to come and work in the UK at a time when there  was  a
    shortage of nurses in the UK.  The first  appellant  had  at  the  time
    worked at a hospital in Guyana  for  21  years,  since  1984  when  she
    qualified as a nurse.  She was told that she would after four years  be
    granted indefinite leave in  that  category.   She  therefore  sold  up
    everything and moved with her two  children,  Janell  who  was  yet  to
    complete her secondary school education and a younger daughter who  was
    also in school to the UK in order to work as a  nurse  at  the  Donness
    Care Home.  Unfortunately  the  appellant  suffered  racial  abuse  and
    discrimination and harassment by staff at the care home.  This led  her
    to resign from her employment.

23.  The appellant did the right thing by going to the  UKBA  to  tell  them
    about her resignation.  She was told by one  Immigration  officer  that
    she had three years left on her work permit and should try  and  obtain
    employment in the next couple of months. In the interim another officer
    took a decision to curtail her leave to enter.  The appellant  was  not
    aware of the curtailment of her leave until 2009.

24.  The appellant for some time tried to  obtain  employment  and  get  the
    employers to apply for leave for her without success.  She  managed  to
    get leave  to  remain  from  about  December  2009  until  March  2012.
    Thereafter she was disappointed by Bupa.

25.  I agree with  Mr  Walker  that  the  first  appellant  has  suffered  a
    catalogue of misfortunes which has resulted in  the  position  she  now
    finds herself in.

26.  I find on the evidence before me that the appellant has  established  a
    private and family life with her two daughters  who  continue  to  live
    with her.  One daughter is studying and the other is attempting to find
    employment.  Janesia has found employment but cannot take up the  offer
    because of her lack of immigration status.   The  first  appellant  has
    also found employment because of her experience as an Intermediate Care
    Nurse but cannot also take up the offer of employment  because  of  her
    lack of immigration status.

27.  I find that the respondent's decision amounts to an  interference  with
    their right to family and private life.  Their interference will amount
    to grave consequences for the appellant and her daughters if  they  had
    to leave the UK.  The decision is however lawful for the maintenance of
    immigration control.

28.   I  now  consider  proportionality.   I  find  that  the  catalogue  of
    misfortunate has had a serious consequence on the  appellant's  ability
    to carry on her work as a  nurse  in  the  United  Kingdom.   She  sold
    everything and uprooted herself and her daughters from  Guyana  leaving
    behind a secure job at a  hospital  where  she  had  worked  since  she
    qualified as a nurse in 1984.  She has now found employment due to  her
    experience and background and she should be given  the  opportunity  to
    take up that employment.  Her two daughters are at a crucial  stage  in
    their lives.  Janell wants to attend university but was unable to apply
    to UCAS because of her immigration status.  Janesia  has  finished  her
    education and cannot accept an  offer  of  employment  because  of  her
    immigration  status.   It  would  not  be  reasonable  to  require  the
    appellant and her family to return to Guyana where they  have  no  home
    because they had to uproot themselves in order  to  come  here  because
    there was a shortage of nurses and with the promise of indefinite leave
    to remain after four years.  I find that  she  did  have  a  legitimate
    expectation that things would go well for her in the UK  but  that  was
    not to be because of the series of misfortunes that she  has  suffered.
    I  find  in   the   particular   circumstances   that   it   would   be
    disproportionate for the appellant and her two daughters to be  removed
    to Guyana.

29.  The facts before me are such that  the  appellants'  appeal  under  the
    Article 8 provisions under the new Immigration Rules cannot succeed.

30.  I have therefore determined their appeal under Article 8  of  the  ECHR
    applying the Razgar principles.  I allow the appeal  of  the  appellant
    and her daughters under Article 8 of the ECHR.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
