
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/23929/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |      Decision Promulgated      |
|On 4th August 2015                    |      On 14th August 2015       |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FO THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              Mrs SHEITU IDDRIS
                       (Anonymity direction not made)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:  Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office presenting officer.
For the Respondent: Mr S Unigwe (counsel) instructed by BWF, solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings  this  appeal,  but
in order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to  as  they  were  in
the First Tier Tribunal. This  is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State
against the decision of First Tier Tribunal Judge  Hawden-Beal,  promulgated
on 29 October 2014, allowing the appellant's appeal  under  the  Immigration
(EEA) Regulations 2006.

Background

3     The appellant was born on 17 March 1987 and is a citizen of Ghana.

4      On  30  December  2013,  the  respondent  refused   the   appellant's
application for a residence card as confirmation of a  right  to  reside  in
the UK as a family member of an EEA national. The appellant's husband  is  a
Belgian national. The appellant married her  husband  in  a  Ghanaian  proxy
marriage ceremony. The respondent refused to accept that the  appellant  was
a party to a  valid  marriage  or  that  the  appellant  was  in  a  durable
relationship with an EEA national.

The Judge's Decision

5     The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal.  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal ("the judge")  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal,
finding that the  appellant's  marriage  was  valid  in  both  Ghanaian  and
Belgian law.

6     The respondent lodged grounds of appeal and, on 25 March  2015,  First
Tier Tribunal Judge Ievins gave permission to appeal,  stating  that  it  is
arguable that  the  documentary  evidence  about  validity  of  marriage  in
Belgium may have been misinterpreted.

The Hearing

7     Mr Jarvis for the respondent submitted that the judge made a  material
error in law in the assessment of the evidence relating to  the  recognition
of a Ghanaian proxy marriage in Belgium. He relied on the  cases  of  Kareem
(Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 24(IAC) and  TA  and  Others  (Kareem
explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316 (IAC), and argued  that  the  documentary
evidence  indicated  that  the  Ghanaian  proxy  marriage  required  to   be
validated and investigated by Belgian authorities before it was  recognised,
and that has not happened in this case. He argued that there is no  evidence
to show  that  the  Belgian  authorities  have  recognised  the  appellant's
marriage. He relied on headnote (g) in the  case  of  Kareem  and  submitted
that it is not enough to refer, in broad terms, to  legislative  provisions.
What is  required  is  specific  evidence  to  show  that  the  marriage  is
recognised in the relevant EEA country. There are no  findings  in  relation
to  a  durable  relationship  in  terms  of  Regulation  8(5)  of  the  2006
Regulations. The Secretary of State does not accept that there is a  durable
relationship.

8     In reply, Mr Unigwe argued that the judge did not  make  an  error  in
law. He relied on the headnote in TA and argued that the judge had  examined
the evidence of marriage in accordance with the law in  the  EEA  state  and
had taken account of the extract of Belgium code  of  private  international
law reproduced at  Annex  L  of  the  appellant's  bundle.  He  referred  to
specific articles of  that  code  and  argued  that  the  evidence  produced
demonstrated that the appellant's Ghanaian proxy marriage is  recognised  in
Belgian law, so that the conclusion arrived at by the judge is supported  by
the evidence that was before the judge.

Analysis

9     In Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 24(IAC) it  was  held
that (i)  A person who is the spouse of an EEA national who is  a  qualified
person in the  United  Kingdom  can  derive  rights  of  free  movement  and
residence if proof of  the  marital  relationship  is  provided;  (ii)   The
production of a marriage certificate issued by a competent  authority  (that
is, issued according to the registration  laws  of  the  country  where  the
marriage took place) will usually be  sufficient.  If  not  in  English  (or
Welsh in relation to proceedings in Wales), a certified translation  of  the
marriage certificate will be required; (iii)  A document which calls  itself
a marriage certificate will not raise  a  presumption  of  the  marriage  it
purports to record unless it has been issued  by  an  authority  with  legal
power to create or confirm the facts it attests:  (iv)     In  appeals where
there is no such marriage  certificate  or  where  there  is  doubt  that  a
marriage certificate has been issued by  a  competent  authority,  then  the
marital relationship may be proved by other evidence. This will require  the
Tribunal to determine whether a marriage was  contracted;  (v)  In  such  an
appeal, the starting  point  will  be  to  decide  whether  a  marriage  was
contracted between the appellant and the qualified person according  to  the
national law of the EEA country of the qualified person's nationality;  (vi)
In all  such  situations,  when  resolving  issues  that  arise  because  of
conflicts of law, proper respect must be given  to  the  qualified  person's
rights as provided by the European Treaties, including the  right  to  marry
and the rights of free movement and residence; (vii) It  should  be  assumed
that, without independent and reliable evidence  about  the  recognition  of
the marriage under the laws of the EEA country and/or the country where  the
marriage took place, the Tribunal is  likely  to  be  unable  to  find  that
sufficient evidence has been provided to  discharge  the  burden  of  proof.
Mere production of legal materials from the EEA  country  or  country  where
the marriage took place will be  insufficient  evidence  because  they  will
rarely show how such law is understood or applied in those  countries.  Mere
assertions as to the effect of such laws will, for  similar  reasons,  carry
no weight; (viii) These remarks apply solely to the question  of  whether  a
person is a spouse for the purposes of EU law. It does not relate  to  other
relationships that might be regarded as similar to marriage, such  as  civil
partnerships or durable relationships

10    In TA and Others (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316  (IAC)  it
was held that following the decision in Kareem (proxy marriages  -  EU  law)
[2014]  UKUT  24,  the  determination  of  whether  there   is   a   marital
relationship for the purposes of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006
must always be examined in accordance with the  laws  of  the  Member  State
from which the Union citizen obtains nationality.

11    The focus in this case is entirely on whether or not  the  appellant's
Ghanaian proxy marriage is recognised in Belgian law.  The  judge  correctly
directs himself at [17] of the decision, and at [21] of  the  decision,  the
judge finds that "...the customary proxy marriage  celebrated  in  Ghana  is
valid under Ghanaian law". The challenge by the respondent focuses  on  [22]
and [23] of the decision. The focus is on the  manner  in  which  the  judge
treated a letter  from  the  Belgian  federal  government  service  of  Home
Affairs, reproduced at L1 to L3 of the appellant's bundle.

12    At [22],  the  judge  considers  the  Belgian  code  of  international
private law reproduced at Annex L of the appellant's  bundle.  It  is  there
that the judge falls into an error of law which I find to  be  material.  In
this case, the appellant did not produce evidence that  the  Ghanaian  proxy
marriage was recognised in Belgian law. The appellant produced  extracts  of
Belgian law and it was the judge who then embarked on his  own  exercise  of
interpretation of Belgian law. I turn to paragraph 68(g) of Kareem. This  is
a case where there has been "mere production of  legal  materials  from  the
EEA country..." and, as established  in  Kareem,  that  is  "...insufficient
evidence..."

Conclusion

13    I therefore find that the judge's decision promulgated on  29  October
2014 contains a material error of law and must be set aside.

14    Parties are agreed that because the judge found that Regulation  7  of
the 2006 Regulations was met, no fact finding exercise was  carried  out  in
relation to Regulation  8(5)  of  the  2006  Regulations.  The  respondent's
decision was made on 30 December 2013. The appellant contracted a  customary
proxy marriage in Ghana on 7 June 2013.

Remittal to First- tier Tribunal

15. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:



    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

16. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
none of the findings of fact are to stand and the matter will be a  complete
re hearing.

17. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
heard  before  any  First-tier  Immigration  judge  other  than  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal.

Decision

18. The making of the decision of the First-tier tribunal is  tainted  by  a
material error of law

19. I set aside the decision.

20. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard of new.



Signed                                                              Date
7th August 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

