
                                                               [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23636/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 June 2015                               |On 24 June 2015               |
|Prepared 16 June 2015                         |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR ACHU PHILIP ADAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
                  Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Frederico Singarajah, Counsel instructed
                  by Paul John & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of Nigeria, date of birth 15  June  1984,  had
    applied for a residence permit on 3 April 2014 which was  refused  with
    reference to Regulation 8(1) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006
    (the 2006 Regulations)  on  the  basis  that  he  had  not  as  a  fact
    established that he was a dependant under  Regulation  8.   His  appeal
    against the decision of 14 May 2014  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cohen (the judge) who,  on  16  February  2015,  promulgated  his
    decision whereby he allowed the appeal outright with reference  to  the
    requirements of Regulation 8 of the 2006 Regulations.

3.   It does not appear from the decision of the  judge  that  it  had  been
    agreed by the parties that he should determine the matter outright.  It
    is also significant that the Presenting Officer, Mr  D  Harvey,  is  an
    experienced and senior Presenting Officer.  Accordingly it seems to  me
    that if that had been such a concession either the judge exercising his
    usual care would have recorded the same or Mr Harvey would  have  noted
    it within his memorandum of the Proceedings or, indeed, it  would  have
    been noted by Mr Singer, Counsel for the Claimant.

4.   There was no challenge to the judge's clear findings that the  Claimant
    is properly a qualified person under the Regulations.  The error, it is
    said by the Secretary of State, was that the judge had then gone on  to
    determine the appeal outright whereas the  correct  course  would  have
    been to have allowed the appeal to the extent that it was  remains  for
    the Secretary of State to decide in accordance with the law.   Reliance
    was essentially placed upon  the  case  of  Ihemedu  (OFMs  -  meaning)
    Nigeria [2002] UKUT 340 (IAC).  Mr Singarajah has helpfully  sought  to
    argue by reference to Regulation  8  and  Regulation  17  of  the  2006
    Regulations, that in effect the Secretary of State had by the  decision
    of 14 May 2014 only raised the issue of the nature  of  the  Claimant's
    qualification under the Regulations. He said it was to be  inferred  or
    implicit that the Secretary of State must have looked at all the  other
    circumstances and concluded  that  it  was  appropriate  to  issue  the
    residence card or that in failing to do so at the outset, the Secretary
    of State had erred in law in failing to exercise the discretion and, as
    such, that was a justiciable decision  which  meant  that  the  judge's
    decision should stand.

5.   Mr Singarajah took me to the case of MO [2008]  UKAIT  61  in  which  a
    Deputy President of the Tribunal, with reference  to  rather  different
    circumstances as such, concluded that in the circumstances to be  taken
    into account the Secretary of State had not yet undertaken the task the
    Regulations  required  and  the  decision  refusing  that  Claimant   a
    residence card was one which was not in accordance with the law and  in
    that case they substituted a determination allowing the appeal with the
    effect that the Claimant's application remains outstanding  before  the
    Secretary of State awaiting a lawful decision.   I  find  MO  does  not
    assist Mr Singarajah's  case  but  he  was  right  to  draw  it  to  my
    attention.  Similarly the analogous reference that he makes to the case
    of Adjei [2015] UKUT 261 (IAC) again does not assist.   With  reference
    to YB (EEA reg17(4)- proper  approach)  [2008]  UKAIT  00062  it  again
    appears to  me  to  be  an  authority  which  stands  for  the  general
    proposition that if a person meets the requirements of Article  8,  for
    example,  so  as  to  engage  with  Regulation  17(4)(a)  of  the  2006
    Regulations, there  still  remains  the  matter  to  be  determined  in
    accordance with the law as to whether  there  are  circumstances  which
    militate against the grant of a residence card in respect of  which  it
    should otherwise be given. The judge's findings of fact stand.

6.   In the circumstances I find the correct approach  was  that  the  judge
    should have allowed the appeal to the extent that he found the Claimant
    had fully met the qualification requirements  under  Regulation  8  and
    returned it to the Secretary of State to deal with  the  further  issue
    under Regulation 17(4)(b) of the Regulations.  To this extent therefore
    Ihemedu is helpful where there is a discretion but which has  not  been
    exercised. I am satisfied that the judge made a material error of  law.
    The Original Tribunal decision cannot stand.

7.   I note the remark made by Judge De  Haney  in  granting  permission  to
    appeal and it may be, but I do not presume to  indicate,  there  really
    were not any circumstances to warrant pursuing this appeal in practical
    terms even though, strictly in law, it  is  evidently  justified.   The
    exercise of that discretion with regard to the  relevant  circumstances
    is at this stage a matter for the Secretary of State and if that is not
    properly exercised then there will be a further right of appeal.

Anonymity Order

No anonymity direction is made. No order was sought nor is one  appropriate.


NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is allowed to the extent that  the  matter  is  returned  to  the
Secretary of State to determine in accordance with the law.


Signed                                  Date 22 June2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

