
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23437/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th January 2016                 |On 11th February 2016                |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             GODFREY MPHO MOABI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of  South  Africa,  born  on  15th  November
    1978.  His appeal against the  Respondent's  refusal  of  a  derivative
    residence card was allowed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Majid  in  a
    decision promulgated on 31st July 2014.

2.   The Respondent appealed on the ground that the  judge  failed  to  make
    reference to Regulation  15A  of  the  2006  Regulations  and  made  no
    findings on the issue of derivate rights.  Secondly, the  judge  failed
    to consider  the  Immigration  Rules  and  identify  circumstances  not
    covered by the Rules that would  warrant  consideration.  Thirdly,  the
    judge's approach to Article 8  was  erroneous.  There  was  no  removal
    decision and therefore  dismissing  the  appeal  would  not  create  an
    interference with the Appellant's Article 8 rights.

3.   Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cruthers  on  24th
    November 2015 on the following grounds.

         "Ground 1: This matter was specifically refused  on  the  issue  of
         derivative  rights  under  Regulation  15A  and  18A  of  the  2006
         Regulations.  However the judge at no point  refers  to  the  issue
         under refusal, makes no reference to the EEA Regulations and  makes
         no findings in this regard.

         Ground 2: The judge has arguably failed to give  any  consideration
         al all to those Immigration Rules that relate to Article 8  of  the
         European Convention on Human Rights  and  has  arguably  failed  to
         mention any basis for having considered Article 8 outside the Rules
         in this case e.g. SS (Congo) & Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

         Ground 3:  It is arguable that the judge should not have considered
         Article 8 issues at all. See Amirtteymour and Others (EEA  appeals:
         human rights) [2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC) and arguable that the Article
         8 analysis which the judge does offer is tainted by  amongst  other
         things  a  lack  of  sufficient  reference  to  Part  5A   of   the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Amongst other things
         the judge seems  to  have  thought  that  an  absence  of  criminal
         convictions was enough  to  obviate  any  public  interest  in  the
         removal of the Appellant. e.g. paragraph 10(b),  Nasim  and  Others
         (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC)."

4.   The Appellant did not attend the hearing and there was  a  letter  from
    his instructing  solicitors  stating  that  he  was  unable  to  afford
    representation and requesting that a decision be made on the papers.

5.   Mr Staunton for the Respondent relied on  the  grounds  of  appeal  and
    submitted that the judge's decision was not open to him.

Discussion and Conclusions

6.   I find that the judge erred in law in failing to make any reference  to
    Regulation  15A  of  the  EEA  Regulations.  The  Appellant   made   an
    application  for  a  derivative  residence  card.   He  was  refused  a
    derivative residence card for the reasons  given  in  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter dated 14th May 2014.  The judge failed to refer  to  the
    EEA Regulations or to the issues raised in the refusal letter.

7.   The  issue  before  the  judge  was  limited  to  the  EEA  Regulations
    following the case of Amirtteymour which states "Where no notice  under
    Section 120 of the 2002 Act has been served and where no  EEA  decision
    to remove has been made  an  Appellant  cannot  bring  a  human  rights
    challenge to removal in an appeal under the EEA Regulations".

8.   No Section 120 notice had been served in this case  and  therefore  the
    judge erred in law in dealing only with Article 8 issues and  the  best
    interests of the children. I therefore find that the judge erred in law
    and set aside his decision and remake it as follows.

9.   On the evidence before me the Appellant lived with the  mother  of  his
    British citizen children.  The Appellant therefore was unable  to  show
    that he was the primary carer of a British citizen or that the relevant
    British citizen would be unable to reside in the UK or in  another  EEA
    state if he was required to leave the UK.

10.  The Appellant did not  have  primary  responsibility  for  his  British
    citizen children but shared that  responsibility  with  the  children's
    mother. She had indefinite leave to remain in the UK and was  therefore
    an exempt person for the purposes of the EEA Regulations 2006.

11.  On the facts asserted the children's mother was the primary  carer  not
    the Appellant, or alternatively the responsibility was shared.  In  any
    event, the Appellant could not satisfy the EEA Regulations because  the
    children would not be required to  leave  the  UK  or  the  EU  if  the
    Appellant was required to do so.

12.  Accordingly,  the  appeal  under  the  EEA  Regulations  is  dismissed.
    Following Amirtteymour there was no appeal under Article 8  and  it  is
    open to the Appellant to make a relevant application to the Home Office
    on the basis of his rights in the UK as a parent of a  British  citizen
    child as referred to in the refusal letter of 14th May 2014.

13.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 31st  July  2015
    is set aside and remade as follows.  The Appellant's appeal  under  the
    EEA Regulations is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The Respondent's appeal is  allowed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal is set aside and remade.

The Appellant's appeal under the EEA Regulations is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


         J Frances
Signed   Date 9th February 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
