
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/23431/2015
                                                               IA/23435/2015
                                                               IA/23438/2015
                                                               IA/24143/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 24 May 2017                        |On 5 June 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                            ORO (first Appellant)
                            EO (SECOND Appellant)
                            fO (THIRD Appellant)
                            DO (FOURTH Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr L Rooney, Citizens Advice Bureau, Waltham Forest
For the Respondent:    Ms Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appeal by a family who comprise a mother  and  three  minor
    children.  The appeal came before me on 20 March 2017 for an  error  of
    law decision and reasons and in a decision promulgated on 30 March 2017
    I found there was a material error of law in the judge's  decision  and
    adjourned the appeal for a resumed hearing before me.  A copy  of  that
    decision is appended.

 2. The issues before me were:-

      a) whether or not the Appellants qualified for leave to  remain  under
         the Immigration Rules, or if not;

      b) whether their removal to Nigeria  would  be  proportionate  and  in
         accordance with Article 8 of ECHR.

 3. Mr Rooney, who again appeared on behalf of the Appellants, provided  me
    with a skeleton argument dated 23 May 2017.  Ms Ahmed on behalf of  the
    Respondent handed up a copy of the reported decision in SF  and  others
    (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017]  UKUT  120  (IAC).   Ms  Ahmed
    indicated that her submission would be very short and I therefore heard
    her first.  She drew my attention to [8] of the decision in SF (op cit)
    where the reference had been made in [7] to the  Home  Office  guidance
    set out in the Immigration Directorate Instruction on Family  Migration
    Appendix FM Section 1.0 "Family Life as a Partner or Parent and Private
    Life, 10 year Routes" August 2015.  This provides as follows at 11.2.3:

      "Would it be unreasonable to expect a British Citizen Child  to  leave
the UK?":-

         "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age  of
         that child. This reflects the European Court of Justice Judgment in
         Zambrano.

         ...

         Where a decision to refuse the application would require  a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer.

         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to  the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in  the  UK  with
         the child, provided  that  there  is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship."

 4. At [9] of the decision in SF:

         "It appears to us inevitable that  if  the  guidance  to  which  Mr
         Wilding has drawn our attention had been  applied  to  the  present
         family, at any time after it was published, and on the  basis  that
         the youngest child is a British citizen, the conclusion would  have
         been that the Appellants should have been granted a period of leave
         in order to enable the British  citizen  child  to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom with them."

 5. The Upper Tribunal then proceeded to allow the appeal on the  basis  it
    would be unreasonable to expect the youngest child to leave the  United
    Kingdom.

 6. I also heard submissions from Mr Rooney on behalf  of  the  Appellants,
    who made the following points:

      a) the second oldest child, E (the Third Appellant) who  was  born  in
         the United Kingdom on 26 January 2007, was registered as a  British
         citizen on 24 April 2017 and he produced the  original  certificate
         of British nationality and  a  copy  of  that  Appellant's  British
         passport.  In these circumstances her appeal falls away given  that
         she cannot be required to leave the United Kingdom;

      b) Mr Rooney also sought to rely on the fact that not only that  child
         but her older brother (the Second Appellant) had spent ten  of  his
         thirteen years in the United Kingdom.  Having been born in  Nigeria
         he came to the United Kingdom at the age of 3.   He  argued  and  I
         accept that in  fact  his  appeal  falls  for  consideration  under
         276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules, given that he had resided  continuously
         in the United Kingdom  for  more  than  7  years  at  the  date  of
         application [25.7.14]. In light of the fact that his  sister  is  a
         British citizen and given that this Appellant has  resided  in  the
         United Kingdom continuously for almost 11 years since the age of 3,
         I find that it is not reasonable to expect him to leave the  United
         Kingdom and his appeal is allowed on this basis;

      c) in respect  of  the  First  Appellant,  the  mother  of  the  three
         children, it is the case that she is now a single parent, given the
         breakdown of her relationship with her former  husband  some  years
         ago.  It was argued by Mr Rooney that her application qualifies  in
         respect of Appendix FM with regard to R-LTRPT.1.1.  which  provides
         as follows:-

             "R-LTRPT.1.1. The  requirements  to  be  met  for  limited  or
                           indefinite leave to remain as a parent or partner
                           are-

                           (a)  the applicant and the child must be  in  the
                               UK;

                           (b)   the  applicant  must  have  made  a   valid
                               application for limited or indefinite  leave
                               to remain as a parent or partner; and either



                           (c)  (i) the applicant must not fall for  refusal
                               under Section S-LTR:  Suitability  leave  to
                               remain; and

                               (ii)  the  applicant  meets   all   of   the
                                   requirements    of    Section    ELTRPT:
                                   Eligibility for leave  to  remain  as  a
                                   parent, or

     (d)  (i)   the  applicant  must  not  fall  for  refusal  under  S-LTR:
     Suitability leave to remain; and

                               (ii) the applicant meets the requirements of
                                   paragraphs   E-LTRPT.2.2-2.4.   and   E-
                                   LTRPT.3.1.; and

                               (iii)    paragraph EX.1. applies."

 7. In the underlying decision of the Respondent refusing the  applications
    for leave by all the Appellants dated 9 June 2015, no issue  was  taken
    with the ability of the First  Appellant  to  meet  these  requirements
    except for the fact that the Respondent asserted that the children  had
    not resided in  the  United  Kingdom  for  seven  years  and  therefore
    paragraph EX.1. did not apply.  That is, of course, incorrect.

 8. I find that the first Appellant meets the requirements of R-LTRPT  1.1.
    and on the evidence before me, that EX.1.(a)  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Rules does apply on the particular facts, given firstly that the  First
    Appellant's second child, her daughter E, is now a British citizen, and
    secondly, her oldest son has lived in the United  Kingdom  continuously
    for more than ten years, and I find in light of those facts and bearing
    in mind the Home Office guidance referred to above and the decision  in
    SF (op cit) that it would clearly not be  reasonable  to  expect  those
    children to leave the United Kingdom.

 9. I allow the appeal of the First Appellant on this basis.

10. There remains one further child, the Fourth Appellant, who was born  in
    the United Kingdom on 11 December 2012.  The appeals of his mother  and
    brother having succeeded, and in light of the fact that his sister  has
    been given British nationality, it is the case that this  child  should
    be granted leave in line with his mother.

11. Alternatively, I find that  it  would  clearly  be  a  disproportionate
    interference with this family's right to private life  for  this  child
    not to be granted leave in line with his mother.  I have had regard  to
    Section 117B(6) of the NIAA 2002 and the public  interest  and  on  the
    particular facts of this case the public interest is clearly in  favour
    of the family remaining together.

12. Whilst the length of leave to be granted is, of course,  a  matter  for
    the Secretary of State for the Home Department, given  that  the  first
    Appellant is a single parent and has childcare responsibilities, it may
    not be appropriate to impose a condition of no recourse to public funds
    until such time that the first Appellant is in  a  position  to  obtain
    gainful employment to support her family.





Notice of Decision

13. For these reasons I allow the appeals of the First, Second  and  Fourth
    Appellants.  The appeal of the Third Appellant falls  away  given  that
    she has now been naturalised as a British citizen.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 1 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeals and because a fee has been paid, I make a  fee
award of any fee which has been paid.





Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 1 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

