
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/23623/2015
                                                               IA/23626/2015
                                                               IA/23627/2015
                                                               IA/23624/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th October 2016                 |On 14th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                Mohammad [H]
                               Nurunnahar [B]
                                   [M A H]
                                    [A H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A J Rahman of JKR Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The first-named appellant was  born  on  8th  August,  1973  and  is  a
    citizen of Bangladesh.  The second-named appellant is his wife and  the
    third  and  fourth-named  appellants   are   his   son   and   daughter
    respectively.  They are all citizens of Bangladesh.

2.   The first-named appellant made application for leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom which was  refused  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  a
    decision of 11th June, 2015.  The first-named appellant had entered the
    United Kingdom on 28th September, 2005 on  a  student  visa  which  was
    subsequently renewed until 30th September,  2009.   On  29th  September
    2009, he applied for and was granted  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student until 30th April, 2011 and  on  1st  April  2011,  he
    applied for leave under Tier 1 and was granted leave  until  1st  July,
    2013.  His application for leave under Tier 4 as a General Student  was
    granted on 30th June, 2013 until 30th April, 2015.  The basis on  which
    he made his most recent application was that he met the requirements of
    Appendix FM.

3.    The  respondent  concluded  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet   the
    requirements of the immigration rules, because he had not completed ten
    years' residence in the United Kingdom.  The third appellant,  who  was
    born on 11th December, 2005, entered the United Kingdom with his mother
    on 27th November, 2007.  It was suggested  that,  as  at  the  date  of
    hearing before the judge, he had resided in the UK for more than  seven
    years and it was further suggested that at the date of the decision the
    first-named appellant had been in the United Kingdom for more then  ten
    years.

4.   The appellants appealed the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  and
    their appeal came for hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers
    on 7th January, 2016.  He found that the first-named appellant did  not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  He considered the best
    interests of the children and concluded that their best interests  were
    to remain with their parents.  He then  explained  why  the  appellants
    could not succeed on Article 8  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  at
    paragraphs 46 to 67 of his determination the judge explained why he did
    not believe that it would be unreasonable  to  expect  the  third-named
    appellant to leave the United Kingdom.

5.   There were several challenges to  the  judge's  decision.   During  the
    course of the hearing before me, it was pointed out that in considering
    the appellants' Article 8 appeal outside the Immigration Rules, it  had
    been urged upon the judge to bear in mind and to take into  account  in
    his  assessment  of  proportionality  the  fact  that  the  first-named
    appellant had now completed ten years' residence in the United Kingdom.

6.   In the judge's Record of Proceedings he records  the  submissions  made
    to him, including the fact that the first-named appellant had  acquired
    ten years' long residence in the United Kingdom  which  was  a  weighty
    matter  to  be  considered  in  considering  Article  8   outside   the
    Immigration Rules.  However, he failed to engage with that argument.

7.   Mr  Harrison  accepted  that  the  first-named  appellant  appeared  to
    qualify under the Immigration Rules, as at  the  date  of  the  judge's
    decision, and it was therefore a material error of law on the  part  of
    the First Tier Tribunal Judge not to  have  considered  that  fact  and
    taken it into account when undertaking the proportionality  assessment.



8.   Mr Harrison very fairly and properly  indicated  that  were  it  to  be
    argued on behalf of the appellants  that  the  first-named  appellant's
    appeal should have been allowed under Article 8 outside the Immigration
    Rules as at the date of  the  hearing  by  the  judge,  he  would  have
    difficulty  in  opposing  that  suggestion.   In  the  circumstances  I
    indicated to him that in view of what he had said, that I was proposing
    to prepare a brief determination, recording that fact and allowing  the
    appeal.  He agreed with my suggestion.

9.   The decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Cruthers  does  contain  an
    error  of  law  which  was  material  to  his  consideration  of  these
    appellants'  appeals.   He  should  have  taken   into   account   when
    considering the question of proportionality, the fact that  the  first-
    named appellant had,  by  the  time  of  the  hearing  of  the  appeal,
    completed ten years' lawful  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.   His
    failure to do that was an error of law. I set aside  his  decision  and
    remake it.   The first-named appellant had completed ten years'  lawful
    residence by the time of the hearing before Judge Cruthers  in  January
    this year.  As accepted on behalf of the respondent,  the  first  named
    appellant would have qualified for leave under the  immigration  rules.
    In considering his Article 8 appeal, bearing  in  mind  the  Presenting
    Officer's comments, I find that it would be disproportionate to  remove
    him.   The Appellants'
     appeals are allowed.

Summary

As accepted on behalf of the Respondent, the First Tier judge erred in  law.
 I set aside his decision. I find that since, at the  date  of  the  hearing
the first named appellant would have qualified under the immigration  rules,
it would be  disproportionate  to  remove  him.   I  allow  the  appellants'
appeals.

No anonymity direction is made.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


