
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers IA/23187/2014
                                                               IA/23193/2014
                                                               IA/23198/2014
                                                             & IA/23200/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at South Shields               |Decision and Reasons promulgated     |
|On 17 December 2015                  |On 15 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey
                      and Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer


                                   Between

                           ABOLAGI SHAKIRU ISMAIL
                          THEODORA ENOOBONG ISMAIL
                  MERCY AYOMIKUN TEMITOPE INEMABASI ISMAIL
                   SAMUEL TOLUWANI ANIEKAN OPEOLUWA ISMAIL
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellants:   Mr J Walsh, of Counsel, acting pro bono.
Respondent:   Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This Tribunal,  by  its  decision  promulgated  on  11  December  2104,
    concluded that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the  "FtT"),
    dated 04 September 2014, was contaminated by material error of law  and
    set same aside accordingly.  The underlying decision  is  that  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of  State"),
    dated 08 May 2014, whereby the applications of the four Appellants  for
    leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  under  Article  8  ECHR  were
    refused.

The Secretary of State's Decision

 2. It is convenient to adopt [2] - [9] of the  earlier  decision  of  this
    Tribunal.  These conjoined appeals originate in a decision dated 08 May
    2014 made on behalf of the Secretary of  State.   The  context  of  the
    decision is apparent from the opening passage:

         "... You have asked that your case be considered under the  [ECHR].
         You claim it will  breach  your  human  rights  to  return  you  to
         Nigeria, a  country  which  is  listed  in  section  94(4)  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002."

    The case made by the Appellants was summarised by the decision maker in
    the following terms:

         "You have stated that removal would  be  a  breach  of  your  human
         rights because you have established private life during  your  time
         in the United Kingdom, particularly your daughter ...  who  is  now
         over seven years of age and has spent the whole of her life in  the
         United Kingdom, so you do not feel it would be reasonable to expect
         her to leave the United Kingdom ...

         [Further] you claim that  you  and  your  family  have  a  fear  of
         returning to Nigeria due to the fact that you no  longer  have  any
         links to Nigeria, where there is a very high level of  poverty  and
         unemployment and poor standards of education and health care  which
         would inflict physical and mental stress on the  children  and  the
         family as a whole."

    The decision maker concluded,  firstly,  that  the  Appellants'  claims
    could not succeed  under  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules.   In particular, the assessment was  made  that  the
    parents had submitted no evidence  that  they  have  lost  all  family,
    social and cultural ties with Nigeria.  The parents' evidence that both
    had attempted to find work there during the preceding three  years  was
    noted.

 3. It was acknowledged that the  older  of  the  two  children  had  lived
    continuously in the United Kingdom for  at  least  seven  years.   This
    triggered consideration of whether it would be  "reasonable  to  expect
    [her] to leave the United Kingdom.   The  decision  maker  reasoned  as
    follows:

         "It is usually considered in the best interests  of  the  child  to
         remain in the family unit with their  parents  and  siblings.   The
         children would not be separated from their parents, as  the  family
         would be expected to return to Nigeria as a whole unit.   Both  you
         and your wife grew up in Nigeria and would be able to  support  the
         children in the family and outside in the wider community in  order
         to help them to  adapt  to  living  in  Nigeria  and  learning  the
         language if required ... You and your wife have  family  living  in
         Nigeria and they could  also  help  and  support  the  children  to
         integrate into the way of life ...

         [The older child] ... is young enough to  adapt  to  the  education
         system in Nigeria ... Primary education in Nigeria  begins  at  six
         years of age and lasts  for  six  years  ...  Education  to  junior
         secondary level (from 6 to 15 years of age) is free and  compulsory
         ...

         Neither child has any health problems.  Any friendships  formed  in
         the United Kingdom can be continued from abroad by  modern  methods
         of communication ...

         You have not submitted any evidence to show that [the older  child]
         has formed exceptional bonds with  anyone  in  the  United  Kingdom
         which would make it unreasonable to expect her to live  in  Nigeria
         ... [or] ...  that  there  is  exceptional  physical  or  emotional
         dependency on other members of the family  in  the  United  Kingdom
         outside your immediate family unit."

    It is then stated that due consideration has been given  to  the  needs
    and welfare of the children as required by Section 55 of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009  (the  "2009  Act").   This  is
    followed by a rehearsal of the factors put forward in  support  of  the
    contention that it would be in the childrens' best interests to  remain
    in the United Kingdom.  Stripped to its essentials, the case  made  was
    that this country provides a much better place for the education,  care
    and development of the children than Nigeria. This case  was  rejected,
    essentially on  the  same  grounds  as  the  case  advanced  under  the
    Immigration Rules

 4. Finally, the decision maker purported to consider the Appellants' cases
    under the rubric of "exceptional  circumstances".   The  passage  which
    follows appears to be directed to the first Appellant,  the  father  of
    the family:

         "You have attempted to obtain leave to remain using false documents
         and your wife obtained entry  clearance  by  deception.   You  have
         remained in the United Kingdom beyond the period of  granted  leave
         to remain and your wife has remained beyond the period  of  granted
         leave  to  enter.   You  failed  to  bring  your   children   under
         immigration control following  their  births,  when  you  submitted
         applications for leave after they were born in the United Kingdom."



    The decision continues:

         "You have not submitted any  evidence  that  there  are  compelling
         compassionate circumstances which would lead to a grant of leave to
         remain because it would not be reasonable to expect the children to
         leave the  United  Kingdom.   Education  and  health  services  are
         available in Nigeria, albeit not necessarily to the  same  standard
         as in the United Kingdom."

    In accordance with the usual practice, removal decisions were  made  in
    respect of all four  Appellants  one  week  later.   Being  immigration
    decisions, these attracted a right of appeal which the Appellants  duly
    exercised.

Decision of the FtT

 5. The First-tier Tribunal the "FtT") allowed the appeals.  The  basis  of
    its decision is encapsulated in the following passage, in [89]:

         "I am therefore satisfied that in the context of  my  findings  set
         out  above  the  Respondent's  removal   decisions   were   not   a
         proportionate and  fair  balance  between  the  relevant  competing
         considerations."

    The appeals were allowed under Article 8 ECHR accordingly

 6. The "findings set out above" in the determination are, on analysis, the
    following:

    (a)  The first two Appellants entered the United Kingdom  legally,  but
         have now over stayed following exhaustion of their application  and
         appeal rights.

    (b)  (In terms) the Appellants' extensive periods of residence  in  the
         United Kingdom is a weighty factor: see [48].

    (c)  The third and fourth Appellants,  the  children,  have  spent  the
         whole of their lives in the United Kingdom and are integrated  into
         UK society.

    (d)  The fourth Appellant has special educational requirements  because
         of his elective mutism, giving rise to the need for speech  therapy
         intervention.

    (e)  The parents have been  lawfully  present  in  the  United  Kingdom
         during most of their sojourn.

    (f)   The  act  of  registering  each  child's  birth  demonstrated  "a
         willingness to engage with the authorities".

    (g)  The two  children  "are  positively  thriving  in  a  school  with
         excellent pastoral care ... [and] ... clearly feel very much a part
         of the school community and are progressing well ... [and] ...  the
         school and the surrounding community are parents and members of the
         congregation at church where they attend are extremely attached  to
         the children and family as a whole".

    (h)  "Every resource available to the teaching  staff  and  pupils  has
         been engaged for the benefit of these children".

 7. Next, having referred  to  ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC  4,  the  Judge
    reasoned that a period of substantial residence as a child may become a
    weighty consideration in the balance of competing factors because -

         "During such a lengthy period of time roots are put down,  personal
         identities are developed, friendships are formed and links are made
         with the community outside the family unit".

    The Judge then noted the periods during which the two children had been
    attending school, the parents' heavy involvement with their church  and
    the  childrens'  participation  in  Sunday  school  and  other   church
    activities.  In [77] the Judge directed himself impeccably:

         "I have considered the best interests of both children as a primary
         consideration but not the primary consideration within the  context
         of the entire countervailing factors."

    The Judge then acknowledged the public interests, being "the clear need
    to maintain immigration controls ..... and the  economic  interests  of
    the country".  Finally, the Judge identified the factors  which  tipped
    the  balance  in  the  Appellants'  favour.    These   focused   almost
    exclusively on the well developed settlement of the two children in the
    United Kingdom, linked mainly to the lives  they  are  leading  through
    their education here. He found, by  implication,  that  the  childrens'
    enforced return to Nigeria "....   would seriously  impact  upon  their
    development with  a  strong  possibility  that  [the  younger  child's]
    elective mutism would return".  The appeals were allowed accordingly.

 8. The manner in which the FtT  dealt  with  the  discrete  issue  of  the
    parents' "immigration conduct" warrants  separate  consideration.   The
    Judge noted clear findings in an earlier  Tribunal  determination  that
    the father had submitted a false invoice  in  support  of  his  Tier  1
    application and a forged letter from a firm of  solicitors,  while  the
    mother had used a different (though not false) name in her second  visa
    application for the sole  purpose  of  securing  entry  to  the  United
    Kingdom: see [56] - [60].  The Judge further  found,  contrary  to  the
    father's assertion, that contact had  been  maintained  both  with  his
    brother and other family members of both parents in Nigeria: see [61] -
    [62].

Error of law decision

 9. This Tribunal found that the decision of the FtT was  unsustainable  in
    law, for three reasons.  First, there was a failure  to  formulate  and
    apply the governing test.  Second, there was a failure to consider  the
    guidance and principles contained in  the  decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in EV (Philippines) - v  -  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874. Third, the FtT failed to give effect to
    the provisions of Part 5A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 (the "2002 Act").

The decision of the FtT remade

10. In the argument of Mr Walsh, of Counsel  (who,  admirably,  represented
    the  Appellants  pro  bono),  there  was  particular  emphasis  on  the
    circumstances of the third Appellant (hereinafter "M"),  the  older  of
    the two children, who is now aged 10.  She has made an application  for
    British Citizenship which, having regard to section 1(4) of the British
    Nationality Act 1981,  seems  likely  to  succeed.   (This  is  not  in
    dispute.)  A similar application will, predictably, be made  on  behalf
    of the fourth Appellant, the second child of  the  family  (hereinafter
    "B") if he remains in the  United  Kingdom  until  attaining  his  10th
    birthday, which will be three years hence.  The second factor which  Mr
    Walsh emphasised in his submissions  is  that  on  the  date  when  the
    Article 8 application was made, M  had  been  resident  in  the  United
    Kingdom for a period  of  seven  years.   This,  he  submitted,  is  an
    important factor in  measuring  the  proportionality  of  refusing  the
    applications.

11. Mr Walsh further drew attention to the quite different  factual  matrix
    in EV (Philippines), submitting  that  the  present  appeals  are  much
    stronger on their facts.  The soi-disant "seven  year  residence  rule"
    also featured in his argument and he reminded us of  the  pronouncement
    of the Court of Appeal in NF (Ghana) [2008] EWCA Civ  906  that,  as  a
    matter of presumption, leave to remain in the case of a child  who  has
    satisfied the requirement of seven years residence will be refused only
    exceptionally. Drawing attention to the place of M's birth, the  length
    of her residence in the United Kingdom, the stage which  her  education
    has reached and the imminence of her teenage years, Mr Walsh  submitted
    that her best interests lie in the  status  quo  being  maintained.   A
    similar submission was made on behalf of  the  Appellant  S,  now  aged
    seven years, with appropriate modifications.

12. The evidence upon which the Appellants relied  includes  in  particular
    the UKBA Country of Information  Report,  dated  February  2014,  which
    documents a series of substantial shortcomings in the education  system
    of Nigeria: under funding,  non-enrolment,  non-attendance  of  pupils,
    teachers'  strikes,  insufficiency  of   schools   and   teachers   and
    discrimination against girls.  There  are  also  serious  inadequacies,
    linked to cultural issues, in the special education  sector.  According
    to some commentators, the dominant forces in  Nigeria  continue  to  be
    nepotism, stateism and corruption, all of  which  are  antithetical  to
    socio-educational investment.

13. The legal framework within which these appeals are to be determined has
    a series of components.  First, paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules provides, in material part:

         "The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain  on
         the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date  of  the
         application, the applicant .....

         (iv) Is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
             UK  for  at  least  7  years  (discounting   any   period   of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK."

    This particular provision of the Rules dates from 13 December 2012.  It
    followed close upon the major Article 8  ECHR  reforms  introduced  via
    Appendix FM with effect from 09 July 2012.

14. As noted by this Tribunal in Treebhawon and  Others  [Section  117B(6)]
    [2015] UKUT 674 (IAC), the plentiful jurisprudence generated  by  these
    new provisions of the Rules has focused in particular on the  interplay
    between the Rules and Article 8 and, hence, (though rarely  mentioned),
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.  It is convenient to adopt  the
    summary in Treebhawon, [5]:

         "In R (Amin) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2014]
         EWHC 2322 (Admin) it was held that paragraphs 276 ADE - 276 DH  and
         Appendix FM do not constitute a comprehensive Article 8 Code.  Thus
         it is recognised that a claim based on Article 8 can, in principle,
         succeed either under the prescriptive Article 8 regime  within  the
         Rules or outwith the Rules, residually.  In Haleemudeen v Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 558, the Court  of
         Appeal espoused the test of "compelling circumstances"  in  respect
         of claims outwith the Rules: see [44] and [77].  In MM (Lebanon)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985  the
         Court of Appeal, in effect, disapproved the suggestion in R (Nagre)
         v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2013]  EWHC  720
         (Admin), at [29], that  there  is  an  intermediate  hurdle  to  be
         overcome prior to consideration of Article  8  claims  outwith  the
         Rules: per Aikens LJ at [129]."

    It is  convenient,  at  this  juncture,  to  note  that,  of  the  four
    Appellants, only M can conceivably succeed  under  the  Rules,  as  she
    satisfies the seven years residence requirement.   The  claims  of  the
    other three Appellants lie squarely outwith the Rules.

15. The second component of applicable the legal framework  is  constituted
    by Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  (the
    "2002 Act") which provides in material part:

    Section 117A

         "(1) This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
             Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and

             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2)."

    Section 117B

         "(1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
         public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom. "

    Section 117D

         "(1) In this Part-

         "Article 8" means Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights;

         "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age  of  18  and
         who-

             (a)  is a British citizen, or

             (b)  has lived in the United Kingdom for a  continuous  period
             of seven years or more;"

16. As decisions of this Tribunal  in  cases  such  as  Deelah  and  Others
    (Section  117B  -  Ambit)  [2015]  UKUT  515  (IAC)  have   held,   the
    considerations enumerated in section 117B do  not  form  an  exhaustive
    list of facts and factors to be weighed  by  a  court  or  tribunal  in
    determining the issue of  proportionality  under  Article  8(2).   This
    follows  from  the  language  of  section  117A(2)  ("in  particular").
    Disregard of the section 117B list is not an option: its contents  must
    compulsorily be considered, seriatim.  However, this is subject to  two
    observations.  First, in certain cases one or more  of  the  individual
    components of section  117B  will  not  apply,  having  regard  to  the
    particular factual matrix: this applies to all of the subsections  with
    the exception of subsection (1).  Second, as decided in Treebhawon,  in
    cases where section 117B(6) applies, this has particular  consequences:
    infra.

17. In Treebhawon, this Tribunal's analysis of  section  117B  yielded  the
    conclusion that its contents consist of four formulations  of  what  is
    considered to be in the public interest - in subsections (1), (2),  (3)
    and (6) - and two legislative instructions to  the  court  or  tribunal
    that little weight is to be given to certain matters, where they apply:
    subsections  (4)   and   (5).     Having   conducted   this   analysis,
    consideration was then given to section 117B(6)  in  some  detail:  see
    [18] - [21].  Having identified the three qualifying  conditions  which
    section 117B(6) embodies, the Tribunal stated, in [20]:

         "Within this discrete regime, the statute  proclaims  unequivocally
         that where the three conditions are satisfied the  public  interest
         does not require the removal of the parent from the United Kingdom.
          Ambiguity there is none ...

         [21] ... In our judgement the underlying parliamentary intention is
             that where the three aforementioned conditions are  satisfied,
             the public interests identified in section 117B(1)  -  (3)  do
             not apply."

    In short, they have been eclipsed.

18. The third component of  the  legal  framework  is  section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 (the "2009  Act"),  which
    provides:

         "(1) The Secretary of State must  make  arrangements  for  ensuring
         that-

             (a)  the functions mentioned in subsection (2) are  discharged
             having regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare
             of children who are in the United Kingdom, and

             (b)  any services  provided  by  another  person  pursuant  to
             arrangements which are made by  the  Secretary  of  State  and
             relate to the discharge of a function mentioned in  subsection
             (2) are provided having regard to that need.

         (2)  The functions referred to in subsection (1) are-

             (a)  any function of the Secretary of  State  in  relation  to
             immigration, asylum or nationality;

             (b)  any function conferred by or by virtue of the Immigration
             Acts on an immigration officer;

             (c)  any general customs function of the Secretary of State;

             (d)  any customs function conferred on  a  designated  customs
             official.

         (3)  A person exercising any of those functions must, in exercising
         the function, have regard to any guidance given to  the  person  by
         the Secretary of State for the purpose of subsection (1)."

    In ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2011]
    UKSC 4, Baroness  Hale  emphasised  that  in  cases  where  section  55
    applies, the best interests of any affected child  must  be  considered
    first: see [26].  Lord Kerr suggested, at [46]:

         "Where the best interests of the child  clearly  favour  a  certain
         course,  that  course  should  be  followed  unless  countervailing
         reasons of considerable force displace them."

19.  Subsequently in an even more comprehensive analysis of section 55,  the
    Supreme Court, in Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2013] UKSC 74, formulated the following code of  governing  principles
    (per Lord Hodge):

         "(1) The best interests of a child are  an  integral  part  of  the
         proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR;

         (2)  In making that assessment, the best interests of a child  must
         be a primary consideration, although not always  the  only  primary
         consideration; and the child's best interests do not of  themselves
         have the status of the paramount consideration;

         (3)  Although the best interests of a child can  be  outweighed  by
         the  cumulative  effect   of   other   considerations,   no   other
         consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;

         (4)  While different judges might approach the question of the best
         interests of a child in different ways,  it  is  important  to  ask
         oneself the right questions in an orderly manner in order to  avoid
         the risk that the best interests of a child  might  be  undervalued
         when other important considerations were in play;

         (5)   It  is  important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of   a   child's
         circumstances and of what is in a child's best interests before one
         asks oneself whether those interests are outweighed by the force of
         other considerations;

         (6)  To that end there is no substitute for a  careful  examination
         of all relevant factors when the interests of a child are  involved
         in an article 8 assessment; and

         (7)  A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she  is
         not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent."

20.  Section 55 was  the  subject  of  still  further  consideration  in  EV
    (Philippines) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 874.  Delivering the main judgment, Christopher Clarke  LJ  stated,
    at [34]:

         "In determining whether or not, in a case such as the present,  the
         need for immigration control out weighs the best interests  of  the
         child, it is necessary to determine the relevant  strength  of  the
         factors which makes it in their best interests to remain here;  and
         also to take account of any factors that point the other way."

    The judgment continues, at [35]:

         "A decision as to what is in the best interests  of  children  will
         depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b) the length
         of time that they have been here; (c) how long they  have  been  in
         education; (c) what stage their education has reached; (d) to  what
         extent they have become distanced from the country to which  it  is
         proposed that they return; (e) how renewable their connection  with
         it may be; (f) to what extent they will have linguistic, medical or
         other difficulties in adapting to life in that country; and (g) the
         extent to which the  course  proposed  will  interfere  with  their
         family  life  or  their  rights  (if  they  have  any)  as  British
         citizens."

    And at [36] - [37]:

         "36. In a sense the tribunal is  concerned  with  how  emphatic  an
         answer falls to be given  to  the  question:  is  it  in  the  best
         interests of the child to remain? The longer  the  child  has  been
         here, the more advanced (or critical) the stage of  his  education,
         the looser his ties with the country  in  question,  and  the  more
         deleterious the consequences of his return, the greater the  weight
         that falls into one side of the scales. If it is overwhelmingly  in
         the child's best interests that he should not return, the  need  to
         maintain immigration control may  well  not  tip  the  balance.  By
         contrast if it is in the child's best interests to remain, but only
         on balance (with some factors pointing the other way),  the  result
         may be the opposite.

         37.  In the balance on the other side there falls to be taken  into
         account the strong weight to be  given  to  the  need  to  maintain
         immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-being  of  the
         country and the fact that, ex hypothesi,  the  applicants  have  no
         entitlement to remain. The immigration history of the  parents  may
         also be relevant e.g.  if  they  are  overstayers,  or  have  acted
         deceitfully."

    Lewison LJ, in a concurring judgment, placed some emphasis on the "real
    world" scenario of giving effect to section 55 in  circumstances  where
    the  affected  child's  parents  and,  perhaps,   siblings,   have   no
    entitlement to be in  the  United  Kingdom:  see  [55].   In  [58],  he
    continued:

         "In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests of
         the children must be made on the basis that the facts are  as  they
         are in the real world. If one parent has no right  to  remain,  but
         the other parent does, that is the  background  against  which  the
         assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the right to remain,
         then that  is  the  background  against  which  the  assessment  is
         conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable  to
         expect the child to follow the parent with no right  to  remain  to
         the country of origin?"

    In a passage which resonates strongly in the  context  of  the  present
    appeals, Lewison LJ further stated at [60]:

         "If the parents are removed, then  it  is  entirely  reasonable  to
         expect the children to go with them. As the immigration judge found
         it is obviously in  their  best  interests  to  remain  with  their
         parents."

21. There are two observations in particular to be made at  this  juncture.
    The first is the clear statement of principle in both ZH  Tanzania  and
    Zoumbas that a child should not be prejudiced by the  misconduct  of  a
    parent.   The second is that the legal framework in existence  when  EV
    (Philippines) was decided did not include either paragraph 276ADE  (iv)
    of the Rules or Part 5A of the 2002 Act.

22. In Bossade (Sections 117A - D: Inter relationship  with  Rules)  [2015]
    UKUT 415 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal held that, ordinarily,  a  court  or
    tribunal  will  first  consider  an  appellant's  Article  8  claim  by
    reference to the Immigration Rules. Adopting this  approach,  the  only
    Appellant who can conceivably succeed under  the  Rules  is  the  older
    child, M, as  she  satisfies  the  seven  years  residence  requirement
    prescribed by paragraph 276 ADE (iv) and is aged under 18.  The  crunch
    question in her case is whether "it would not be reasonable  to  expect
    the applicant to leave the UK".  At this juncture, giving effect to the
    injunction in ZH (Tanzania), we assess what is  in  this  child's  best
    interests.  In doing so, we note the statement in the UNHCR  Guidelines
    on Determining the Best Interests of the Child [May 2008]:

         "The term 'best interests' broadly describes the well  being  of  a
         child".

    In the passage which follows,  a  distinction  is  made  between  those
    provisions  of  the  Convention  which  require  that  a  child's  best
    interests be the determining factor, such as adoption (Article 21)  and
    forced separation of a child from parents (Article  9)  and  Article  3
    which is, of course, the genesis of  section  55.   In  ZH  (Tanzania),
    Baroness Hale made this observation of the Guidelines:

         "This seems to me accurately to distinguish between decisions which
         directly affect the child's upbringing, such as the parent or other
         person with whom she is to live, and decisions which may affect her
         more indirectly, such as decisions about where one or both  of  her
         parents are to live."

23. In our evaluation of the best interests of M, we recognise that she  is
    aged nine years, has spent the entirety  of  her  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom and that her pending application for British  citizenship  will
    succeed. In language, culture, social mores, education and private life
    her ties are exclusively with the United Kingdom. Her connections  with
    Nigeria, the country of her parents' births, are minimal.   Essentially
    the same assessment applies to the fourth Appellant, S, who is now aged
    seven years, with the added factor  that  he  has  benefited  from  the
    specialised facilities available in the United  Kingdom  in  overcoming
    his condition of elective  autism   and  could  well  be  detrimentally
    affected if this condition were to revive following return to  Nigeria,
    given the less adequate facilities there.  We  add  that  there  is  no
    evidence  to  suggest  that  departure  from  the  United  Kingdom  and
    settlement in Nigeria is likely to reactivate this condition.

24. In its consideration of the best interests case made to  the  Secretary
    of State, this Tribunal stated, in [3] of its earlier decision:

         "Stripped to its essentials, the case made was  that  this  country
         provides  a  much  better  place  for  the  education,   care   and
         development of the children than Nigeria."

    In rejecting the Appellants' cases, the decision  maker  observed  that
    there are public education and health services in Nigeria  "albeit  not
    necessarily to the same standard as in the United Kingdom".  In  short,
    the  United  Kingdom  is  a  better  country  than  Nigeria  from   the
    perspective of rearing young  children.   This  is  because  it  offers
    superior publicly  funded  education,  health  and  other  systems  and
    services and  greater  stability  and  security.  Furthermore,  if  the
    children were to remain in the United Kingdom,  they  would  avoid  the
    disruption, sadness  and  emotional  upset  of  having  to  uproot  and
    relocate to Nigeria.  In short, all of the factors identified  in  [36]
    of EV (Philippines) fall into  the  childrens'  side  of  the  notional
    scales.  However, it does not follow inexorably  from  this  assessment
    that the best interests of these  children  lie  in  remaining  in  the
    United Kingdom.  This is altogether  too  narrow  an  analysis,  as  it
    excludes the vital factors of their parents and  the  composite  family
    unit. We consider that, viewed panoramically,  the  best  interests  of
    these two children will be served by remaining with their parents in an
    undisturbed family unit.

25. Moving to the next stage of the exercise, we are obliged  by  paragraph
    276ADE(iv) of the Rules to determine the question of whether  it  would
    be reasonable to expect M to leave the United Kingdom.  This  provision
    of the Rules is not applicable in the case of S.  However, we  consider
    that, as in ZH (Tanzania), the reasonableness of expecting S to  depart
    the  United  Kingdom  must  be  a   material   consideration   in   the
    proportionality assessment.  This is precisely what the  Supreme  Court
    did in EV (Kosovo) - v - Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2008] UKHL 41 and in ZH (Tanzania) at [29],  both  contexts  preceding
    the advent of this provision of the  Rules.    We  shall  examine  this
    discrete issue vis-�-vis S presently.

26. The absence of any definition of "reasonable" is unsurprising.  It  is,
    in part, a reflection of the intensely fact sensitive nature  of  every
    Article 8 case.  It has the potential to embrace  a  potentially  broad
    spectrum  of  facts  and  factors.   The  inexhaustive  composition  of
    Christopher Clarke LJ in EV (Philippines), at [36], provides a  helpful
    tool of guidance.  There is also a useful barometer in the  opinion  of
    Lord Bingham of Cornhill in Huang v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2007]  2  AC  167,  at  [13],  though  one  must  heed  his
    cautionary words in EB (Kosovo) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2008] UKHL 41, at [12]:

         "... There is in general no alternative to  making  a  careful  and
         informed evaluation of the  facts  of  the  particular  case.   The
         search for a hard edged or bright line rule to be  applied  in  the
         generality of cases is incompatible with the  difficult  evaluative
         exercise which Article 8 requires."

    Within these and other seminal passages  in  both  the  Strasbourg  and
    Supreme Court jurisprudence one finds the  genesis  of  the  Article  8
    regime introduced in the Rules in July 2012, together with  certain  of
    the provisions contained in Part 5A of the 2002 Act

27. We adopt the following approach in applying the test of  reasonableness
    in the case of the Appellant M. We consider her case to be inextricably
    linked with how the appeals of her parents are to be resolved.  Indeed,
    none of the four claims can be severed from any of the others.  This is
    the reality in every case where those seeking  immigration  status  are
    members of a family unit.  The futures of the two children  are  wedded
    to those of their parents.  The interplay  among  the  four  claims  is
    irresistible.  Thus, if it were compellingly in the best interests of M
    (or indeed both of the children) to remain in the United Kingdom,  that
    would be a weighty factor in determining the parents' claims and could,
    in principle, lead to the conclusion that it would not be reasonable to
    expect the child (or children) to leave the United  Kingdom,  with  the
    result  that  the  public  interest  would  not  require  the  parents'
    applications to be refused, per section 117B(6) of the 2002  Act.   The
    reality of this case is that success for  the  parents  is  ineluctably
    welded to success for one or both  of  the  children,  given  that  the
    parents' Article 8  private  life  claims,  viewed  in  isolation,  are
    amongst the weakest imaginable in the current state of the law.

28. We develop our assessment of reasonableness under paragraph  276ADE(iv)
    of  the  Rules  in  the  following  way.   The   application   of   the
    reasonableness test requires the Tribunal to consider the circumstances
    in which the children would be departing the United Kingdom and to make
    a realistic and adequately informed predictive evaluative judgement  of
    what the future is likely to hold for them thereafter.  On one side  of
    the scales, there are the various factors already highlighted above: in
    brief, M, the older child, now aged nine years, has spent  all  of  her
    life in the United Kingdom,  giving  rise  to  the  considerations  and
    consequences noted in [23] above, she will  be  uprooted  to  an  alien
    country and it  will,  predictably,  be  an  unsettling  and  upsetting
    experience.  We consider that these negative impacts would  be  largely
    the same as regards both children.

29. On the other side of the scales, we take into account  the  absence  of
    any suggestion that the children  could  not  adapt  to  the  language,
    culture,  customs  and  different  way  of  life  in  Nigeria.  Indeed,
    adaptation at their ages will probably be easier than,  say,  in  their
    teenage years.  We further take into  account  that  they  will  remain
    members of a stable, preserved family unit and will  continue  to  have
    the support of loving and committed parents.  The  parents  have  spent
    most of their lives in Nigeria and are presumed to be familiar with the
    language, culture, customs and the  Nigerian  way  of  life  generally.
    They are Nigerian citizens.  Both are healthy and  able  bodied.   They
    have family  living  in  Nigeria.   The  parents  are  therefore  amply
    equipped to assist and support their children throughout the process of
    transition and thereafter.  Our evaluation of reasonableness must  also
    be informed by the assessment already made that the best  interests  of
    both children will be served by the preservation of  the  family  unit.
    We are satisfied that the negative impacts  on  the  children  will  be
    offset by their youth, their resilience and the presence of loving  and
    supportive parents and are likely to be comparatively short  term.   It
    follows that if we were to reject the parents' appeals it would not  be
    unreasonable to expect the older child or, indeed, the younger child to
    leave the United Kingdom.

30. Thus our conclusion in relation to  paragraph  276ADE(iv)  is  that  it
    would be reasonable to expect the  Appellant  M  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom if the claims of the other three  family  members  fail.   This
    would mean failure for her claim under the Rules.  The only context  in
    which this scenario will not materialise is that  of  all  four  claims
    succeeding.  This brings us directly to the claims of the  parents  and
    the younger child which, as they lie outwith  the  Rules,  can  succeed
    only if they satisfy the test of  compelling  circumstances:  see  [14]
    above. We conclude that these claims fail to satisfy this test by  some
    measure. Viewing the family unit  as  a  whole  there  is  no  medical,
    physical, psychological, historical, cultural, societal or other factor
    which even threatens to  overcome  this  threshold.  There  is  nothing
    exceptional or compelling in the circumstances  of  this  stable,  well
    educated and healthy family.  The factual matrix which they present  is
    unexceptional and unremarkable.  The claims of the parents and  younger
    child, therefore, call for decisive rejection. Thus their appeals  must
    be dismissed.

31. Given our analysis and conclusions above, the claim of the Appellant  M
    under the Rules also fails as it would be reasonable to expect her,  in
    furtherance of her best interests, which have the statutory pedigree of
    a primary consideration, to remain in the family unit and resettle with
    them in Nigeria.

32. It follows also that there will be no  interference  with  any  of  the
    Appellant's right to respect for family life under Article  8(1)  ECHR.
    There will, however, be  an  interference  with  their  private  lives.
    Accordingly, as mandated by section 117A  of  the  2002  Act,  we  give
    consideration to and apply section 117B in the following way:

    (a)  The public interest in the maintenance  of  effective  immigration
         controls is engaged.

    (b)  There is no evidence that the "English speaking"  public  interest
         in section 117B(2) is engaged.

    (c)  While the "financial independence" public interest did not feature
         explicitly in the case made on behalf of the Secretary of State, we
         consider that it applies as we readily make the inference that  all
         four  Appellants  benefit,  and  will  continue  to  benefit,  from
         publicly funded services, in particular education,  to  which  they
         have made no financial contribution and there was no evidence  that
         they have any financial resources.

    (d)  The immigration status of both parents has been precarious  during
         much of their sojourn in the United Kingdom, thereby attracting the
         assessment that little weight is to be given to the  private  lives
         developed by them during such period. Given our assessment  of  the
         two  children's'  best  interests  and  the  application   of   the
         reasonableness test we consider  it  unnecessary  to  give  further
         consideration to their private lives at this stage of the exercise.
         We are mindful that the interplay between paragraph  276ADE(iv)  of
         the Rules and section 117B raises  potentially  contentious  issues
         and may require more detailed  examination  in  a  suitable  future
         case.

33. The final port of call in  our  decision  making  exercise  is  section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  This provision  falls  to  be  considered  as
    regards the Appellant M only.  As noted in Treebhawon, section  117B(6)
    enshrines three conditions. The  first  two  conditions  are  satisfied
    here, namely none of the Appellants is liable to  deportation  and  the
    Appellant M is a qualifying child with whom her parents have a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship.  The final condition is  that  it
    would not be reasonable to expect M to leave the United Kingdom.   This
    test of reasonableness  is  framed  in  identical  terms  in  paragraph
    276ADE(iv) of the Rules.  Thus our conclusion  in  [29]  above  applies
    mutatis mutandis. It follows that there will be no infringement of  the
    public interest expressed in section 117B(6) if M is required to  leave
    the United Kingdom.

34. Lastly, we address the argument of Mr Walsh, summarised in [11]  above,
    that there is a presumption that, absent exceptional  circumstances,  a
    child who has attained seven years residence in the United Kingdom will
    secure leave to remain.  The primary riposte to this submission is that
    this topic is now regulated by statute viz section 117B(6) of the  2002
    Act and the Rules, neither of which  contains  any  provision  to  this
    effect.  In short, Parliament and the Secretary of State  have  entered
    the arena and occupied the field and the governing legal rules are  now
    to be found in the two sources mentioned.  Furthermore, section  55  of
    the 2009 Act did not feature in NF (Ghana) on which  Mr  Walsh  relies.
    In the alternative, even if the NF (Ghana) principle survives, this  is
    plainly a case where the presumption is displaced  on  account  of  our
    assessment of M's best interests, which are  a  primary  consideration,
    our application of the reasonableness criterion  and  the  consequences
    flowing from the dismissal of the other three family members' appeals.

Decision

35. Accordingly, we remake the decision of the FtT by dismissing  all  four
    appeals.


                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                             14 January 2016
