
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23368/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 March 2015                      |On 12 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mrs Zaila Huma Rafiq
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Dogra, Counsel instructed by Bukhari Chambers
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                        (Given orally at the hearing)

1.   The Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  has  been  granted
    permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Pirotta who, by a determination promulgated on 1 October 2014,  allowed
    the appellant's appeal against a decision to refuse to grant her  leave
    to remain.  The judge allowed the appeal  both  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and on human rights  grounds  finding  that  there  would  be  an
    impermissible infringement of rights permitted by Article 8 of the ECHR
    if the appeal were not to be allowed.

2.   For the sake of convenience I will refer to the  appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, Mrs Rafiq, as the claimant and  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department as the Secretary of State.

3.   The claimant, who was  born  on  15  January  1984,  is  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan.  She has been unlawfully present in the United Kingdom  since
    approximately 2005.  She has entered into an Islamic marriage with  the
    sponsor, Mr Nasimi, who is a person who at the time had temporary leave
    to remain under the points-based system.  They have  had  two  children
    each of whom was born in the United Kingdom, one in  2012  and  one  in
    2013.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted in  her  determination  that
    the claimant had entered the United Kingdom using a false  passport  so
    that she could join relatives who were already living here.

4.   The Secretary of State refused the application  for  reasons  that  are
    summarised in the judge's determination.  For present  purposes  I  can
    summarise them as follows.  The appellant did  not  qualify  under  the
    Rules because her spouse was not a British citizen or  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom and because her children were not British  citizens  and
    therefore they could not meet the requirements of E-LTRP.1.2 to 1.7 nor
    the criteria of EX.1.

5.   The application could not succeed under  276ADE  because  the  claimant
    had not lived in the United Kingdom for the required  period  of  time.
    The Secretary of State did not accept that  it  had  been  demonstrated
    that she had no longer any  strong  ties  in  Pakistan,  that  being  a
    country where she had spent the majority of her time.  The Secretary of
    State looked at  her  obligation  under  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  and  concluded,  unsurprisingly,
    that the children's best interests were served by remaining with  their
    parents but went on to conclude  that  there  was  no  reason  why  the
    parents could not relocate to their country of  nationality.   Finally,
    the Secretary of State concluded  that  there  were  no  compelling  or
    compassionate circumstances to justify the grant of leave  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

6.   After the date of the decision under challenge and  before  the  appeal
    hearing circumstances had changed in that the sponsor had been  granted
    indefinite leave to remain, this being a change of circumstances  which
    the judge considered to be of particular significance.   She  accepted,
    as does not appear to be in dispute,  that  there  was  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship between the claimant and the  sponsor  and,  at
    paragraph 17 of the determination, the judge noted that  the  grant  of
    indefinite leave to the sponsor meant that the children  were  entitled
    to apply to be registered as British citizens under Section 1(3) of the
    British Nationality Act 1981, although the judge also recorded that  no
    such application had in fact been made.

7.   The judge went on to say at paragraph  18  of  her  determination  that
    this meant that the appellant's case must  now  be  considered  on  the
    basis that she would meet the criteria of E-LTRP because her spouse  is
    settled in the United Kingdom.  She might not yet meet  E-LTRPT  though
    her children should be considered to be settled in the United Kingdom.

8.   For the claimant, Ms Dogra today realistically  and  properly  concedes
    that the judge was wrong  in  that  respect.   The  obligation  was  to
    consider the matter as it was at the date of the hearing and not as  it
    might be depending upon the outcome of applications that might or might
    not be made.

9.   The judge, however, went  on  to  make  findings  at  paragraph  23  as
    follows:

         "Now that the Secretary of State has granted the sponsor indefinite
         leave to remain his children become entitled to apply  for  British
         citizenship under Section 1(3) of the British Nationality Act  1981
         and their interests are more firmly centred in the United  Kingdom,
         so that their removal would be  disproportionate  and  contrary  to
         their interests as British citizens.  Had  they  remained  entitled
         only to Pakistani citizenship, they could have returned to Pakistan
         with  their  parents,  where  their  interests  would   have   been
         sufficiently protected by their parents."

10.  I am satisfied that the judge made a series of errors of law that  were
    material to the outcome of the appeal.  First, as I have mentioned,  it
    has been conceded quite properly and realistically that it was an error
    of law for the judge to allow the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules
    because  plainly,  by  any  view,  the  claimant  did  not   meet   the
    requirements of the Rules.

11.  Secondly it was an error of law for the judge to determine  the  appeal
    on the basis that because the children had  a  right  to  apply  to  be
    registered as British citizens the appeal should be determined  on  the
    basis that they had a right  of  residence  despite  the  fact  of  the
    findings made and set out in the determination that otherwise it  would
    not have been unreasonable to expect the whole family unit to return to
    Pakistan.

12.  Thirdly it was an error of law to fail to have regard when  determining
    the Article 8 question to the issues set out in  Section  117B  of  the
    2002 Act as amended.  That is material because in this case there  were
    issues that were relevant to that consideration including  the  aim  of
    maintenance of effective immigration control  in  the  public  interest
    implicitly in line with the Immigration Rules.  Secondly the fact  that
    it is in the public interest that those seeking to enter or  remain  in
    the United Kingdom are able to speak English because, at  the  hearing,
    the claimant gave evidence to the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  with  the
    assistance of  an  interpreter.   Thirdly  the  relationship  with  the
    sponsor  was  formed  whilst  the  claimant  was  present   unlawfully.
    Fourthly, as the judge had found that absent a right  of  residence  it
    could not be said to be unreasonable to expect the children  to  return
    to Pakistan with their parents, that is something that should have been
    factored into the Article 8 assessment,  and  fifthly,  no  matter  how
    carefully one looks at the determination it is clear that there was  no
    attempt at all to carry out a balancing exercise in striking a  balance
    between the competing interests in play,  there  being  no  attempt  to
    identify the public interest side of that balancing exercise.

13.  Finally, at paragraph 19 it is plain that in saying:

         "I consider that the rights of the children to remain and  live  in
         the  United  Kingdom  cannot  be  overridden  except  in  the  most
         exceptional circumstances, which have not been demonstrated in this
         case",


    it is plain that the judge has applied the wrong legal test.

14.  For all those reasons I am satisfied  that  this  determination  cannot
    stand because the appeal has been assessed on entirely the wrong  basis
    and therefore the decision of Judge Pirotta will be set aside.

15.  There has been no challenge to her findings of fact  some  of  which  I
    think might be relied upon by both sides in  this  litigation  to  some
    extent and so subject to any submissions that I now receive my proposal
    is  to  say  that  those  findings  of  fact  should  stand.  (No  such
    submissions were in fact advanced).

17.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed  to  the  extent  that  the
    determination of the judge is set aside and the appeal is  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh by a judge  other  than
    Judge Pirotta.


Signed   [pic]         Date 5 March 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

