
[pic]
IAC-BFD- MD

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23257/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th July 2015                    |On 30th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts


                                   Between

             mr ajith wijesinghe wijesinghe hettiachchi mudalige
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, of Counsel instructed by Jein
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant Mr Ajith Wijesinghe Wijeshinghe Hettiachchi Mudalige is a
    citizen of Sri Lanka. He appeals with permission to the Upper  Tribunal
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Behan) which  in
    a decision promulgated  on  23rd  January  2015  dismissed  his  appeal
    against the Respondent's refusal  to  grant  him  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on account  of his having completed ten years  lawful  residence
    in the UK.

 2. The grant of permission neatly encapsulates the central issues in  this
    appeal and the relevant parts for the purpose of this hearing  are  set
    out below.

         "The background facts are not disputed. It was  accepted  that  the
         Appellant had lived in the United Kingdom since 2003. His right  to
         live in the United Kingdom was on the basis of his student  status,
         an application which the Appellant made in 2009 for  further  leave
         to remain as a student was rejected  as  invalid  because,  he  had
         failed to complete mandatory parts of the  application  form.  When
         the Appellant eventually  received  the  notice  of  invalidity  he
         corrected the mistake and he was granted further leave to remain as
         a student.

         He made his application for indefinite leave to  remain  under  the
         provisions  of  paragraph  276B  in  2014  after  his   educational
         Sponsor's licence had been revoked and the  Appellant's  leave  was
         curtailed but, he submitted his application before  his  period  of
         leave  (as  curtailed)  had  ended.  The   Secretary   of   State's
         representative refused the application on the basis that the events
         of 2009 had caused the Appellant to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
         for more than 28 days as an overstayer.

         The issue in the  appeal  centres  upon  the  point  at  which  the
         Appellant became an overstayer. Within the decision the judge found
         at paragraph 32 of the decision that the Appellant was not  covered
         by Section 3C leave because he did not make a valid application  to
         vary his leave before his student visa expired on  30th  June.  The
         Secretary of State's representative calculated  that  there  was  a
         period of 261 days between the Appellant's leave expiring  and  the
         grant of leave on 19th October 2010."

The UT Hearing/Error of Law

 3. Following discussions between the two representatives  -  Ms  Jegarajah
    for the Appellant and Mr Walker for the Respondent, it was accepted  by
    Mr Walker that the First-tier Tribunal's decision could not  stand  and
    should be set aside. He agreed that the appeal should  be  allowed  and
    the matter  remitted  to  the  respondent  for  further  consideration.
    Unsurprisingly Miss Jegarajah agreed with this course.

 4. The following factors were agreed:

       . The Appellant did not receive the 2009 refusal notice, sent by  the
         Respondent, to treat his application as valid.

       . Nevertheless the Appellant  made  a  re-submitted  application  for
         leave to remain out of time, and this application was granted  with
         the Appellant having been granted leave to remain until 3rd October
         2011.

       . The Respondent treated the 2009 application as a valid  application
         after it had been corrected by the submission of  the  re-submitted
         application.  This  was  the  logical  inference   shown   by   the
         Respondent's notice of 2nd August 2009 whereby the notice  contains
         the following line "Arrangements would be made for any  fee  to  be
         repaid". In the Appellant's case no fee was returned -  leading  to
         the inference that the application was thereby being treated  as  a
         valid one.

 5. Added to this contained in the Respondent's  own  Reasons  for  Refusal
    letter dated 3rd May  2014,   under  the  heading  Immigration  History
    (Bullet point 5)  there is an incorrect reference  to  the  Appellant's
    application for leave to remain as being "rejected", when  in  fact  it
    should properly have referred to it being a decision on "validity".

 6. These factors mean that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  led  into
    error and such error was material. Mr  Walker  accepted  therefore  the
    decision of the FtT could not stand. I agree and set aside the decision
    of the FtT.

 7. Both representatives were further in  agreement  that  the  appropriate
    course in this matter is for the appeal to be  allowed  to  the  extent
    that it is remitted to the Secretary of State for further consideration
    in accordance with this decision.

Decision

 8. Appeal allowed to the  extent  that  the  matter  is  remitted  to  the
    Respondent for further consideration of her decision of 13th  May  2014
    to refuse to vary  the  Appellant's  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

No anonymity direction is made



Signature     Dated

Judge of the Upper Tribunal
