
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23356/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 July 2015                       |On 22 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                              ESTHER ASEM AMOAH
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jibowu, Counsel instructed by MJ Solomon and
Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the  appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision  of  First  Tier
    Tribunal Judge Tiffen which was promulgated on 12 February  2015.  This
    is the ex tempore decision in respect of the appeal. The appellant is a
    citizen of Ghana. She is the mother of a daughter, a British citizen.

 2. We considered various grounds of appeal in respect of this  case  which
    were set out in a detailed document which had been filed with  Tribunal
    and upon which permission to appeal was granted by Judge Fisher  on  14
    April 2015. The appellant seeks leave to remain in the United  Kingdom,
    particularly relying on the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 3. In addition to the documents previously filed, the appellant's  Counsel
    provided us this morning with a skeleton  argument  which  refined  the
    issues required to be dealt with, the original grounds having been  set
    out in much more detail. Having explored the issues with  the  parties,
    it appears that the matters can be considerably summarised.

 4. The grounds really amount to  the  following.  Firstly,  the  appellant
    contends that the First Tier Tribunal Judge  materially  erred  in  law
    when she had said that she was restricted to considering  circumstances
    appertaining at the time of the respondent's decision.  That  statement
    by the judge is indeed wrong because this was an appeal in  respect  of
    the EEA Regulations and  there  is  no  such  restriction  to  consider
    matters only as at the date of the decision. The appropriate  date  for
    considering matters in respect of the 2006 Regulations is at  the  date
    of the hearing.

 5. However, even though the judge had said what she did at paragraph 8  of
    her decision and reasons, it is clear that the judge did  not  actually
    restrict herself in terms of the matters  which  she  had  gone  on  to
    consider. It is quite clear that she did in fact consider matters as at
    the date of the hearing.  Having explored  this  with  the  appellant's
    Counsel, it is quite clear that although the judge cited  what  appears
    to be standard wording at paragraph 8 of her decision, she did in  fact
    take all matters into account as at the date of the hearing.

 6. That therefore deals with paragraph 1 and ground 1 of  the  appellant's
    grounds. We conclude that there was  no  material  error  of  law.   In
    reality, this was the primary ground relied upon by appellant.

 7. Secondly, the grounds of appeal relate to arguments in respect  of  the
    appellant's claim to a  derivative  rights  of  residence  pursuant  to
    Regulation  15A(7)  and  Regulation  18A  of  the   Immigration   (EEA)
    Regulations 2006. The Judge said she accepted that the appellant was  a
    primary carer of the child. She had said that at paragraph  19  of  her
    decision, "As  indicated  at  the  hearing  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    appellant is the primary carer of the child....".

 8. However, the judge went on  to  say  at  paragraph  19:  "...  But  the
    appellant must also satisfy me that the child's  father  is  not  in  a
    position to care for the child if the appellant was forced to leave the
    United Kingdom." This is an important part of the case  and  a  central
    feature of the judge's reasoning and findings. It was  not  enough  for
    the appellant to have been the primary carer of  her  child.  More  was
    required. Specifically it was necessary for the appellant to show  that
    her child (the British citizen) would be unable to reside in the UK  if
    the appellant was forced to leave the United Kingdom.

 9. Paragraph 19 of the judge's decision is reflective of  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006. The definition of "Primary Carer" is set out at
    15A(7) of the Regulations,

         15A(7)  P is to be regarded as a primary carer of another person if



             (a) P is a direct relative or a legal guardian of that person;
             and

             (b)  P-

                  (i)      P is a person who has primary responsibility  for
                  that person's care or

                  (ii)  shares equally the responsibility for that  person's
                  care with another person who is not an exempt person."

10. 15A (4A) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 states as follows:

         4A:  P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if

             (a)  P is the primary carer of a British citizen (the relevant
             British citizen);

             (b)  the relevant British citizen is residing  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and

             (c)  the relevant British citizen will be unable to reside  in
                  the UK or in another state if required to leave."

11. Therefore the question for particular focus  was  whether  or  not  the
    father of the child would be in a position provide the  necessary  care
    that the child require if the appellant was forced to leave the  United
    Kingdom.   It is Regulation 15A(4A)(c) that  the  appellant  failed  to
    prove.

12. It was therefore this aspect that the judge particularly dealt with  at
    paragraphs 19 and 20 of her  decision  and  reasons.   The  appellant's
    central complaint in her grounds and which is repeated in  some  detail
    is that the judge firstly (this is  set  out  at  paragraph  3  of  the
    grounds) failed to acknowledge and analyse the  appellant's  undisputed
    evidence and, secondly, having accepted  that  the  appellant  was  the
    primary carer, she sought to undo the finding which  she  had  made  at
    paragraph 19 in respect of the appellant being the primary carer.

13. The assertion in the grounds is wrong. That is because the judge  makes
    clear at paragraph 20 that she considered the appellant's  credibility.
    She also made it clear that she considered the evidence and credibility
    of the appellant's sister, and indeed that of a friend who  claimed  to
    support the appellant.  The judge made it plain that she had  also  had
    in mind the letters of support which had been provided.  She  concluded
    that little weight could be given to them.  The judge was  entitled  to
    come to the conclusions that she did in respect of the evidence  placed
    before. The judge explained why  she  attached  little  weight  to  the
    evidence concluding that, "There is no evidence that  the  child  could
    not  be  adequately  cared  for  by  his  sister  either  alone  or  in
    conjunction with the Appellant's sister and her other family members in
    the United Kingdom".

14. It is important to recall the basis of  the  respondent's  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter.  That had set out in clear terms  why  the  appellant's
    application had been refused. It was said in the  plainest  terms  that
    insofar as the appellant's evidence is concerned, that it was of a very
    limited nature. Therefore the appellant was  put  on  notice  that  she
    needed to set out significant evidence to deal  with  the  respondent's
    decision. As the respondent's decision notes at page  2  of  5  of  the
    decision:

         "You have not provided evidence to why the child's father is not in
         a position to care for the British child if you are forced to leave
         the United Kingdom and there is insufficient evidence to show  that
         the British citizen child would be unable to remain in  the  United
         Kingdom/EEA if you are forced to leave.

         The supporting statements provide a suggestion  that  [the  father]
         left you shortly after  the  child  was  born  and  does  not  want
         anything to do with the child.

         It should be noted however that any unwillingness  to  assume  care
         responsibility is not by itself, sufficed for the  claimed  primary
         career to assert that another direct relative or guardian is unable
         to care for the British citizen.

         In making this assessment, the  burden  of  proof  remains  on  the
         applicant ....."

15. Therefore the appellant was made well aware that she had to provide the
    necessary evidence to enable her appeal to be successful. She was  also
    well aware that the burden of proof was on her. She failed  to  provide
    that evidence to the required  standard  and  the  judge  has  provided
    sustainable reasoning as to why the appeal had to be dismissed.

16. We explored with the appellant's Counsel which part  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in R (Iran) that he had particularly sought  to  rely
    upon. In his submissions he said that this was  a  case  in  which  the
    credibility findings were a 'bit harsh'.  Even if that was  a  slip  of
    the tongue, mere disagreement with the judge's findings are clearly not
    sufficient as the Court of Appeal's judgment makes abundantly clear. It
    would have to be shown that no other judge could reasonably  have  come
    to the findings that this judge had come to. It is clear  however  that
    this hurdle has been missed by a significant margin. The  findings  are
    sufficiently and clearly reasoned. In the end the grounds amount to  no
    more than a mere disagreement with the judge's decision.

17. In the circumstances, in  relation  to  the  grounds  which  deal  with
    credibility, there is nothing to them that enables me to conclude  that
    there was a material error of law.  I am unable to detect any  material
    error of law in the findings.

18. Thirdly, the grounds state that the  judge  considered  the  wrong  and
    irrelevant law. This relates to Paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Again, having explored this with the appellant's  Counsel  this
    morning, it is quite clear that  the  judge  had  only  considered  the
    matters which are now complained  of  because  they  were  the  grounds
    raised by the appellant's Counsel at the hearing before her.  The judge
    referred to Paragraph 276ADE at paragraph 24 of her decision.

19. In fact there was  no  appeal  before  the  judge  in  respect  of  the
    Immigration Rules or Article 8. As was conceded during the  submissions
    before us, this always was and indeed is, an appeal in respect  of  the
    EEA Regulations only.  Therefore whatever might have been said  by  the
    judge in respect of the Immigration Rules and Article 8 is no more than
    obiter in any event. There was no Immigration Rules or Article  8  ECHR
    appeal so the Immigration Rules and Article  8  aspects  could  not  be
    considered. It is an entirely a matter for the Appellant,  but  if  she
    wishes to make an application for  leave  to  remain  pursuant  to  the
    Immigration Rules or Article 8 ECHR then  she  can  do  that  with  the
    appropriate application to the Secretary of State. That matter  is  not
    before us though and so we cannot deal with it.

20. Finally, it is said in the grounds of appeal that there was  a  failure
    in the judge's decision to take into account that she was dealing  with
    the appellant's daughter rather than a son and it is  said  that  there
    was constant reference to the child having a masculine  gender.   Again
    having explored this with the appellant's Counsel it is clear  that  in
    the very many paragraphs that the judge did refer  to  the  appellant's
    child it is in the feminine gender with "she" and  "her",  having  been
    used albeit in one paragraph, paragraph 5, there is reference to "him".
    We do not see that there is any material error of law that can arise by
    that unfortunate slip which has occurred, but it  is  no  more  than  a
    slip. It is not a material error of law.

21. In the circumstances, taken individually or cumulatively, there  is  no
    sufficient basis in the grounds of appeal upon which  this  application
    can succeed.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.  The determination of the  First  Tier
Tribunal stands and the appeal remains dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014.  We do not make an order pursuant to Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been and therefore there can be no fee award
