
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23262/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18 January 2017                       |On 08 February 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             mr Chahine Mohamad

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Heidar, AA Immigration Lawyers


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Martins  dated
    25 August 2016, following a hearing of an appeal  that  took  place  on
    2 June 2016 against a decision by the Secretary of State dated 8  June
    2015, refusing to issue a residence  card  to  the  Respondent  as  the
    spouse of an EEA national.

 2. The Respondent, to whom I shall refer as the Claimant, is a national of
    Lebanon born on 11 September 1981.  He first entered the United Kingdom
    on 4 September 2014 in possession of a visit visa due to expire  on  24
    January 2015.  He was gainfully employed in Lebanon,  owning  a  mobile
    telephone shop in Lebanon and also working as  a  construction  project
    manager; he had a degree in computer engineering obtained in  2004  and
    had also lived in Ukraine where he had  pursued  studies  in  medicine.



 3. On 7 September  2014,  the  Claimant  met  Theresa  Ponzi,  an  Italian
    national, in a restaurant called Chez Vous in  Tooting  Broadway.  They
    struck up a conversation and subsequently began  a  relationship.   The
    Claimant and Ms Ponzi started cohabiting on 23 November  2014,  because
    the Claimant was living in a hotel and he moved in with Ms Ponzi to her
    address.  He proposed to her in mid-November 2014 and they  married  on
    10 December 2014.  They contacted solicitors for advice in  respect  of
    regularising his stay and on 15 January 2015 the Claimant applied for a
    residence card as confirmation of his right to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 4. On 14 April 2015, the Home Office made a visit to the address which had
    been put on the application form.  This was not, in fact,  the  address
    where the Claimant and his wife were living, which was 32 [Tulse  Hill,
    London].  The address on the form was 216 [Fulham Road,  London].   The
    reason this address had been put down on the application form  is  that
    the Claimant and his wife had intended to move to this flat and had  in
    fact paid a deposit, but on  15  January  2015  the  Claimant's  wife's
    grandmother had died in Italy and she left the United Kingdom in  order
    to travel to Italy.   Upon her return after her grandmother's  funeral,
    the Claimant's wife decided she did not want to move  and  that  whilst
    they informed the landlord that they no longer intended to move to that
    property  they  did  not  inform  their  solicitors.    Therefore   the
    Respondent attended the wrong property.

 5. Following the visit by the Home Office, the landlord of the flat at 216
    [ ~ ] informed the Claimant that the Home Office had visited, whereupon
    the Claimant contacted his solicitors, who informed the  Respondent  of
    the change of address.  The Respondent requested that the Claimant  and
    his wife complete questionnaires and submit  documents  in  support  of
    their relationship.  This was done and was forwarded to the Home Office
    in May 2015 but on 8 June 2015 the Respondent refused the  application.



 6. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal Judge who  proceeded  to
    allow the appeal, holding inter alia as follows:

    "37.     I had the opportunity of hearing and observing  the  Appellant
         and his wife give evidence which they did in a straightforward way,
         I had no reason to disbelieve anything they told me and  find  them
         credible.

    38.  It appears that the situation developed into an appeal because the
         Appellant did not  inform  the  Home  Office  that  on  account  of
         personal circumstances he and his wife had been unable to move into
         the accommodation which they had given on the application form  for
         his residence  card.   As  a  result  when  a  visit  was  made  by
         Immigration Officers to that address nobody there had heard  of  or
         seen the Appellant and  his  wife  and  so  naturally  this  raised
         suspicions about the subsistence of the marriage.

    39.  Before me there has been a  full  explanation  of  how  this  came
         about.  The move had not come about because  the  Appellant's  wife
         had lost her grandmother in Italy and after the funeral and on  her
         return to the United Kingdom decided it was too much to go  through
         a move at that time.

    40.   The  oral  and  documentary  evidence  before  me  leads  to  the
         conclusion that the Appellant and the Sponsor are genuinely married
         and do have a subsisting relationship and that they reside together
         at 32 [Tulse Hill, London].  They did complete a questionnaire sent
         to them by the Home Office after they advised the Respondent of the
         confusion over the address and the Respondent  could  have  invited
         them for interview.  I find that the Appellant has  been  with  his
         wife since September 2014 and there is evidence of  photographs  of
         them and of cohabitation in terms of utility bills, bank statements
         and such like."

 7. The Secretary  of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  this
    decision on the very narrow basis that the judge  had  failed  to  take
    into account and/or resolve conflicts of fact or  opinion  on  material
    matters.  This was based on the fact that at [24] the judge  has  noted
    the Appellant describes the front door of the property  at  [32  ~]  as
    being red and also at [24] that his wife ate dates for  breakfast,  "in
    contradiction the judge has noted that  at  paragraph  32  the  Sponsor
    states she has a brown door and at paragraph 34 that she ate  a  burger
    for breakfast".

 8. The grounds were submitted in  time  on  7  September  2016  and  in  a
    decision dated 19 December 2016,  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Frankish granted permission to appeal on the basis  that  arguably  the
    points raised have not been addressed  possibly  aggravated  by  almost
    three months from hearing to promulgation.

     Hearing

 9. At the hearing before me, I heard submissions  by  Ms  Heidar  for  the
    Claimant and by Mr Armstrong for the Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department.

10. Mr Armstrong conceded that the point made in relation to the Claimant's
    wife eating a burger was  incorrect  and  what  paragraph  34  actually
    states is "she had a burger and this morning had dates and a  yoghurt".
    He maintained however  that  the  judge  should  have  dealt  with  the
    conflicting evidence in relation to the colour of the door.

11.  Dealing with that point first the  evidence  of  the  parties  was  as
    follows. The Claimant's  evidence  recorded  at  [23]  of  the  judge's
    decision is as follows "the Appellant described the  property  that  he
    and his wife live in presently and explained that they  are  sharing  a
    flat on a council estate but that they rent privately.  The building is
    one of red stones and the door is red".

12. The evidence of the Claimant's wife is at [32]  of  the  decision  that
    "their present accommodation has a brown front door and they have lived
    there since January 2014; it is a reddish brown  building  and  an  ex-
    council flat".

13. I do not consider that this is a material discrepancy but more  perhaps
    a matter of perception of colour: the Claimant's perception being  that
    the colour of the building was red and the door was red and his  wife's
    perception being that the building is reddish brown with a brown  front
    door.

14. This is the only issue raised by the Secretary of State  and  given  my
    finding above it does not constitute a material error  of  law  on  the
    part of the First tier Tribunal Judge.  The material issue  before  the
    judge, based on the decision of 8 June 2015  was  in  relation  to  the
    couple's address, which it was asserted cast doubt on the  veracity  of
    the claimed relationship. The Judge  found  that  issue  to  have  been
    addressed by the fact that the Claimant and his wife had  always  lived
    together at 32 Lansdell House and had not in fact moved to the  address
    on the application form due to a change of mind by the Claimant's wife.



15. The judge at [37] to [40] of her decision dealt fully with the  reasons
    provided  in  the  decision  letter  for  rejecting  the   claim.    In
    particular, at [37] she found the Claimant and his wife to be credible,
    having had the opportunity to hear  and  observe  the  giving  evidence
    "which they did in a straightforward way."  The fact  that  the  couple
    were residing at a  different  address  from  the  one  stated  on  the
    application form was the  issue  before  her  that  gave  rise  to  the
    assertion by the Secretary of  State  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience and the Judge's findings in  this  respect  have  not  been
    challenged by the Secretary of State.

16. I find, therefore, that there is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision, which I uphold.



Signed: Rebecca Chapman                               Date: 6 February 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
