
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23639/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Fieldhouse                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18th June 2014                               |On 30th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                       MRS Nahla Ben abdullah Ep Raihi
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Blondell, counsel instructed by Rashid & Rashid
For the Respondent:    Mr Kondola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, Mrs Nahla  Ben  Abdullah  Ep  Raihi  date  of  birth  26
    December 1978, is a citizen of Tunisia.

 2. I have considered whether any of the parties to the present proceedings
    requires the protection of an anonymity direction.  Taking  account  of
    all the circumstances I  do  not  consider  it  necessary  to  make  an
    anonymity direction.

 3. This is the Appellant's appeal against a  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Devlin promulgated on 18th December 2013.

 4. By a decision taken on 28th April 2014 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McGeachy
    granted permission to appeal.  The reasons for the decision are:-

      i) The grounds of appeal asserts that  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal erred in his consideration of the Article 8 rights of  the
         appellant and that he should have found that there were exceptional
         factors which made the decision disproportionate. They  also  refer
         to the position of the appellant and the children under EU law.

     ii) Particular in with regard to that  point  and  notwithstanding  the
         useful analysis of the relevant law set out in paragraph 42 onwards
         of the determination and the very detailed findings of fact made by
         the judge regarding the sponsor's ability to care  for  himself,  I
         find that the grounds of appeal or arguable.

 5. Thus the matter appeared before me on 18 June 2014 to determine in  the
    first instance whether or not there was a material error of law  within
    the determination.

 6.  Outline of the facts:-

         a) As stated the appellant is a national of Tunisia.  The  sponsor,
            Mr Mohammed Ben Belgacem Riahi is a British citizen.

         b)  The sponsor had been in the United Kingdom since 1970.  He  had
            had a previous marriage and had five children by  that  previous
            marriage. Some years ago he had acquired British citizenship.

         c) The sponsor and the appellant married on 20  September  2006  in
            Tunisia. Some 13 days later the sponsor returned to  the  United
            Kingdom.

         d) The sponsor visited the appellant in Tunisia  in  December  2006
            and  December  2007.  In  December  2007  the  appellant  became
            pregnant. The first child of the marriage was born on 27  August
            2008. A further child was  born  on  12  April  2013.  Both  the
            children are British citizens. After 2008 the  sponsor  did  not
            visit Tunisia but the appellant commenced to  visit  the  United
            Kingdom, visiting some 2 to 3 times.

         e) The appellant came ostensibly as a visitor to the United Kingdom
            on 19 June 2012.  The  appellant  has  remained  in  the  United
            Kingdom since that date.

         f) Between 2008 and 2010 the  sponsor  began  to  experience  heart
            problems. He suffered cardiomyopathy and  heart  failure.  On  2
            December 2010 he underwent an operation to fit a  pacemaker.  It
            is alleged that post the operation his health  and  memory  have
            deteriorated and he has become baby like. Post the operation the
            sponsor was placed in "sheltered  accommodation".   Due  to  his
            medical condition the sponsor is unable to take  employment  and
            is dependent upon pension tax credit, child tax credit,  council
            tax credit and incapacity  benefit.  FTTJ  Devlin  made  adverse
            credibility findings with regard to the claims in respect of the
            sponsor's medical condition, in that he found that the appellant
            had sought to overstate the sponsor's medical condition.

         g) That was supported in part by  the  statement  by  the  sponsor.
            According to the evidence given in the  first-tier  the  sponsor
            was able to look after himself. However, it  was  asserted  that
            the two children of the family would have no one to  look  after
            them and would  have  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  with  the
            appellant, if the appellant were removed from the UK.

         h) The appellant having come to the United Kingdom on 19 June  2012
            became pregnant and gave birth to the second child  as  referred
            to above on 12 April 2013. The first child of the family is  now
            attending school in the United Kingdom and  is  allegedly  well-
            settled and making good progress.

         i) Having regard to the condition of her husband and  the  position
            of the two children application  was  made  on  the  appellant's
            behalf on 10 October 2012 to remain in the United Kingdom as the
            spouse of a person present and settled here.

 7. It was conceded before me that the appellant could  not  succeed  under
    the rules and could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  appendix  FM  or
    paragraph 276 ADE. The appeal had  therefore  to  be  considered  under
    Article 8 outside the rules.

 8. The appellant had entered the United Kingdom on the 19  June  2012  and
    was making application to remain on 10 October 2012. If  for  no  other
    reason the appellant could not succeed under the Rules as Appendix FM E-
    LTRP  2.1  Immigration  Status  Requirements  precludes  the  appellant
    applying under appendix FM as a spouse, because  at  the  time  of  her
    application she was a visitor and had valid leave granted for a  period
    of less than six months.

 9. Similarly the appellant as a parent could not succeed under Appendix FM
    E-LTRPT.3.1., because again that precludes a  person  that  is  in  the
    United Kingdom as a visitor or with valid leave granted for a period of
    less than six months from applying.

10. As part of the submissions  made  on  the  appellant's  behalf  it  was
    asserted that the judge in applying the requirements of the  rules  had
    wrongly construed EX.1(a) as requiring not only that  the  children  be
    British nationals but also that they were required to have spent  seven
    years immediately preceding the application in the  United  Kingdom.  A
    clear reading of E-LTRPT.2.2. makes of that the child has either to  be
    a British citizen or to have lived in the UK for 7 years. Certainly  in
    paragraph 32 FTTJ Devlin is mistaken as to the effect of the rules.

11. It was submitted that having approached the requirements of  the  rules
    on a false basis that  infected  the  approach  taken  with  regard  to
    Article 8.

12. From paragraph 30 of the determination onwards  the  judge  points  out
    other factors which lead him to the conclusion that the appellant could
    not meet the requirements of the rules  including  the  fact  that  the
    appellant could not meet the financial  requirements  of  paragraph  E-
    LTRP.3.1. nor had the required documentary evidence under Appendix  FM-
    SE been submitted.

13. The appellant's representative sought to argue that consistent with the
    case of Gulshan 2013 UKUT 640 the  starting  point  for  assessment  of
    Article 8 was family life under the rules  and  having  assessed  those
    factors under the rules consideration had to be given as to whether  or
    not there were factors justifying consideration outside the rules.  The
    contention being that as the rules are the starting point and as  there
    had been a failure to look at the rules correctly, there was  an  error
    which infected the whole of the assessment.

14. Looking at the judge's assessment of the requirements of the rules, the
    judge has given valid reasons for finding that the appellant  does  not
    meet the requirements of the rules.

15. The judge has made specific findings with regard  to  material  aspects
    such as the medical condition of the sponsor.  Whilst  it  is  asserted
    that there was medical evidence before the judge, there is  no  medical
    opinion indicating that the sponsor was unable to  look  after  himself
    and the evidence from the sponsor  directly  contradicted  such  claim.
    The judge has specifically found that the condition of the sponsor  has
    been exaggerated by the appellant. That was a finding of fact the judge
    was entitled to make on the evidence that was before him.

16. The judge has also assessed the nature and extent of  the  relationship
    of the sponsor to his children. In respect of  all  those  factors  the
    judge has given valid reasons for coming to  the  conclusions  that  he
    did.

17. The appellant could not meet the financial requirements of the rules or
    the documentary requirements of the rules as set out.

18. Submissions were made with regard to paragraph EX.1 but as  is  pointed
    out in the case of Sabir 2014 UKUT 63(IAC) EX.1 is not  a  freestanding
    ground.

19. The judge has therefore  made  a  full  assessment  of  the  rules  and
    Appendix FM and  given  valid  reasons  for  the  conclusions  that  he
    reached. Those reasons are  not  infected  by  the  error  set  out  in
    paragraph 32 of the determination. Whilst the judge has made  an  error
    in that respect that error does not infect the other  factual  findings
    made by the judge.

20. The judge has also assessed the private life aspects of  paragraph  276
    ADE. The judge has again given  valid  reasons  the  finding  that  the
    appellant does not meet the requirements with regard to private life.

21. The most recent authorities on the issue of  the  relationship  between
    article 8 and the rules are the cases of Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640, Nagre
    [2013] EWHC 720 and Haleemudeen [2014] EWCA Civ 558.   The  cases  make
    the point that the Rules are Article 8 compliant and that it would only
    be where the  facts  warrant  consideration  outside  the  rules  under
    Article 8 that Article 8 needs to be considered on the basis of  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27.

22. In considering the issues raised the judge has specifically looked  the
    best interests of  the  children  as  is  evident  from  paragraph  152
    onwards. Judge clearly also took  into  account  the  effect  upon  the
    children if the children were to be removed from  the  United  Kingdom.
    However the judge has properly assessed all the factors.

23. The judge specifically noted that the appellant had been able  to  live
    in Tunisia with the eldest child for four years and three months. There
    was nothing to suggest that the child and the appellant did not enjoy a
    satisfactory standard of living.  The  judge  has  looked  at  all  the
    factors including a wider family support the appellant had in Tunisia.

24.  In assessing whether or not the factors which justify consideration of
    article 8 outside the rules the judge has considered  with  great  care
    the best interests of  the  children,  the  medical  condition  of  the
    sponsor and all other relevant factors.

25. The appellant had entered the United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor  with  no
    expectation that she would be allowed to remain here. The appellant did
    not meet the requirements of the rules to be allowed to remain here. In
    accordance with the case law the judge properly considered  whether  or
    not the circumstances were such as to justify consideration of  article
    8 outside the rules and has given  valid  reasons  for  coming  to  the
    conclusions that he did. Whilst the judge has made an  error  such  was
    not material taking into account the other findings made by the judge

26. In the circumstances the judge has assessed all  the  material  factors
    and was entitled to come to the conclusion that he did on the basis  of
    the evidence presented. For the reasons set out there  is  no  material
    error of law within the original determination.  I uphold the  decision
    to dismiss this appeal on all grounds.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure


