
[pic]

IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23392/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                    |Decision and Reasons                |
|On 29th October, 2014                  |Promulgated On 19th November 2014   |
|Signed, 17th November, 2014            |                                    |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                         syed tahir ali shah bukhari
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Nicholson of Counsel instructed by Thornhills
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnyc, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Pakistan and was born on 6th  September,
    1969.  His wife and three children are dependants.  His wife  was  born
    on 1st July, 1977.  His eldest daughter was born on  22nd  July,  1998.
    His youngest daughter was born on 11th November, 2002 and his  youngest
    child, a son was born in the United Kingdom on 24th May, 2008.

2.   The appellant made application to the respondent for  leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom on the grounds that his removal would  place  the
    United Kingdom in breach of his obligations under the Human Rights  Act
    1998.  The respondent refused that application in the decision taken on
    19th May, 2014, when she  also  gave  directions  for  the  appellant's
    removal under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.   The
    appellant appealed that decision to the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Gladstone  in  Manchester
    on 25th July, 2014.

Immigration History

3.   It is important that I set out fully the  immigration  history  of  the
    appellant and his dependants.

The Appellant

4.   The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 28th November, 1999,  as  a
    visitor with leave until 28th May, 2000.

5.   On 27th February, 2004 the appellant entered the United  Kingdom  on  a
    multi-entry visitor visa valid  from  13th  January,  2004  until  13th
    January, 2009.  After each entry, leave was valid for six months or  to
    the end of the visa, whichever is shortest.  As such his leave  expired
    on 27th August, 2004.

6.   On 11th May, 2011 the appellant submitted an application for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on human rights grounds under Article 8 of
    the ECHR.  On 21st October, 2013 he requested a reconsideration of  his
    previous application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on human
    rights grounds under Article 8.

Appellant's Wife

7.   The appellant's wife entered the United Kingdom on 27th February,  2004
    on a multi-entry visit visa valid from 13th January,  2004  until  17th
    March, 2004.   On  4th  May,  2011  she  submitted  an  application  as
    dependant for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  on  human  rights
    grounds  under  Article  8  and  on  21st  October,  2013  requested  a
    reconsideration of his previous application.

The Appellant's oldest Daughter

8.   The appellant's oldest daughter entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  27th
    February, 2004 on a multi-entry visit visa  valid  from  13th  January,
    2004 until 17th March, 2004 and was a dependant in the application  for
    leave made on 4th May, 2011 made by her father on human rights  grounds
    under Article 8.  She was also dependent  on  the  renewed  application
    made on 21st October, 2013.

The Appellant's youngest Daughter

9.   Like her sister she entered the United Kingdom on 27th  February,  2004
    on a multi-entry visit visa valid  from  13th  January,  2004  to  17th
    March, 2004 and  was  a  dependant  on  the  application  made  by  the
    appellant on 4th May, 2011 to remain  on  human  rights  grounds  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.   She  was  also  a  dependant  on  the  renewed
    application made on 21st October, 2013.

The Appellant's Son

10.  The appellant's son was born in the United Kingdom on 28th  May,  2008,
    but he was dependent also in the application made on 4th May, 2011  and
    renewed application made on 21st October, 2013.


The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

11.  The judge  had  before  her  a  statement  prepared  by  the  appellant
    together with a statement from the appellant's  eldest  daughter.   The
    judge heard oral evidence from the appellant who had intended to return
    home when he left Pakistan.  His daughter started school  in  September
    2004 and this was when he decided that he had  friends  living  in  the
    United Kingdom and did not wish  to  return.   He  concluded  that  his
    children would have a better education in  the  United  Kingdom  and  a
    better life here.

12.  It was accepted on behalf of the appellant that he could not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix  FM  in  relation  to  family  life  or  under
    paragraph 276ADE in relation to private life.  The judge was  urged  to
    allow the appeal outside the Immigration  Rules.   The  judge  recorded
    submissions made to her in respect  of  EV  (Philippines)  &  Others  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874  and
    noted  that  the  best  interests  of  the  children  are   a   primary
    consideration.  The judge was referred specifically by the  appellant's
    solicitor to paragraph 35 of EB  and to paragraph 51.  She  noted  that
    the appellant and all dependants were citizens of Pakistan and that, to
    paraphrase paragraph 58 of EV, if  neither  parent  had  the  right  to
    remain then it is the background against which the  assessment  of  the
    best interests of the children is conducted and the  ultimate  question
    would be, is it reasonable to expect the child  to  follow  the  parent
    with no right to remain in the country of origin.  The judge noted that
    neither the appellant nor his dependants were British, nor had  any  of
    them the right to remain in the United Kingdom.

13.  The judge says at paragraph 88 of her determination that  the  starting
    point in the appeal was the best interests of the  three  children  and
    she believed that their best interests was  served  by  them  remaining
    with their parents.  She noted the children's ages and  the  fact  that
    the two eldest ones had been in the United Kingdom since 27th February,
    2004 although they have been without leave in the United Kingdom  since
    27th August, 2004.  The youngest one had been  in  the  United  Kingdom
    since his birth on 24th May,  2006.   The  judge  reminded  herself  at
    paragraph 36 of EV,


         "The longer  the  child  has  been  here,  the  more  advanced  (or
         critical) the state of his education, the looser his ties with  his
         country in question, and the more deleterious the  consequences  of
         his return, the greater the weight  falls  into  one  side  of  the
         scales."

     The judge noted that the eldest daughter has just taken her  GCSEs  and
    is awaiting the results and is due to start A levels at a  new  college
    in September.  She noted that this daughter's attitude to learning  was
    stated to be excellent in the main, one or two being described as being
    good.

14.  The judge had reports in respect of the  two  younger  children,  which
    she carefully examined and considered.  She noted  that  the  appellant
    was educated to degree level and his wife had a diploma  in  arts.   No
    evidence had been submitted  to  the  judge  concerning  the  education
    system in Pakistan and noted that the children had a number of  cousins
    in Pakistan, all of whom are attending state schools.  She referred  to
    and quoted Lord Justice Levison at paragraph 60 of EV.  She noted  that
    on the evidence before her the appellant and his dependants appeared to
    live a very self-contained life in the United Kingdom bordering on  the
    reclusive.  The appellant's wife has been in the United Kingdom for ten
    years but not learnt to speak English.  The judge also noted  that  the
    appellant's eldest daughter appeared to have had more contact with  her
    family in Pakistan than with  any  friends  or  others  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The judge further noted that the appellant's father and three
    brothers and their wives and families continue to  live  communally  in
    Pakistan and that that was where the appellant and  his  wife  and  two
    older children lived before coming to the United  Kingdom.   The  judge
    pointed out that in  making  submissions,  the  appellant's  solicitors
    submitted that the three children consider the  United  Kingdom  to  be
    their home.    She noted that it was a very self-contained life, almost
    reclusive.  She noted that it was the appellant who decided that he and
    his dependant should not return to the United Kingdom in 2004 and  that
    it was only some seven years later when the appellant sought to rectify
    his position  in  an  application  for  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

15.  The judge took account of the fact that before  coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom the appellant had only ever been here as a visitor and  had  no
    connection with the UK.   She  did  not  believe  that  life  would  be
    difficult for the appellant or his dependants were they  to  return  to
    Pakistan given that they have extensive parental  and  maternal  family
    and  existing  home  and  given  the  appellant's  qualifications   and
    experiences.

16.  The judge concluded on the evidence before her that there  was  nothing
    about the appellant, his dependants or their  respective  circumstances
    which would properly allow her to allow the  appellant's  appeal  under
    Article 8.  She dismissed the appeal.

17.  Lengthy grounds were submitted by Mr Nicholson extending to  some  nine
    pages, the majority of which were quotations  from  various  judgments.
    As he accepted the complaint he made with regard to  the  determination
    and which, he submitted, meant that it could not stand,  was  that  the
    judge failed to give any consideration to paragraph 276ADE of Statement
    of Changes  in  Immigration  Rules,  as  amended,  in  respect  of  the
    children.  The Secretary of State had only addressed  paragraph  276ADE
    in respect of the parents in the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter  and  the
    judge had simply failed to address this Rule.

18.  I was rather surprised at the  brief  submission  he  made,  given  the
    lengthy application Mr Nicholson had submitted.  In the application  he
    had suggested that the judge had failed to consider the best  interests
    of the children and failed to follow EH  (Tanzania),  EV  (Philippines)
    and EA in doing so and had not considered Section 117 of the  2002  Act
    which, although not in force at the time  of  the  hearing  before  the
    judge, was in force when she reached her decision.

19.   Responding  briefly,  the  Presenting  Officer  suggested   that   the
    determination contained no material error of law.  It  was  clear  from
    the very extensive examination of the interests of  the  children  that
    the judge was firmly of the view that it would be reasonable in all the
    circumstances for the children to return to Pakistan.  The family  were
    a self-contained unit and it could not properly be said that this would
    have been a situation where the judge would have been entitled to allow
    an Article 8 appeal outside the Rules.

20.  I reserved my decision.

21.  Paragraph 276ADE of Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC  395,
    as amended ("the immigration rules") provides:-

    "Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on the
grounds of private life
    276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
    remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of
    application, the applicant:
         (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-
         LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and
         (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the
    grounds of private life in the UK; and
         (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years
    (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
         UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of imprisonment)
         and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the
         UK; or
         (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent at
         least half of his life living continuously in the UK (discounting
         any period of imprisonment); or
         (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above, has
    lived continuously in the
         UK for less than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment)
    but there would 18
         be very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration  into
         the country to which he would have to go if required to leave the
         UK."




22.  Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 inserts paragraphs  117A,  117B,
    117C and 117D in Part 5A under the hearing  "Article  8  of  the  ECHR:
    public interest consideration".  It is set out in full in the  Appendix
    to this determination.

23.  Paragraph 117C clearly does not apply to  this  appeal,  but  paragraph
    117B does since it came into effect on 28th July, 2014  and  the  judge
    did not sign her determination until 30th July, 2014.

24.  At paragraph 105 of the judge's determination she said this:-

         "105.    In summary, the best  interests  of  the  children  are  a
             primary consideration but not the only consideration.  I  have
             found that their best interests lie in  remaining  with  their
             parents.  It does not follow that this means that they  should
             remain in the United Kingdom.  I have  taken  account  of  the
             length of time they have been here.  I  have  found  that,  in
             that time, the family has lived a self-contained life.  I have
             taken account of what stage their education  has  reached.   I
             reiterate that N and F [the two older children] have  come  to
             the end of their specific age  of  their  education.   S  [the
             appellant's son] has completed only one year of primary school
             and is of an age where he can be expected to adapt, bearing in
             mind that N (his older sister) was of a similar age  when  she
             was taken from Pakistan and placed in school in the UK.   They
             have retained the ability to speak Urdu.  Here is knowledge of
             the family within Pakistan,  with  some  limited  contact.   I
             consider that there is nothing in  the  evidence  to  indicate
             that the  children  would  not  adapt  to  life  in  Pakistan,
             particularly as they would be  returning  to  family  members.
             Contact in other forms can  be  maintained  with  A  [a  close
             school friend of the appellant's oldest daughter], given  that
             the physical contact between her and N [the appellant's oldest
             daughter] has come to an end."

25.  The judge said at paragraph 106 that she believed  that  the  appellant
    would have a reasonable prospect of obtaining employment  in  Pakistan,
    given his qualifications and previous experience  and  his  ability  to
    adapt as he had done in the United Kingdom and  in  paragraph  108  she
    said:

             "Having considered and  endeavoured  to  balance  all  of  the
             above, I do not find that there are  compelling  circumstances
             not sufficiently recognised under the Rules.  Nor  do  I  find
             that there are any 'insurmountable obstacles' in  relation  to
             practical issues with reference to the circumstances to  which
             the appellant is likely  to  return  in  Pakistan.   There  is
             nothing to indicate that the children are likely to  encounter
             any serious difficulties in  Pakistan.   I  find  that  it  is
             reasonable in all the circumstances for them to be expected to
             live in Pakistan with their parents." [My emphasis]

26.  The judge reached these conclusions having very  meticulously  examined
    the  evidence  before  her.   She  quotes  extensively  from   EV   and
    demonstrates that she has very much had it in mind.  She  has  examined
    the children's school reports and the evidence submitted to  her.   She
    carefully  looked  at  the   application   letters,   the   appellant's
    circumstances in the United Kingdom, his dependants' circumstances  and
    the situation that the children would face on their return to  Pakistan
    and was entitled to find, having examined that evidence, that it  would
    be reasonable for the children to be expected to live in Pakistan  with
    their parents.

27.  The judge has not set out paragraph 276(iv) of the  Immigration  Rules,
    but I do not believe that to be a fatal flaw.  She has  very  carefully
    considered the evidence and it is clear  from  her  determination  that
    whilst she did not particularly address her mind to the requirements of
    paragraph  276ADE(iv),  she  did   consider   whether,   in   all   the
    circumstances it would be reasonable for them to be expected to live in
    Pakistan with their parents.  In the circumstances I am afraid  that  I
    do agree with the Presenting Officer.  The grounds disclose no material
    error in the judge's determination which I uphold.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
     17th November, 2014

    The Appendix above referred to


"19 Article 8 of the ECHR: public interest considerations

          This sectionnoteType=Explanatory Notes has no associated
After Part 5 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 insert-



"PART 5AArticle 8 of the ECHR: public interest considerations

117AApplication of this Part
(1)This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to  determine
whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

(a)breaches a person's right to respect for private and  family  life  under
Article 8, and

(b)as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act
1998.

(2)In considering the public interest question, the court or  tribunal  must
(in particular) have regard-

(a)in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and

(b)in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals,  to  the
considerations listed in section 117C.

(3)In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means the  question  of
whether an interference with a person's right to  respect  for  private  and
family life is justified under Article 8(2).

117BArticle 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases
(1)The maintenance of  effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the  public
interest.

(2)It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests  of  the
economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who  seek  to  enter
or remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak English,  because  persons
who can speak English-

(a)are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

(b)are better able to integrate into society.

(3)It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests  of  the
economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who  seek  to  enter
or remain in the United Kingdom are financially  independent,  because  such
persons-

(a)are not a burden on taxpayers, and

(b)are better able to integrate into society.

(4)Little weight should be given to-

(a)a private life, or

(b)a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

that is established by a person at a time when the person is in  the  United
Kingdom unlawfully.

(5)Little weight should be given to a private life established by  a  person
at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.

(6)In the case of a person who is not  liable  to  deportation,  the  public
interest does not require the person's removal where-

(a)the person has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
qualifying child, and

(b)it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the  United
Kingdom.

117CArticle  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases   involving   foreign
criminals
(1)The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.

(2)The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign  criminal,  the
greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

(3)In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been sentenced  to  a
period of imprisonment of four years or more, the public  interest  requires
C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

(4)Exception 1 applies where-

(a)C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of C's  life,


(b)C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom, and

(c)there would be very significant obstacles to  C's  integration  into  the
country to which C is proposed to be deported.

(5)Exception 2 applies where C has a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
with  a  qualifying  partner,  or  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of C's  deportation  on
the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

(6)In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a  period  of
imprisonment  of  at  least  four  years,  the  public   interest   requires
deportation unless there are very compelling circumstances, over  and  above
those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

(7)The considerations in subsections  (1)  to  (6)  are  to  be  taken  into
account where a court or tribunal is considering  a  decision  to  deport  a
foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason  for  the  decision  was
the offence or offences for which the criminal has been convicted.

117DInterpretation of this Part
(1)In this Part-

            . "Article 8" means Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on
              Human Rights;

            . "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of  18
              and who-

              (a)
              is a British citizen, or

              (b)
              has lived in the United Kingdom for a  continuous  period  of
              seven years or more;

            . "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

              (a)
              is a British citizen, or

              (b)
              who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the  meaning  of
              the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).

(2)In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

(a)who is not a British citizen,

(b)who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

(c)who-

(i)has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 12 months,

(ii)has been convicted of an offence that has caused serious harm, or

(iii)is a persistent offender.

(3)For the purposes of subsection (2)(b),  a  person  subject  to  an  order
under-

(a)section 5 of the Criminal Procedure (Insanity) Act 1964 (insanity etc),

(b)section 57 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 (insanity  etc),
or

(c)Article 50A of the Mental Health (Northern Ireland) Order 1986  (insanity
etc),

has not been convicted of an offence.

(4)In this Part, references to a person who has been sentenced to  a  period
of imprisonment of a certain length of time-

(a)do not include a person who has received a suspended sentence  (unless  a
court subsequently orders that the sentence or any part of it  (of  whatever
length) is to take effect);

(b)do  not  include  a  person  who  has  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
imprisonment of that length of time only by virtue  of  being  sentenced  to
consecutive sentences amounting in aggregate to that length of time;

(c)include a person who is sentenced to detention, or  ordered  or  directed
to be detained, in  an  institution  other  than  a  prison  (including,  in
particular, a hospital or an  institution  for  young  offenders)  for  that
length of time; and

(d)include a person who  is  sentenced  to  imprisonment  or  detention,  or
ordered or directed to be detained, for an  indeterminate  period,  provided
that it may last for at least that length of time.

(5)If any question arises for the purposes of this  Part  as  to  whether  a
person is a British citizen, it is for the person  asserting  that  fact  to
prove it."


