
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  IA/23263/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On Thursday 8 June 2017                    |On Wednesday 14 June 2017      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                        MISS JOYCILDA VERONICA WALKER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Palmer, Counsel instructed by Stuart & Co
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There  is  no  good
reason to make an anonymity direction in this case.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The Appellant appeals against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Ruth promulgated  on  26  September  2016  ("the  Decision").  By  the
Decision  the  Judge  dismissed   the   Appellant's   appeal   against   the
Respondent's decision dated 3 June 2015 refusing her application  for  leave
to remain on the basis of her family and private life.

2.    The facts of the Appellant's case  are  not  in  dispute.   She  is  a
national of Jamaica born on 15 January 1954.   She  entered  the  UK  on  22
December 1999 with leave  extended  until  22  June  2000  (as  a  visitor).
Thereafter she overstayed.  She made no further attempt  to  regularise  her
status until 21 December 2009 when she  sought  leave  to  remain  on  human
rights grounds.  In response to  a  request  for  further  information,  the
Appellant's representatives sent further  documents  on  11  November  2010.
The application was refused on 17 November 2010 without a right of appeal.

3.    The Appellant's representatives sought reconsideration of the  refusal
on 29 December 2010 and mentioned for the first time that the Appellant  was
in a relationship with Mr William Graham now aged eighty-one years who is  a
British citizen but was originally born in Jamaica.  He came to  the  UK  in
1959 and has not been back to Jamaica, I was told, for about sixteen  years.
 He owns a parcel of land there.  Mr Graham owns his  own  property  in  the
UK.  The couple have been in a relationship it  appears  since  2006.   They
apparently moved in together in 2008.

4.    Mr Graham is now retired and in receipt  of  a  pension.   It  appears
from a document in the Appellant's  bundle  that  in  2013-14,  Mr  Graham's
income before tax was �17,002.62 but there is limited information as to  his
means and it is not clear  whether  the  Appellant  could  meet  the  income
threshold under the Immigration Rules ("the  Rules").   The  Appellant  does
not contend that she could meet that requirement.

5.    There is some very limited information in the  Appellant's  bundle  as
to the Appellant's health.   Although  there  is  some  information  in  the
bundle which suggests that Mr Graham suffers  from  age-related  ill  heath,
there is no evidence from a medical professional.

6.    The Appellant has other family in the UK including adult children  and
their children.  She has one daughter who  remains  in  Jamaica.  Mr  Graham
also has an adult daughter in the UK.

7.     The Judge found at [25] of the Decision that the Appellant could  not
meet the requirements of the Rules in relation to her family life  and  that
the Rules were not met in relation to her  private  life.   He  went  on  to
consider the Appellant's case outside the Rules from [34]  to  [51]  of  the
Decision before concluding that removal of the  Appellant  would  not  be  a
disproportionate interference with her private and family life.

8.    The Appellant's application for permission to  appeal  to  the  First-
tier Tribunal was made over three months out of time.   First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Page refused permission on the basis that the application was  out  of
time.    He indicated however that, even if he had extended time,  he  would
have refused permission on the merits.

9.    Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  on
20 April 2017 in the following terms:-

      "The lateness of the application for permission to appeal to the First-
      tier Tribunal ("FtT") is not an issue that  this  permission  decision
      needs to address, given that the First-tier Tribunal Judge ("the FtJ")
      refused the application for permission rather than 'not admitting'  it
      in conformity with the 'new' FtT procedure Rules.

      Although it does not appear either that the FtJ was addressed  on  the
      issue or that the appellant's skeleton argument raised the matter, and
      the initial grounds seeking permission do not raise it, I consider  it
      arguable that the FtJ erred  in  law  in  deciding  that  he  was  not
      required to consider the applicability  of  Ex.1.(b)  of  Appendix  FM
      because the appellant could not meet the financial requirements of the
      Rules [22]. The later, wider consideration of Article 8 arguably  does
      no address the issue of insurmountable  obstacles  sufficiently  fully
      such as to mean that any error of law is not material."

10.   The appeal comes before me to determine whether there  is  a  material
error of law in the Decision and if so to either  re-make  the  decision  or
remit to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

Discussion and conclusions

11.   At the outset of the hearing, Mr Jarvis  raised  a  preliminary  issue
about the first  paragraph  of  the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal.   He
submitted that there was an issue on timeliness of the permission to  appeal
application to the First-tier Tribunal which the Upper  Tribunal  Judge  was
wrong to refuse to deal with as he did.  This raises  an  interesting  issue
of law and procedure with which it may well be  appropriate  for  the  Upper
Tribunal to grapple  in  an  appropriate  case  with  the  benefit  of  full
argument on both sides.  This was though raised late in the day and  clearly
took Mr Palmer for the Appellant by  surprise.   Further,  having  heard  Mr
Palmer's  submissions  regarding  the  reasons  why  the   application   for
permission to appeal was made late, Mr Jarvis accepted  that  in  this  case
there did appear to be good reason why the application was out of time.   He
therefore abandoned any reliance on this point.  For that reason also, I  do
not need to deal with ground one of the Appellant's grounds  which  concerns
FTTJ Page's refusal to permit the application out of time.

12.   The Appellant therefore raises one ground  of  appeal  which  concerns
the Judge's finding that the Appellant could not succeed under the Rules  in
relation to her family life.

13.   The Judge dealt  with  this  part  of  the  Appellant's  case  in  the
following way:-


      "[21] Turning first to the provisions contained within the immigration
      rules in relation to private and family life, I have regard  first  to
      Appendix FM.


      [22]   Although  the   appellant   does   satisfy   the   relationship
      requirements in section E-LTRP1.1, she cannot  satisfy  the  financial
      requirements in section E-LTRP3.1 as  she  has  provided  very  little
      evidence, in the specified format, to show  she  could  satisfy  these
      requirements.   She  has  provided  some  bank  statements  and  other
      financial documents but these neither come in  the  specified  format,
      nor demonstrate her ability to comply  with  the  mandatory  financial
      thresholds.


      [23]  For example, the bank statements from Natwest relate to a credit
      card as do the Barclaycard statements.  The letters from  the  Halifax
      do not provide any financial information and there appears  to  be  no
      other documentation relating to the financial requirements.


      [24]  I note the partner said in evidence that he receives  a  pension
      but no  information  about  this  has  been  provided  and  I  cannot,
      therefore, assess whether this  would  take  the  appellant  over  the
      relevant financial threshold.


      [25]   In  these  circumstances  the  appellant  cannot  satisfy   the
      requirements of Appendix FM and it is not necessary for me to go on to
      consider whether or not  the  requirements  of  EX1,  the  immigration
      status requirements of E-LTRP2.2 not being satisfied are met."

14.   Mr Jarvis for the Respondent accepts (as does  the  Respondent's  Rule
24 statement) that the Judge fell into error in  this  passage  but  submits
that the error is not material.  I agree that this passage of  the  Decision
does disclose an error of law.  The Judge  appears  to  have  thought  that,
because the Appellant was unable to meet the  income  threshold  requirement
under the Rules, EX.1 of the Rules was not relevant.  It is clear  from  the
Rules, however, that EX.1 falls to  be  considered  provided  the  Appellant
could meet the suitability requirements and the eligibility requirements  in
E-LTRP.1.1-1.12.  and  E-LTRP.2.1.   As  the  Judge  observes,  the   income
threshold requirements are to be found at  E-LTRP.3.1.   The  Appellant  did
not therefore need to satisfy that requirement if EX.1.1 applies.

15.   The Appellant's skeleton argument for the hearing  before  the  First-
tier Tribunal Judge does not make any reference to this point.  Nor does  it
appear from the Decision that the Appellant's Counsel  argued  the  case  in
this way.  However, the Respondent  had  dealt  with  the  application  also
applying EX.1 (even though she did not  accept  that  the  relationship  was
genuine and subsisting).   The Judge should therefore  have  been  alert  to
the application of this provision. The Judge did therefore  err  in  failing
to consider the Appellant's case under paragraph EX.1.1.

16.   That though is not the  end  of  the  matter.   Section  12  Tribunal,
Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 makes clear that, where the  Upper  Tribunal
finds that the making of a decision by the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
making of an error on a point of law, the  Upper  Tribunal  "may  (but  need
not) set aside the decision".   There is  therefore  an  issue  whether  the
error is material.  If it is not, there would be no point in  setting  aside
the Decision.

17.   The parties' submissions in this regard can be summarised as  follows.
 Mr Palmer says that  the  Judge  could,  on  the  facts  and  evidence  put
forward, have found there  to  be  insurmountable  obstacles.   Although  he
accepted that the Judge had dealt with the Appellant's family  life  outside
the Rules which might in some cases lead to the same  result,  he  submitted
that this was not the position here.  He pointed also to a number of  errors
which he said were made by the Judge when considering Article 8 outside  the
Rules,  particularly  in  relation  to  the  weight  to  be  given  to   the
Appellant's family life and the  relevance  of  the  Respondent's  delay  in
making a decision on the Appellant's application.

18.   Mr Palmer accepted that  "insurmountable  obstacles"  is  a  stringent
test but he submitted that it has to be  given  a  practical  and  realistic
interpretation.  The factors which he said may lead  to  a  conclusion  that
there are "insurmountable obstacles" to family life  continuing  in  Jamaica
are the Appellant's and her partner's age, the fact that  he  has  lived  in
the UK since 1959, is completely settled in the  UK  and  in  receipt  of  a
pension in the UK.  The Appellant also has most of her family in the UK.

19.   In response, although Mr Jarvis accepted that the Judge erred  in  not
applying EX.1, he  submitted  that  this  error  and  any  minor  errors  in
approach outside the Rules were not material because all the errors were  to
the Appellant's benefit.  The Judge had in fact  applied  a  less  stringent
test than that under the Rules and indeed that  advocated  by  the  case-law
outside the Rules.  The Judge found that the Appellant was not a  burden  on
the UK taxpayer.  However, that  is  not  the  test  applying  section  117B
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("section 117B").  The test  is
whether the Appellant is financially independent and  on  the  face  of  the
material produced, she is  not.   The  Respondent's  delay  was  considered.
This was not a case where the Appellant had entered  into  her  relationship
with Mr Graham at a time when she believed,  due  to  the  delay,  that  her
presence would be tolerated.  The Appellant entered into  that  relationship
prior to the delay when she and her partner knew that she had  no  right  to
be in the UK.

20.   I start by setting  out  EX.1  which  reads  as  follows  (so  far  as
relevant):-

      EX.1. This paragraph applies if
      (a)...
      or
      (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
      partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen........and there are
      insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner continuing
      outside the UK.


      EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) "insurmountable
      obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which would be
      faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their family
      life together outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would
      entail very serious hardship for the applicant or their partner."

21.   As Mr Jarvis pointed out, this test is  one  which  derives  from  the
ECtHR's decision in Jeunesse v Netherlands.   Although  Mr  Jarvis  accepted
that the application of that test to each case  is  fact  sensitive,  it  is
nonetheless clearly intended to be a  high  threshold.   The  Supreme  Court
summarised the test, in Agyarko and Ikuga v Secretary of State for the  Home
Department [2017] UKSC 11 ("Agyarko") as follows:-

      "[45]...interpreting the expression  in  the  same  sense  as  in  the
      Strasbourg case law, leave to remain would not normally be granted  in
      cases where an applicant for leave to remain under the  partner  route
      was in the UK in breach of immigration laws, unless the  applicant  or
      their partner would face very serious difficulties in continuing their
      family life together outside the UK, which could not  be  overcome  or
      would entail very  serious  hardship.   Even  in  a  case  where  such
      difficulties do not exist, however, leave to remain  can  nevertheless
      be granted  outside  the  Rules  in  "exceptional  circumstances",  in
      accordance with the Instructions: that is to say, in "circumstances in
      which refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the
      individual  such  that  refusal  of  the  application  would  not   be
      proportionate"...."

The Supreme Court went on to consider whether that approach  was  consistent
with Article 8 ECHR and concluded that it was ([48]).

22.   I turn next to consider the way in which  the  Judge  dealt  with  the
Appellant's family life outside the Rules, having failed  to  look  at  this
through the lens of the Rules.  There was no issue whether  the  Appellant's
Article 8 rights were engaged or that removal  would  interfere  with  those
rights.  As in many such cases, the only issue is  one  of  proportionality.
The Judge dealt with that issue at [44] onwards as follows:-


      "[44] As to whether the decision is a proportionate  response  to  the
      appellant's established  family  and  private  life,  I  have  in  the
      forefront of my mind the requirements contained in section 117B of the
      2002 Act.  There is no issue in relation to subsections 2 or  3  since
      the appellant speaks fluent English and is not a burden on the State.


      [45]  There is, however, a serious difficulty  for  the  appellant  in
      relation to section 117B(4).  I am required to give little weight to a
      private  life  or  a  relationship  formed  with  a  British  citizen,
      established by a person at a time when that person  has  been  in  the
      United Kingdom unlawfully.


      [46]  That is certainly the case for this appellant since her leave to
      remain, she does not dispute, came to an end in 2000 and she has  been
      unlawfully here since then.  The appellant has therefore  been  living
      illegally in this country for at least the last fourteen years and she
      and her partner knew this to be the case.


      [47]  There is also  the  matter  of  the  unexplained  delay  by  the
      respondent between 2010 and 2015.  It is clear that during periods  of
      such delay private and family life ties  may  strengthened  [sic]  and
      deepened [sic] (EB (Kosovo)) and I have no  doubt  this  is  what  has
      happened in this case.  Had  the  respondent  dealt  with  the  matter
      earlier the weight to be given to the appellant's private  and  family
      life would have been reduced.


      [48]  I therefore do give greater weight to  the  private  and  family
      life of the appellant, but this cannot overcome  the  instructions  of
      Parliament.  I am required by section 117B(4) to give "little"  weight
      to the appellant's private and family life because she has remained in
      the UK unlawfully.  The appellant's interests cannot, therefore, weigh
      heavily against those of the respondent.


      [49]  In the final analysis the appellant and  the  sponsor  ought  to
      have known that remaining illegally for so many years was unlikely  to
      end well.  The appellant is healthy and  of  working  age.   No  minor
      children are involved.  She has access to  family  members,  land  and
      financial support from her family in the UK.  In those circumstances I
      do not consider it unreasonable to expect her to return to Jamaica.


      [50]  The question then becomes how she and the partner will carry  on
      their genuine family life.  This is a matter for them  but  there  are
      various  options.   One  would  be  for  the  appellant  to  make   an
      application for entry clearance as a partner.  Mr Unigwe urged me  not
      to reach such a conclusion on the basis of Chikwamba, but that case is
      not authority for a general departure from  the  requirements  of  the
      rules and I note this is not a  case  where  the  only  issue  in  the
      balance  from  the  perspective  of  the  respondent  is  the  general
      requirement that such applications are made overseas.   In  this  case
      there is the more pressing issue that the appellant  chose  to  remain
      illegally for considerably more than a decade.


      [51]  Another option would be for the partner to  travel  to  Jamaica,
      either temporarily or permanently.  Given the fact Mr Graham knew  the
      appellant's situation from the start of their relationship  and  given
      he owns land in that country, that does  not  seem  to  me  to  be  an
      unreasonable option in all the circumstances.


      [52]   The  removal  of  the  appellant  would  therefore  not  be   a
      disproportionate interference with her Article 8 rights."

23.   Although the Appellant's grounds did not include a  challenge  to  the
Decision in relation to the assessment outside the Rules, Mr Palmer  made  a
number of submissions about the way  in  which  the  Judge  approached  this
assessment and I did not prevent him from doing so.  He pointed out that  at
[45] of the Decision, the Judge's analysis begins with the Judge giving  the
Appellant's family life "little weight" but then at [48] giving  it  greater
weight  as  a  result  of  the  Respondent's  delay  in  responding  to  the
application.  He said that it was therefore unclear  what  weight  had  been
given to the Appellant's family life.   He  also  relied  on  the  Court  of
Appeal's judgment in Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
[2016] EWCA Civ 803 ("Rhuppiah") in support of the proposition that  "little
weight" does not mean that no weight should be given.

24.   I do not accept that the Judge erred in law in relation to the  weight
to be given to the Appellant's family life.  It is clear  that  the  Judge's
starting point  was  that  "little  weight"  should  be  given  because  the
relationship was formed when the Appellant's status was unlawful.   Although
the Judge accepted that more weight should be  given  to  that  family  life
because of the Respondent's delay  (or  perhaps  more  accurately  that  the
delay might diminish the  public  interest  in  removal),  it  remained  the
position that the Appellant's  family  life  should  be  given  only  little
weight because that is what section 117B  provides  in  circumstances  where
the Appellant's stay in the UK has been for the most  part  unlawful.   That
is not inconsistent with the approach advocated in Agyarko (referring to  EB
(Kosovo); see [52] of that judgment). That is an assessment which the  Judge
was entitled to reach on the evidence.  Indeed, the suggestion that  greater
weight should be given due to the delay  may  be  generous  given  that  the
application had itself been refused timeously and what was  outstanding  was
a request for reconsideration.  However, that is not what  the  Judge  found
and I do not therefore need to deal with the point.

25.   Mr Palmer  also  suggested  that  the  Judge  had  failed  to  provide
adequate reasons why it would not be "unduly harsh" for  the  Appellant  and
Mr Graham to return to Jamaica.  He submitted that the Judge had  begun  the
assessment but had not carried it through to any  lawful  extent.   He  said
that this is relevant to whether another Judge might reach a different  view
whether there are insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life  continuing  in
Jamaica.  Mr Palmer directed my attention to  [51]  of  the  Decision  which
were, he said, the only reasons given why the couple could  be  expected  to
relocate.  Those reasons were, he submitted, limited to  the  fact  that  Mr
Graham owns land in Jamaica.

26.   The difficulty with Mr Palmer's argument is  that  it  approaches  the
issue from the wrong starting position.  As the  Judge  recognised,  section
117B provides that the Appellant's family life is to be given little  weight
because she is here unlawfully (because  of  course  section  117B  provides
that the maintenance of immigration control  is  in  the  public  interest).
That therefore is the Respondent's position as to what the  public  interest
requires. It is not for the Respondent or the Judge to make the  Appellant's
case as to what her family and private  life  involves  and  the  degree  of
interference which removal  would  entail.   It  is  for  the  Appellant  to
demonstrate the strength of her Article  8  rights  which  are  then  to  be
weighed in the balance against the public interest.  The Judge  carried  out
the balancing exercise at [49] to [51] of the  Decision.   If  the  evidence
which the Judge had was insufficient to  demonstrate  the  strength  of  the
family life which the Appellant and her partner enjoy  in  the  UK  and  the
interference which will result from  removal,  that  is  the  fault  of  the
Appellant or those who represent her.

27.   In response, Mr Jarvis pointed  out  that  the  assessment  which  the
Judge conducted outside the Rules is based on  a  test  of  whether  removal
would be unreasonable, weighing the Appellant's and her partner's Article  8
rights against the public interest.  That is a lower threshold than  whether
there would be "insurmountable obstacles".   It  follows,  Mr  Jarvis  says,
that if the Judge found that removal would not be  disproportionate  on  the
basis that it was reasonable to remove the Appellant, she could not  succeed
applying the higher threshold.  That is clearly correct.

28.   Mr Jarvis also submitted that, by assessing the position  outside  the
Rules, the Judge made it easier for  the  Appellant  to  succeed.   That  is
because he could (and did) take account of other factors which might  be  to
the Appellant's benefit such as delay.   However,  even  taking  account  of
those additional factors, the finding at [49], [51]  and  [52]  is  that  it
would  not  be  unreasonable  and  would  be  proportionate  to  remove  the
Appellant.  Mr Jarvis also drew my attention to  what  is  said  in  Agyarko
about the test to be applied outside the Rules.  That is considered  by  the
Supreme  Court  under  the  heading  "Exceptional  Circumstances".   As  the
Supreme Court there makes clear that does  not  mean  that  a  case  has  to
contain some "unique or unusual feature".  The Court goes on to say  however
that:-

      "... the test is one of proportionality.  The reference to exceptional
      circumstances in the European case law means that, in cases  involving
      precarious family life, "something very  compelling...is  required  to
      outweigh the public interest."

As Mr Jarvis submits and I accept, in this case  the  Judge  approached  the
issue against a test of whether it would be reasonable to expect family  and
private life to be enjoyed in Jamaica.  That is a lower test than  the  case
law requires.  Nonetheless the Judge reached the view that even  that  lower
test is not met.

29.   Mr Jarvis also pointed out that at [44] of  the  Decision,  the  Judge
erred in giving the Appellant credit by finding that  sections  117B(2)  and
(3) are met in this case.  As held by the Court of Appeal in  Rhuppiah,  the
factors in sections 117B(2)  and  (3)  are  neutral  if  those  factors  are
established and are only relevant if adverse to an applicant ([58]  to  [65]
of that judgment).  Mr Jarvis also rightly pointed out  that  the  issue  in
section 117B(3) is not whether the Appellant is a burden  on  taxpayers  but
whether she is "financially independent  of  others".   In  this  case,  the
evidence is that she is not.   Those  errors  though  can  only  be  to  the
Appellant's benefit.  They do not serve to  undermine  the  Judge's  finding
that removal would not be disproportionate.

30.   In conclusion, I accept that the test which the Judge applied at  [44]
to [51] of the Decision is, if anything, one which  is  overly  generous  to
the Appellant.  The Judge found - and  was  entitled  to  find  -  that  the
Appellant's family and private life were outweighed by the  public  interest
and it was therefore reasonable for her to be  removed.   That  is  a  lower
test than whether there is  "something  very  compelling"  to  outweigh  the
public interest (assessing the case  outside  the  Rules)  and  considerably
lower  than  the  stringent  test  of  whether  there  are   "insurmountable
obstacles" (under the Rules).  Since the Appellant could not meet the  lower
test applied by the Judge, it is inconceivable on  the  evidence  which  was
before the First-tier Tribunal Judge that those higher tests could be met.

31.   Mr Palmer did indicate in his submissions that, if the  Decision  were
set aside the Appellant would wish to adduce additional evidence.  He  noted
that there is for example no medical evidence in  relation  to  Mr  Graham's
health.  However, no application was made prior to the hearing before me  to
adduce further evidence.  The Appellant and  her  witnesses  were  in  court
during the hearing and all speak English.  I indicated to Mr Palmer  that  I
would be willing to hear evidence from those witnesses even in  the  absence
of any further witness statement but Mr Palmer declined that invitation  and
indicated that he would prefer to deal with the re-making at a second  stage
hearing if I found the error of law to be material. Since I have found  that
the error  of  law  is  not  material,  this  stage  does  not  arise.   The
Appellant's representatives will have been aware though from the  Directions
sent with the grant of permission that, if they  wished  to  adduce  further
evidence, an application should have been made prior to the  hearing  before
me and that they should have been prepared to deal  with  the  re-making  on
the same day as the error of law  hearing.   As  it  is,  if  the  Appellant
wishes to put forward further evidence in support of her  claim  to  remain,
she will have to make a further application to the Respondent.

32.   For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that, although the  Decision
contains an error of law, that error is not material.  I  therefore  decline
to set aside the  Decision.   I  therefore  uphold  the  Decision  with  the
outcome that the Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.

DECISION
The First-tier Tribunal Decision did not involve the making  of  a  material
error on a  point  of  law.  I  therefore  uphold  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Decision  of  Judge  Ruth  promulgated  on  26  September  2016   with   the
consequence that the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Signed           [pic] Dated:  14 June 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
