
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23150/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16th December 2014                           |On 16th January 2015       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      deputy upper Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           HAMANDEEP SINGH SANDHU
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Q Annisuddin, Legal Representative


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against  the  allowing
    of the respondent's appeal against her decision to remove him from  the
    United Kingdom pursuant to Section 10 of  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    1999. The appealed  decision  is  that  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Devittie, promulgated on the 30th October 2014.

 2. The removal decision was taken in response to the Secretary of  State's
    finding, which is disputed, that the respondent had used  deception  in
    obtaining entry clearance to the United Kingdom. That finding triggered
    the  power  of  removal  under  Section  10(1)(b)  of  the  1999   Act.
    Furthermore, by virtue of Section 10(8),  the  effect  of  the  removal
    decision was to invalidate the respondent's previous grant of leave  to
    remain.

 3. A removal decision of this kind may not be appealed whilst  the  person
    is in the United Kingdom unless, "the  appellant  has  made  an  asylum
    claim, or a human rights claim,  while  in  the  United  Kingdom"  [the
    combined effect of the sub-sections (1) and (4)(a) of Section 92 of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002].

 4.  The  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  submitted  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, by reference to the foregoing provisions, that the  appellant
    did not have a right of appeal whilst he was  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Judge Devittie dealt with that submission at paragraphs 6 to 8  of  his
    determination -

      6. The respondent raises the preliminary point, that's  the  issue  of
         first section 10 removal notice under the  immigration  and  Asylum
         act and 1999, and (as amended by section 74 of the 2002  acts,  has
         the effect of invalidating all previous leave  that  the  appellant
         may have had, and that consequently, as the appellant had no  valid
         leave at the time he made the application to vary  his  leave,  the
         decision to remove attracts only an out of country right of appeal.

      7. The respondent has not provided any documentary evidence  to  prove
         that the appellant practiced deception. I am not therefore to  make
         a finding on whether the allegation of deception is well-founded.

      8.  I  accept  that  in  terms  of  section  92  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the appellant may not  appeal  his
         removal whilst he is in the United  Kingdom.  Appellant's  counsel,
         however, makes a valid point, that section 92 provides an exception
         where an applicant  has  made  a  human  rights  claim  against  an
         immigration decision that would not otherwise be appealable in  the
         United Kingdom. I accept that the appellant has made a human rights
         claim, whilst in the United Kingdom, and accordingly, that he  does
         have a right of appeal. The  appeal  is  allowed  to  that  limited
         extent.

 5. The grounds of appeal raise a  number  of  claimed  procedural  errors,
    including (but not limited to) an error in recording the place at which
    the appeal was heard, a failure to note the identity of the  respective
    representatives, and (having found that he had jurisdiction to  do  so)
    failing to proceed to determine the substantive merits of  the  appeal.
    However, the core ground of appeal (and the only one  that  was  argued
    before me on the 16th December 2014) is that which is contained  within
    paragraph 4 of the application for permission to appeal -

         FtJ Deivitte finds that s92(4)(a) does apply to this Appellant.  He
         gives no reasons whatsoever for doing so. This is very  clearly  an
         error of law. The Secretary of State avers that the  Appellant  has
         never made a human rights application to her. The  first  point  at
         which he asserted that removal would  be  a  breach  of  his  human
         rights was in his grounds of appeal to the FtT. It was submitted to
         the learned judge Devitte that to allow  such  a  claim  to  engage
         s92(4)(a) would be to subvert the meaning of the statute. He  fails
         to deal with this at all in his Determination.

 6. As Mr Anisusdding pointed out, the  above  complaint  is  not  entirely
    borne out by a reading of  the  determination  as  a  whole.  Thus,  at
    paragraph 4 of his determination,  the  judge  referred  to  "a  letter
    addressed to the respondent by the appellant's representatives, dated 5
    June 2014", which contains the following statement -

         Furthermore our client has been residing and  studying  in  the  UK
         since his arrival on 05/09/2009. During his time in the UK  he  has
         established a private and family life with his family  and  friends
         during five years. To remove [the appellant] from the UK would be a
         breach of his article 8 rights. Our client  lives  with  his  uncle
         (mother's brother) and family at [address supplied]. Our client has
         a girlfriend and is in a stable relationship. If removed to  India,
         he cannot continue to enjoy his family life with these members.

    However, as the Notice of Appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  also
    dated the 5th June 2014, the question of precisely when this letter was
    sent was obviously critical to the outcome of the appeal. Nevertheless,
    as Designated Judge  McCarthy  noted  when  he  granted  permission  to
    appeal, this was not a matter upon which Judge Devittie made a specific
    finding, and I hold this to  be  a  material  error  of  law.  I  shall
    therefore remake the decision.

 7. I have not been provided with a transmission report  for  the  sending,
    apparently by facsimile message, of either the representatives'  letter
    or the Notice of Appeal. Furthermore, the circumstantial concerning the
    order in which they were sent to  their  respective  addressees  is  in
    conflict. On the one hand, the Notice of Appeal encloses a copy of  the
    letter. This might suggest that the letter was sent first. However, the
    letter itself states that the representatives "have today lodged an  in
    country Notice of Appeal against removal".  The  letter  thus  suggests
    that the Notice of Appeal had already been lodged when the  letter  was
    dictated. It is of course possible that they were sent  simultaneously.
    The position is wholly obscure. I therefore find that the appellant has
    failed to discharge the burden of proving that  he  had  made  a  human
    rights claim by the time that he lodged his Notice of Appeal.

 8. Further, or alternatively, a "human rights claim" is defined by Section
    113 as, "a claim made by a person to the Secretary of State at a  place
    designated by the Secretary of State that to remove the person from  or
    require him to leave the United Kingdom would be unlawful under section
    6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 (c. 42) (public  authority  not  to  act
    contrary to Convention)  as  being  incompatible  with  his  Convention
    rights" [Note: a date has yet to be appointed for commencement  of  the
    amended definition that is contained within the Immigration, Asylum and
    Nationality Act 2006, as  cited  in  the  current  edition  of  Phelan:
    Immigration  Law  Handbook].  The  letter,  however,  is  addressed  to
    "Immigration Enforcement, NRC Capita", at an address in Solihull. I  am
    not therefore satisfied, in any event, that the letter of the 5th  June
    2014 constitutes the making of a human rights claim to the Secretary of
    State, whether at a place designated for that purpose or at all.

Notice of Decision

 9. The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.

10. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the  respondent's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to remove him from the
    United Kingdom is set aside, and is substituted by a decision that  the
    Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to entertain the appeal because  it
    was lodged at a time when the appellant was in the United  Kingdom  and
    had not previously made an asylum or a human rights claim.



Signed        Date 16th January 2015


Judge D Kelly

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

