
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23552/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard At  Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 10th June  2015                   |On 21st July 2015                     |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                           MR JORGE LABBE HERRERA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Himself.
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. In these proceedings it is the Secretary of State who  is  appealing.
       For convenience I will continue to refer to the parties as they  were
       in the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. The appellant is a national of Argentina, born on 29  June  1952.  He
       came to the United Kingdom on 20 November 1999 on a  six-month  visit
       Visa. He then obtained  leave  to  remain  as  a  student  which  was
       extended until 30 September 2002. Thereafter he overstayed.

    3. On 4 April 2013 he applied  for  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
       grounds, namely, private life. His application was refused on 6  June
       2013, with no right of appeal. In light of a possible judicial review
       the respondent reconsidered the decision. A new decision was made  on
       12 May 2014 which maintained the refusal and gave a right  of  appeal
       which he exercised.

    4. His  appeal  was  heard  on  2  February  2015  by  First-tier  Judge
       Hembrough. In a decision promulgated on 3 March 2015 the  appeal  was
       allowed under the immigration rules on the basis  that  he  satisfied
       ruled 276 ADE (vi), namely, whilst he had lived less than 20 years in
       the United Kingdom there would be very significant obstacles  to  his
       reintegration in Argentina. In the alternative, the  judge  concluded
       it  was  appropriate  to  allow  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  his
       freestanding article 8 rights and  his  private  life.  The  decision
       indicates the judge appreciated that the new paragraph 117 had to  be
       taken into account.

    5. The appellant was not represented and the judge agreed to  allow  his
       friend, Ms Reid, to assist him. She also gave evidence. The judge was
       provided with a short bundle from the  appellant  containing  witness
       statements together with a supplementary bundle of 354 pages.

    6. The claim is summarised at paragraph 15 onwards of the decision:

           "15.   The synthesis of his evidence was  that  before  he  left
           Argentinia in 1999 he ran a stationary shop. He  never  married.
           He  left  Argentina  because  of  the   deteriorating   economic
           situation. He owns no property  there.  He  explained  that  his
           business had failed and he had sold everything  before  leaving.
           He came to the UK to study English with a view to moving to  the
           USA where he hoped to start a new business but his plans had not
           come to fruition  for  a  variety  of  reasons  which  were  not
           explained. He said that before coming here had obtained  a  visa
           to enter the USA which has now expired.

           16.    Since he left Argentina both his parents  have  died.  He
           has 2 married sisters living there. His  brother  has  lived  in
           Brazil for about 15 years. He has infrequent  contact  with  his
           sisters via  Facebook.  They  speak  via  telephone  on  special
           occasions such as Christmas and New Year.

           17.    Having been out of Argentinia for so long he  feels  that
           he no longer has any cultural connection  to  that  country  and
           would have difficulty in reintegrating into life there, although
           he accepted that he is still fluent in Spanish.

           18.    He is now 62 years  old  and  has  suffered  from  mental
           health problems, including depression  and  obsessive-compulsive
           disorder (OCD). He was detained under the Mental Health Acts  in
           the UK in 2010 for a period  of  about  three  months.  In  that
           regard reference was made to medical records  appearing  in  his
           bundle. He now takes antidepressant  medication  to  manage  his
           condition.

           19.    If returned to Argentina he would be unlikely to be  able
           to obtain employment there given his age and circumstances.  Not
           having paid the necessary financial contributions he  would  not
           be eligible for a pension. He would not be able to turn  to  his
           sisters  for  support  as  they  already  live   in   straitened
           circumstances and have families of their own to support. He also
           gave as well the reason for not wanting to return  to  Argentina
           that there were not so many opportunities to engage in voluntary
           work to help others."

    7. Evidence was given by Ms Reid about his good character and charitable
       works. She said that when he was permitted to work from 2004 to  2011
       he paid tax and national insurance contributions from his work  as  a
       self-employed sound engineer  and  from  cleaning  and  painting  and
       decorating. She said that she believed if allowed to work he would be
       able to support himself without recourse to public funds.

    8. The judge found the appellant and Ms Reid to be credible.  The  judge
       made the following findings:

           "35.   I am satisfied that since he last entered the UK in  1989
           the Appellant has achieved a very high level of integration into
           life here and the letters from the voluntary organisations  with
           whom he has interacted all attest  to  his  personal  qualities,
           describing him as a much respected and  admired  member  of  his
           local community.

           36.    He has been out of Argentina for about 16 years. He never
           married and his parents are deceased. He owns no property  there
           and the reality I find is that he no longer has any  significant
           connection to that country. Whilst he has 2  sisters  there,  he
           has not seen  them  since  he  left  Argentina.   I  accept  his
           evidence of infrequent contact and that he would not be able  to
           turn to his sisters for support if returned.

           37.    I find that he no longer has any meaningful ties  whether
           social, cultural or familial to his country of origin.

           38.    Given the length of time he has been  out  of  Argentina,
           his age and his mental health problems I also  find  that  there
           would be very significant obstacles to his integration into life
           there. Specifically, I find that he would have very  significant
           difficulty in accessing the medical and other  support  services
           he needs to manage his condition without third-party support and
           that  he  would  also  be  significantly  disadvantaged  in  the
           workplace.  I  consider  that  his  removal  is  likely  to   be
           detrimental to his mental health and that there is a  real  risk
           that he will end up isolated and homeless."

    9. In seeking leave the respondent submitted that the immigration  judge
       had not provided adequate reasons why the appellant would  face  very
       significant obstacles to integration into Argentina which would  lead
       to an unjustifiably hard outcome. He had spent the first 47 years  of
       his life in Argentina and he has siblings there with  whom  he  could
       resume more regular contact. There was no evidence that  his  sisters
       were unwilling or unable to assist him.

   10. It was submitted the judge failed to undertake a proper  analysis  of
       the appellant's mental health. No findings were made in  relation  to
       health or what treatment was available in  Argentina.  There  was  no
       evidence to support the tribunal's conclusion that it would  be  very
       difficult for him accessing medical treatment in Argentina.

   11. It was also submitted there was no evidence that he would  be  unable
       to obtain employment in Argentina. He could maintain contact with his
       friends here through modern means.

   12. With regard to a freestanding consideration of article 8 and  private
       life the judge stated :

           "43.   The appellant has been here over 16 years,  during  which
           he has developed an extensive private life. I have found that he
           has achieved a very high level of integration into life  in  the
           UK where, with the support of those around him, who clearly care
           for him and hold him in high regard, he would be able to support
           himself without records to public funds and continue to  make  a
           positive contribution to the lives of others.

           44.    He speaks English  to  a  high  standard.  I  accept  his
           evidence  that  he  was  not  able  to  produce  the   requisite
           documentary evidence because as matters stand he  cannot  afford
           to take the test.

           45.     Whilst  I  have  had  regard  to  the  public   interest
           considerations set out in paragraphs 117A-D  of  the  2002  Act,
           which provide  inter-alia  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
           immigration control is in the public interest and that I  should
           give little weight (but not  no  weight)  to  any  private  life
           established by the appellant in  the  UK  when  his  immigration
           status was precarious. I find that this is  one  of  those  rare
           cases where even the limited weight to be given to  his  private
           life, which I find largely consists of helping other  vulnerable
           members of society in the UK, significantly outweighs the public
           interest in [h]is removal."

   13. In the leave application it stated that when he came in November 1999
       it was only with leave on a temporary basis and since September  2000
       he has overstayed. There was no  evidence  that  he  was  financially
       independent and costs had been  incurred  when  he  received  medical
       treatment. Reference  was  made  to  a  lack  of  evidence  that  the
       appellant spoke English and the fact he was unable to pay to take the
       test indicated he was likely to  be  a  burden  on  taxpayers  if  he
       remained.

The Upper Tribunal.

   14. The appellant attended  with  his  friend  Ms  Reid.  The  presenting
       officer relied upon the grounds on which leave had been  granted.  Ms
       Reid said that Judge Hembrough had the benefit of all  the  documents
       in the bundle. She repeated that when the appellant was  employed  he
       paid taxes. He also was engaged in charitable works, including  at  a
       centre where she works. She also mentioned him working in  a  nursing
       home. She said that his relationship with his sisters  was  not  good
       when he left and that their own circumstances  were  dire.  She  said
       that he would have no money to re-establish himself in Argentina.

   15. I indicated at the end of the hearing I was reserving my decision. If
       I did find a material error of law there was sufficient  evidence  to
       remake  the  decision  without  the  need  for  further  evidence  or
       argument.

Consideration.

Under 276 ADE

   16. I begin my consideration by turning to the immigration rules  dealing
       with private life, paragraph 276 ADE. He has not been here 20  years.
       He has been here since 20 November 1999 on  visas  which  were  of  a
       temporary nature until 30 September 2002  from  when  he  overstayed.
       The crucial issue is whether, having lived this lesser period he  can
       demonstrate he has no ties, including social, cultural or family with
       Argentina which would mean he could not return.

   17. There are decisions of the Upper Tribunal were the question  of  ties
       with the United Kingdom has been considered. The  factual  background
       to the cases is different as  they  are  concerned  with  deportation
       proceedings, typically involving young people who have lived  in  the
       United Kingdom from an early age. Ogundimu (Article 8  -  new  rules)
       Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC) concerned a young man being  deported
       for criminal activity. He had arrived in the United Kingdom  when  he
       was six years old, had been granted indefinite leave  to  remain  and
       had been here 21 years. He also had a child. The  Upper  Tribunal  at
       paragraph 124 stated the natural and ordinary  meaning  of  the  word
       'ties' in paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules imports  a  concept
       involving something more than merely remote or abstract links to  the
       country of proposed deportation or removal. It involves there being a
       connection to life in that country. Consideration of whether a person
       has 'no ties' to such a country must involve a rounded assessment  of
       all of the relevant circumstances  and  is  not  limited  to  social,
       cultural and family circumstances.

   18. At paragraph 36 of the decision Judge Hembrough refers to the  length
       of time the appellant has been out of  Argentina;  that  he  owns  no
       property there; that his parents are deceased and he  has  infrequent
       contact with his sisters. Reference is also made to his age  and  his
       mental health problems. Significant weight is attached to the  latter
       and the judge concludes he would  have  very  significant  difficulty
       accessing medical and support services. The judge also refers to  the
       high level of integration found into life in the United  Kingdom  and
       the voluntary work he has done.

   19. Clearly the judge was sympathetic towards the appellant,  stating  at
       paragraph 44 that he could make a positive contribution to the  lives
       of others. I find  the  judge's  sympathy  understandable  given  the
       evidence presented of his integration and charitable works.  However,
       the judge has not adequately considered the high threshold imposed by
       276 ADE (vi).

   20. As the respondent points out, he spent the first 47 years of his life
       in Argentina.  Spanish  is  his  first  language.  This  is  not  the
       situation of someone who left Argentina  as  a  child  who  would  be
       returning to something totally unfamiliar. There may have  been  some
       changes to his home country  since  he  left  but  he  would  not  be
       returning to an alien environment. He still has family  ties,  having
       two sisters there. He has not seen them in a long time but the papers
       indicate he does maintain a reasonable level of  contact  with  them.
       The papers also would indicate he  still  maintains  contact,  albeit
       infrequently, with a small group of friends in Argentina.

   21. I appreciate at the appellant's age  he  will  face  difficulties  in
       obtaining employment. I seek not to underestimate these difficulties.
       There is nothing to suggest he has any physical  incapacity.  He  has
       been able to function independently. He is educated to  degree  level
       in Argentina and has a specialised interest in sound engineering.  In
       the United Kingdom he has managed, when permitted, to work. This  has
       included working as a cleaner and a painter and decorator. I  do  not
       find the possibility if his obtaining some  employment  in  his  home
       country can be ruled out.

   22. He has also been engaged in charitable activities. No explanation has
       been given as to why this could not continue in his home country.  It
       was said on his behalf that he would  not  be  eligible  for  a  full
       pension on retirement age because he has  not  contributed  into  the
       fund. He would still be entitled to a modest pension.

   23. The judge did not make specific findings on his mental health or what
       would be available in Argentina. On 22 April 2010 he was admitted  to
       a hospital further to section 2 of the  Mental  Health  Act.  He  was
       acutely unwell and presenting  as  being  isolated;  having  impaired
       concentration  and  expressing  feelings  of  hopelessness.  He   was
       orientated in time, place and person .There were signs of  poor  diet
       and it was felt there was a high risk of neglect. On 25 May  2010  he
       was considered to be much better. I cannot see the date of  discharge
       but it would appear to be approximately 6 weeks later.  He  was  then
       seen by the community mental health team and attended a  psychologist
       about his obsessive-compulsive disorder. This continued until towards
       the end of the year.

   24. The papers indicate that there are mental health  services  available
       in Argentina. One article indicates there are psychiatric  facilities
       in Argentina and  that  mental  health  reform  is  directed  towards
       improving community care. The reasons for  refusal  letter  refer  to
       objective evidence that Argentina has the highest number  per  capita
       rate of practising psychologists in the  world.  The  evidence  would
       indicate there would be services available for the  appellant  should
       his mental health deteriorate to the stage where he could  not  self-
       care. The appellant does have  mental  health  problems.  Undoubtedly
       these  and  his  associated   obsessive-compulsive   disorders   have
       presented real difficulties for him.  Nevertheless,  he  has  largely
       been able to live independently.

   25. My conclusion is that the judge has not adequately explained how  the
       appellant  has  demonstrated  very  significant  obstacles   to   his
       reintegration in Argentina. It would  appear  the  judge  was  unduly
       swayed by sympathy for the appellant's plight, his  integration  into
       the United Kingdom and his charitable work rather than focusing  upon
       the high threshold established in the legislation.

   Article 8

   26. The judge refers to section 117 of the 2002 Act  and  that  effective
       immigration control is in  the  public  interest  and  little  weight
       should be given to any  private  life  established  when  a  person's
       immigration status was precarious. The judge goes on  to  state  that
       this was one of those rare cases where even the limited weight to  be
       given to his private life, which largely consists of helping  others,
       significantly outweighs the public interest in removal. Again, it  is
       difficult to see how, if proper regard is  had  to  the  section,  it
       could be said his charitable work significantly outweighed the public
       interest. The key phrase in the legislation is that little weight (my
       emphasis) should be given to the  private  life  established  in  the
       circumstance. The bulk of the time the appellant has spent  here  has
       been as an over stayer and before that, his  immigration  status  had
       been of a temporary nature.

   27. I accept the judge was in  a  position  to  form  a  view  about  the
       appellant's command of English, albeit his literacy was not confirmed
       by formal testing. The  judge  did  accept  he  had  integrated  into
       British society which is one of the aims behind section 117.

   28. He has worked when permitted to do so and paid taxes  and  so  forth.
       However, he has claim benefit albeit he did not appreciate that as  a
       person from abroad he did not have entitlement. He  also  has  had  a
       period of hospitalisation and after-care which has  been  a  cost  on
       public funds. He now approaches retiring age. It seems likely in  the
       future he would be a drain on the public purse.

   29. The decision of Dube (s117A-D) [2015] UKUT90 (IAC) held  that  judges
       are duty-bound to 'have regard' to the  specified  considerations  in
       section 117. It is not an a la carte menu of considerations  that  it
       is at the discretion of the judge to  apply  or  not  apply.   Whilst
       expressed in mandatory terms, the considerations  specified  are  not
       expressed as being  exhaustive.  Here,  the  judge  placed  too  much
       emphasis upon the appellant's integration into  society  rather  than
       the little weight that should have been given  to  the  private  life
       established in the circumstance. Insufficient weight was placed  upon
       the statutory reference that little  weight  should  be  placed  upon
       private  life  established  when  the  person  was  in  a  precarious
       immigration situation, as here.

   Conclusions

   30. I find First-tier Judge Hembrough materially  erred  in  law  in  how
       regulation 276ADE(vi) was dealt with. There was also a material error
       in law in allowing the appeal on the basis of a freestanding  article
       8 private life, bearing in mind the considerations listed in  section
       117. There is no need for further evidence as the facts  are  already
       set out. I would remake the decision  dismissing  the  appeal  of  Mr
       Herrera.

   Decision.

   31. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  I  remake  the
       decision dismissing the appeal of Mr Herrera  under  the  immigration
       rules and under article 8.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly    Date
