
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: IA/23569/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |           Decision & Reasons        |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 4th February 2016                   |           On 29th February 2016     |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before


                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                      OYINMIEBI ANDRELLA ABEKI IGANGAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Amunwa, Counsel, instructed by Ravi Sethi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of  Nigeria  born  on  26th  February
    1998.  The Appellant first arrived in the UK on 30th August  2010  with
    her mother as a dependant child visitor and was granted leave to  enter
    in that capacity until  5th  February  2011.   The  Appellant's  mother
    returned to Nigeria, but the Appellant overstayed in the  care  of  her
    sister.   The  Appellant  eventually  applied  for  asylum,  but   that
    application was refused on 16th May 2014 for the reasons given  in  the
    Respondent's letter of that date.  The Respondent  subsequently  agreed
    to reconsider the Appellant's application on a human rights  basis  but
    maintained the decision to  refuse  leave  to  remain.   The  Appellant
    appealed that decision, and her appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Mays (the Judge) sitting at Hatton Cross on  1st  May  2015.   He
    decided to dismiss the appeal for the reasons  given  in  his  Decision
    dated 1st June 2015.  The Appellant applied for leave  to  appeal  that
    decision, and on 13th October 2015 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The issue of  whether  the  Appellant  was  in  need  of  international
    protection by way of asylum or humanitarian protection was  not  before
    the Judge. The Judge was also not required to decide if  the  Appellant
    qualified for leave  to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  The Judge dismissed the appeal on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds because he found the  evidence  of  the  Appellant  lacking  in
    credibility and as a consequence decided that the Appellant  had  first
    entered the UK intending not to  leave,  and  that  she  had  not  been
    physically abused in Nigeria.  Further, he found that it  was  not  the
    case that the Appellant's mother had abandoned her and no longer wanted
    to have anything to do with her.  The Appellant maintained contact with
    her mother, and it was possible for the Appellant to return to  Nigeria
    to live with her mother who would  give  the  Appellant  financial  and
    emotional support there.  The  Appellant  was  familiar  with  Nigerian
    culture, and it  would  be  in  her  best  interests  to  be  with  her
    biological mother in the country where she had been born and where  she
    had other relatives.  The Appellant was in good health, and in  Nigeria
    would be able to make good use of the education she had received in the
    UK.  The Judge accepted that the Appellant's removal would  engage  her
    Article 8 rights, but if removed she would be able to maintain  contact
    with her sister by modern  means  of  communication,  and  taking  into
    account all these circumstances and the factors set out in Section 117B
    Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  the  public  interest
    outweighed other considerations and therefore the Respondent's decision
    was proportionate.

 4. At the hearing, Mr Amunwa argued that the Judge had  erred  in  law  in
    coming to that conclusion.  He referred to the grounds  of  application
    and submitted that the Judge had erred by failing to  comply  with  the
    provisions of the Joint Presidential Guidance Note  Number  2  of  2010
    relating to vulnerable  witnesses.   In  particular,  and  although  Mr
    Amunwa did not criticise the Judge's conduct of the hearing, the  Judge
    had failed to comply with paragraphs 14 and 15 of the Guidance in  that
    he had not made a finding as to vulnerability.  This was an  obligation
    when deciding credibility.  The Judge had referred to  the  Appellant's
    distress at the hearing at paragraph 33 of the Decision, but this alone
    was insufficient to discharge the duty imposed upon the  Judge  by  the
    Guidance.  The Judge should have considered the evidence in  line  with
    the comments made at paragraphs 26 and  27  of  JL  (Medical  Report  -
    Credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC).

 5. Mr Amunwa then argued that the Judge had further erred  by  failing  to
    give adequate reasons for his credibility findings.  In particular, the
    Judge had relied upon an assumption at paragraph 34 of the Decision  as
    to when the Appellant had disclosed her mistreatment to her sister.

 6. Finally, Mr Amunwa submitted  that  the  Judge  had  again  erred  when
    carrying out the balancing exercise  necessary  for  an  assessment  of
    proportionality.  He had failed to give sufficient weight to the  delay
    of  more  than  two  years  by  the  Respondent  in  dealing  with  the
    Appellant's application for leave to remain.

 7. In response, Mr Clarke argued that there had been  no  such  errors  of
    law.  The Judge had made it abundantly clear in his  Decision  that  he
    was aware that he was dealing with a child and therefore  a  vulnerable
    person.  It was implied that  the  Judge  found  the  Appellant  to  be
    vulnerable.  The Judge had recorded in  the  Decision  the  Appellant's
    demeanour at the hearing, and had taken this into account when deciding
    credibility.  The Judge had made a thorough analysis  of  the  evidence
    and gave a full explanation for his findings.  The Judge had not relied
    upon any assumptions,  and  had  properly  carried  out  the  balancing
    exercise to decide proportionality.

 8. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which I do not  set
    aside.  It is true that the Judge did not make a specific finding as to
    the vulnerability of the Appellant, but I am satisfied that this is not
    a material error of law because it is  apparent  from  what  the  Judge
    wrote in his Decision that he was fully aware that the Appellant was  a
    child at the date of the hearing and therefore vulnerable, and that the
    Judge took this factor into account  when  deciding  credibility.   The
    Judge recorded the date of birth of the Appellant in paragraph 1 of the
    Decision, and at paragraph 4 recorded Mr Amunwa's submission  that  the
    Appellant was a vulnerable child and that the Guidance applied to  her.
    The Judge did not decide to the contrary.  The Judge  demonstrated  his
    concern by enquiring if there was  a  responsible  adult  present,  and
    arranged for the hearing to be in camera.  At paragraph  5,  the  Judge
    referred to the need to treat the Appellant sensitively.   Further,  at
    paragraph 28 the Judge again referred to the Appellant's age and stated
    that  she  was  a  child  for  the  purposes  of  Section  55  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  It was  therefore  necessary  to
    treat her best interests as a primary consideration.  Finally  on  this
    subject, at paragraph 33 of the Decision the Judge  recorded  that  the
    Appellant was at times tearful and distressed when giving evidence.  It
    is apparent from what the Judge wrote there that he  took  that  factor
    into account when deciding credibility.

 9. I find that the Judge in deciding credibility thoroughly  analysed  the
    evidence and gave a number of reasons for his decision at paragraphs 34
    to 40 inclusive of the Decision.  The Judge came to  a  decision  which
    was open to him on that evidence.  Any assumption he may have  made  as
    to when the Appellant disclosed her mistreatment to her  sister  formed
    only a small and therefore immaterial part of this analysis.

10. Finally I am satisfied that the Judge carried out a proper and thorough
    analysis of the relevant evidence for  the  purpose  of  the  balancing
    exercise necessary to decide  proportionality.   He  explained  why  he
    found that the best interests of the Appellant would be served  by  her
    returning to Nigeria to live with her mother.  The Judge explained  his
    decisions as to what weight was to be attached to the  various  factors
    and was entitled to find from that analysis that  the  public  interest
    carried the most weight.  At paragraph 57 of  the  Decision  the  Judge
    dealt with the issue of delay and found that it was not so  significant
    as to outweigh the need  to  maintain  effective  immigration  control.
    That was a decision for the Judge.  The  facts  in  this  case  may  be
    distinguished from those in EB (Kosovo) v  SSHD  [2008]  3WLR  178  and
    therefore the decision of the Judge  was  not  inconsistent  with  that
    case.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an eror on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so and indeed I find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton




