
[pic]
IAC-HW-AM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers:
IA/23778/2014

                                             IA/23779/2014
     IA/23780/2014

                                IA/23781/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 February 2016                    |On 15 March 2016                     |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

               tHE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               MRS E D C F + 3
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Miss Cooke, Farani-Javid-Taylor, Solicitors, London


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary  of  State  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellants are citizens of Brazil born on 13 July 1981,  20  August
    1978, 5 June 2003 and 13 February  2008.   They  are  a  wife  and  her
    husband and their two children.  They appealed against the Respondent's
    decisions of 14 May 2014 refusing them leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom and setting removal directions  against  them  as  overstayers.
    The appeals were heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Symes on  26
    January 2015.  He allowed the appeals under the Immigration  Rules  and
    on human rights grounds in a decision promulgated on 24 February 2015.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal De Haney on 23 April  2015.
    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  lodged  and  permission
    was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Frances  on  14  July  2015.   The
    permission states that it is arguable that  the  Appellants  could  not
    satisfy the Immigration  Rules  at  the  date  of  the  decision.   The
    permission points out that  the  judge  acknowledged  that  the  Fourth
    Appellant  was  one  month  short  of  seven  years'  residence.    The
    permission  goes  on  to  state  that  it  is  also  arguable  that  in
    considering proportionality the judge erred in law in  his  application
    of Section 117B.

 4. There is no Rule 24 response.

 5. A first stage error  of  law  hearing  was  heard  at  Field  House  on
    8tDecember 2015 before Upper Tribunal Judge Storey.  He found that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred in law and adjourned the  case  for
    it to be remade in the Upper Tribunal.

 6. He points out that the Appellants have  been  resident  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully.  The First Two  Appellants  have  been  overstayers
    since mid 2007.  In the case of the  Third  Appellant  he  entered  the
    United Kingdom via Ireland without authorisation in June 2010  and  the
    Fourth Appellant was born in the United Kingdom on  13  February  2008.
    She suffers from hydrocephalus which  has  required  extensive  medical
    care and has required education in a special needs context.  The  First
    Two Appellants have worked illegally in the United Kingdom.

 7. Upper Tribunal Judge Storey found that the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE have not been satisfied.  The requirements of this Rule have  to
    be met at the date of application and  none  of  the  Appellants  could
    satisfy the terms of the Rules.  The Third Appellant had  not  at  that
    time lived continuously in the United Kingdom  for  seven  years.   The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law  in  concluding  that
    the Appellants or even one of them met the requirements of the Rules.

 8. Judge Storey  then  went  on  to  deal  with  Section  117B(3)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 stating  that  the  First-
    tier  Judge  wrongly  applied  this   when   dealing   with   financial
    independence.  He stated that the First-tier Judge  wrongly  failed  to
    apply Section 117B(5) considerations which specify that  little  weight
    is to be given to a private life established by a person at a time when
    the person's immigration status is precarious.

 9. Judge Storey found there was a further error of law in that the  First-
    tier Judge failed  to  apply  Section  117B(5)  considerations  to  the
    proportionality assessment under Article  8  outside  the  Rules.   The
    judge made no reference to the fact that the Appellants have  developed
    a private life in the United Kingdom when their immigration status  was
    precarious.  He found that the judge addressed the issue  of  the  best
    interests of the child but  did  not  conduct  any  kind  of  balancing
    exercise.  The  judge  did  not  consider  the  family's  cultural  and
    linguistic connections with Brazil and made an error  by  referring  to
    the lack of additional family support if the family had to stay  in  an
    urban centre with the First Two Appellants working.

10. Judge Storey referred to the various reports  relating  to  the  Fourth
    Appellant, in  particular  the  reports  by  Dr  Adamovic-Satterthwaite
    dealing with the requirements of the Fourth Appellant and  her  present
    development.  He stated that any assessment outside the Rules based  on
    Article 8 is likely to turn very much on his reports and the extent  to
    which they can be  relied  on  in  light  of  the  Country  Information
    regarding rural  and  urban  areas  of  Brazil.   For  that  reason  he
    adjourned the case and  set  it  down  for  hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  There has been no disagreement on the facts relating to  the
    family's circumstances in the United Kingdom.  The matter of the likely
    circumstances of the family in Brazil, either in their home rural  area
    or on relocating to an urban area is  one  which  he  found  the  Upper
    Tribunal could deal with without the need for remittal.

11. I am dealing with the second stage hearing today.

The Hearing

12. The First Appellant took the stand and asked that her  statement  which
    she made for the First-tier  hearing  be  used  as  evidence  for  this
    hearing.

13. Her representative asked her about  her  daughter's  medical  condition
    (the Fourth Appellant).  She asked what care she  gets  in  the  United
    Kingdom and what investigations the witness has made  about  healthcare
    in Brazil.  She said she has made no investigations.  She was asked  if
    she knows anything about healthcare in Brazil and she said she does and
    she thinks her daughter would be on a waiting list  for  a  long  time.
    She said in Brazil she lived in a small town and she would need to move
    to a larger city where she has no relatives.  She said  it  would  also
    cost a lot of money to have the Fourth  Appellant  treated  in  Brazil.
    She was asked why her daughter would need to wait a long time to see  a
    doctor and she said that the kind of treatment her daughter  needs  can
    only be carried out quickly if you have a lot of money in Brazil.   She
    was asked how she knows this and she said  she  used  to  work  in  the
    health system in her town in Brazil which was Eldorado in Para State.

14. The witness was asked what family she has in Brazil and  she  said  she
    has her mother, four brothers and three sisters in  Brazil.   She  said
    her father has another family with someone who is not her mother.   The
    witness said that her mother lives in Maranhao State in  the  north  of
    Brazil in Chapadinha Town.  She said her mother's city is small and her
    brothers and sisters live in small cities.

15. It was put to her that her daughter often attends a doctor and she  was
    asked if her daughter has ever needed any emergency treatment  and  she
    said she has on five or more occasions.

16. The Presenting Officer questioned the witness asking her why the family
    could not go to live in a big city in Brazil and  she  said  she  would
    have no one there.  It was put to her that she has no one in the United
    Kingdom and she said that is correct.  The Presenting Officer asked her
    if her knowledge of the Brazilian healthcare system  is  based  on  the
    time when she worked there seven years ago and she  said  yes  and  no.
    She said it is based on that and on the internet.  She was asked if she
    has printed out anything about healthcare in Brazil from  the  internet
    and she said she has not.

17. Her representative re-examined her asking her if she has any family  in
    the United Kingdom and she said  she  only  has  her  husband  and  her
    children.

18. The second Appellant took the stand.  He asked that his statement which
    he made for the First-tier  hearing,  be  used  as  evidence  for  this
    hearing.

19. His representative asked him if he has any family in Brazil and he said
    he has his father, his brothers and his sisters.  He said they all live
    in small cities.

20. The Presenting Officer had no questions for this witness.

21. The Presenting Officer made his  submissions  relying  on  the  refusal
    letter.

22. He referred to Article 8 and page 5 onwards in the refusal letter.   He
    submitted that this family's immigration history is poor.  He submitted
    that when Article 8 is considered the relevant case law has to be taken
    into account.  He made reference to the case of  E  v  Philippines  and
    others C5(2013) 2758 and Hamidreza Azimi-Moayed and three others [2013]
    UKUT 00197.  He submitted that the starting point in  this  case,  with
    regard to the best interests of the children, is for them  to  be  with
    both of their parents.  He submitted that the Appellants are not in the
    United Kingdom legally.  He submitted that these two  country  guidance
    cases have to be applied and when they are applied these appeals cannot
    succeed under Article 8 of ECHR.

23. He submitted that the strongest point in the Appellants' favour is  the
    fact that the Fourth Appellant is ill and receives medical treatment in
    the United  Kingdom.   He  submitted  that  Brazil  has  well-developed
    medical care. There is no COI Report on Brazil but he pointed me  to  a
    document by the World Health Organisation dated in February 2016  which
    states that Brazil's health system reaches  out  to  the  poor  and  is
    improving all the time.  He submitted that the family may well have  to
    go to live in a bigger  city  than  the  one  they  come  from  and  he
    submitted that they may to need to rely on  family  support  when  they
    arrive in Brazil but both parents can work and they  do  not  have  any
    family support in the United Kingdom.  He submitted  that  no  evidence
    has been put to the Tribunal which shows that they will  be  unable  to
    access the public healthcare system in Brazil.  He  submitted  that  no
    evidence has been produced to show that the public healthcare system in
    Brazil is not adequate to deal with the Fourth Appellant.

24. With regard to the First Appellant's oral evidence  he  submitted  that
    this was non-specific.  Her experience  of  the  healthcare  system  in
    Brazil is out of date.  Nothing has been produced to  show  that  there
    are any particular problems with the healthcare system in Brazil.  This
    family is not being returned to somewhere where  there  are  no  proper
    medical facilities.

25. With regard to Article 8 outside the Rules I was referred to  the  case
    of N [2008] ECHR 453. He submitted that this claim  does  not  disclose
    such exceptional circumstances  as  are  required  by  the  case  of  N
    relating to medical treatment in the country which the Appellants  will
    be returning to.

26. With regard to the education of the  children  the  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that the United Kingdom cannot  be  responsible  for  medical
    treatment and education for the rest of the world.  He  submitted  that
    for Article 8 to succeed outside the Rules there has to be  some  other
    basis.  The healthcare in the United Kingdom cannot be compared to  the
    healthcare in Brazil.

27. With regard to general integration into Brazil he submitted  that  this
    family speaks Portuguese at home.  Some family members have been in the
    United Kingdom for seven years but not all of them.  He submitted  that
    there is no fundamental  problem  in  this  family  reintegrating  into
    Brazilian society.

28. The Presenting Officer referred me  to  Part  5A  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which contains Sections 117A to  D  and
    referred in particular to paragraph 117B(6) which  the  Appellants  are
    relying on relating to the Fourth Appellant.  He submitted that all the
    sections of Section 117B  have  to  be  considered  and  these  include
    effective immigration control and public interest and he submitted that
    117B(6) is just one consideration.

29. He submitted that when Article 8  is  considered  the  status  of  this
    family in the United Kingdom is that they are here  unlawfully  and  he
    submitted that this must weigh heavily against them.  He submitted that
    what I have to decide is whether the interference of removing  them  to
    Brazil is sufficient to outweigh the public  interest  in  this  family
    remaining in the United Kingdom and he submitted that it would  not  be
    disproportionate to remove them to Brazil.  They would be returning  to
    a well-developed country with medical facilities and  I  was  asked  to
    dismiss the appeal.

30. The Appellants' representative made  her  submissions  relying  on  her
    skeleton argument.  She submitted that the key issues are  outlined  in
    paragraph 5 of the skeleton and this is an appeal on Article 8  outside
    the Rules only.

31. I was referred to the case of SS Congo and others [2015] EWCA  Civ  387
    which states that there have to be compelling reasons for a claim to be
    considered outside the  Immigration  Rules.   She  submitted  that  the
    compelling reason in this case is the health of the  Fourth  Appellant.
    She submitted that not only does her health have to be  considered  but
    her educational needs also have to be considered and she has  now  been
    in the United Kingdom for more than seven years.  She admitted that she
    had not been in the United Kingdom for seven years at the date  of  the
    application.

32. I was referred in particular to Part 5A of the  2002  Act  and  Section
    117B(6).  She submitted that this has to  be  look  at  when  the  best
    interests of the children are considered.  She submitted that Appellant
    number 3 has rights which have to be considered but the main  issue  is
    the Fourth Appellant who has special needs.   She  submitted  that  the
    best interests of the child are a primary consideration and  there  has
    to be a proportionality assessment when Article 8 outside the Rules  is
    considered.

33. I was referred to paragraph 19 of the skeleton argument.  She submitted
    that I have to decide whether it would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    Fourth Appellant to have to leave the United  Kingdom.   She  submitted
    that it would not be reasonable and neither would it be reasonable  for
    the Third Appellant to have to leave the United Kingdom.

34. I was asked to consider the Fourth Appellant's medical conditions which
    are referred to at paragraph 24 onwards in the  skeleton  argument.   I
    was referred to the National Health Service letter  from  Dr  Adamovic-
    Satterthwaite dated 2012.  This is in the Appellant's  bundle  for  the
    First-tier hearing.  At that time the Fourth Appellant was  four  years
    old.  The doctor states that she has profound and complex  needs.   The
    letter was updated in 2013.  This letter refers not only to her  health
    but also the additional educational help she requires  to  support  her
    learning and attention.

35. A small additional bundle was also provided for this hearing and I  was
    referred to the physiotherapy that  she  receives  at  Evelina  London,
    Guy's and St Thomas Hospital and to the oral evidence  today  that  she
    has required emergency medical treatment on a number of occasions.

36. The representative submitted that  there  is  a  functional  healthcare
    system in Brazil but the report by the World Health Organisation states
    that it is patchy and needs significant  improvements.   She  submitted
    that primary healthcare services are starting and I was referred to the
    article by Deloitte which is dated in 2015 and refers to  6,800  public
    and private hospitals still not being enough.  I was then  referred  to
    the Child Fund International charity letter.  This is a charity looking
    for money to help children in Brazil and the  representative  submitted
    that the medical care in Brazil may not be sufficient  for  the  Fourth
    Appellant.

37. She submitted that what I  have  to  decide  is  whether  it  would  be
    proportionate for the Fourth Appellant to return to Brazil  and  if  it
    would be reasonable and if I find that it would not be  reasonable  she
    submitted that Section 117B(6) must apply.

38. The representative submitted that it is not clear what medical services
    would be available to her in  Brazil.   It  is  clear  that  the  Furth
    Appellant medical needs and  sometimes  requires  emergency  treatment.
    She is on a special programme for her needs in the United  Kingdom  and
    the  representative  submitted  that  the  Fourth  Appellant  would  be
    affected very badly if this family has to relocate to Brazil.

39. The representative submitted that the Fourth Appellant has been in  the
    United Kingdom now for eight years and was born  here.   She  submitted
    that it would not be reasonable or proportionate for her to relocate to
    Brazil.

40. I was asked to consider the  case  law  referred  to  in  the  skeleton
    argument and the importance of suitability for children and  continuity
    of educational  provisions.   She  submitted  that  education  is  more
    significant when a child reaches the age of 7 and  the  fact  that  the
    Fourth Appellant has special needs has to be taken into  account.   She
    has severe learning  problems.   I  was  referred  to  the  speech  and
    language therapy letter dated in 2013 in the  Appellants'  bundle.  She
    attends a speech therapist.  I was asked to give considerable weight to
    the Evelina London letter in the Appellants' supplementary  bundle  and
    also the Fourth Appellant's school report in  the  Appellants'  bundle.
    In the 2013 letter by Dr  Adamovic-Satterthwaite  he  states  that  the
    Fourth Appellant  needs  significant  additional  educational  help  to
    support her learning and attention.  The representative submitted  that
    she will get that in the United Kingdom but it is not known whether she
    will get that in Brazil.  This report refers to  the  gap  between  the
    Fourth Appellant and her peer group widening with age and she submitted
    that it will be a problem if the Fourth  Appellant  has  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom as this gap is likely  to  widen  even  more  as  it  is
    unlikely that she will receive such good education in Brazil as in  the
    United Kingdom.  She submitted it is not clear what  support  she  will
    get, so it cannot be in her best interests to leave the United Kingdom.

41. The representative submitted that all of Section 117B applies  and  she
    admitted that  there  are  many  points  against  these  appeals.   The
    Appellants are here unlawfully but  the children had  no  choice  about
    where they were going to live their lives.  They had to depend on their
    parents.  She submitted that effective immigration control  has  to  be
    considered but I was referred to the cases of ZH Tanzania [2011] UKSC 4
    and Zoumbas both of which make it clear that children should not suffer
    because of the actions of their parents.

42. She submitted that all the Appellants  speak  English  and  have  never
    claimed public funds.  She submitted that the  fact  that  the  parents
    have worked unlawfully must be held against them but she submitted that
    if they are granted leave to remain it is likely that they will work.

43. I was asked to allow the appeals and I was referred to the case  of  SQ
    Pakistan and another EWCA Civ 1251 which states that to  force  someone
    with significant medical and educational  needs  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom would cause a profound disruption in their life.

Decision and Reasons

44. The burden of proof is on the Appellants and the standard of  proof  is
    the balance of probabilities

45. I have considered all of the evidence on file, the oral evidence  given
    at the hearing and the submissions of both parties.

46. These applications cannot meet the  terms  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    This has been accepted by both parties and I am  therefore  considering
    the appeals under Article 8 of ECHR outside the Rules.

47. For Article 8 outside the Rules to  be  considered  there  have  to  be
    compelling circumstances and in this case it has been put  to  me  that
    the compelling circumstances are the state  of  health  of  the  Fourth
    Appellant who has hydrocephalus.

48. Proportionality has to be assessed and the first  thing  that  must  go
    against  the  Appellants'  applications  is  that  the  terms  of   the
    Immigration Rules cannot be satisfied.  None of the Appellants  are  in
    the United Kingdom legally.  The First Two Appellants have not  claimed
    benefits but they have been working illegally.

49. I have to consider effective immigration control.  Everyone  should  be
    treated equally and if these Appellants are  allowed  to  stay  in  the
    United Kingdom there must be a reason for treating them differently  to
    others wishing to remain in the United  Kingdom  who  cannot  meet  the
    terms of the Rules.

50. Public interest has to be taken into account in  the  equation.   These
    Appellants have made extensive use of the NHS services  in  the  United
    Kingdom and the two children have had access to free education  in  the
    United Kingdom.  These are matters which affect the tax payers.

51. The representative for the Appellants has stated that Section 117B  (6)
    must apply as it would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the  children,
    especially the Fourth Appellant, to leave the United Kingdom.   Section
    117B (6) is not  the  only  part  of  Section  117B  which  has  to  be
    considered. All the parts have to be considered.

52. Originally it was the case that the family spoke  Portuguese  at  home.
    The evidence now is that they speak English.  I noted  that  the  First
    Two Appellants gave  their  evidence  through  an  interpreter  at  the
    hearing.  I understand that  the  Third  and  Fourth  Appellants  speak
    English and Portuguese.

53. These Appellants are not  financially  independent.   Little  has  been
    produced to indicate that they are  integrating  into  society  in  the
    United Kingdom.

54. These Appellants  cannot  derive  from  Section  117B(3)  any  positive
    consideration when it comes to financial considerations.  I  also  have
    to consider Section 117B(5) which states that little weight  should  be
    given to private lives formed at a time  when  the  person  is  in  the
    United Kingdom unlawfully.  All these  Appellants  are  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully.  The Fourth Appellant was born when the  First  Two
    Appellants were in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  I find  that  little
    weight can be given to any of these Appellants' private lives.

55. It is clear that these Appellants are not liable to deportation but the
    Appellants have no right to  be  here  and  their  situation  has  been
    precarious since the end of 2007.  The Second  Appellant  came  to  the
    United Kingdom on a visit visa in March 2007 .

56. Based on the above when proportionality  is  assessed  public  interest
    must succeed over the Appellants' rights.

57. I now have to consider the best interests of the children in particular
    the Fourth Appellant.  The Appellants are from Brazil.  Their  family's
    culture is Brazilian and  their  language  is  Portuguese.   They  have
    connections with Brazil and for the family to say that if they relocate
    to a major city in Brazil so that  the  Fourth  Appellant  can  receive
    satisfactory medical treatment they would  be  without  family  support
    does not hold any weight as at present they are in the  United  Kingdom
    with no family support.  Nothing has been shown to me to indicate  that
    the First Two Appellants would be unable to find  work  in  a  city  in
    Brazil.  The fact that their families do not live in a large city  does
    not weigh in their favour.

58. When the best interests of  the  children  are  considered  I  have  to
    consider the medical evidence  on  the  Fourth  Appellant.   There  are
    reports by Dr Adamovic-Satterthwaite which deal with the nature of  the
    Fourth Appellant`s problems in terms of medical, social and educational
    care and support.  There is very little evidence to show what  medical,
    social and educational care and support there is available  in  Brazil.
    The Fourth Appellant received physiotherapy in 2012. There is reference
    to headaches  which  are  improving  and  the  fact  that  her  health,
    considering her problems, is good and she has a  good  appetite  and  a
    good sleep pattern.  There is no abnormality in her hearing  or  vision
    but her language is delayed  because  of  her  condition.   The  report
    states that she has complex needs and  there  is  global  developmental
    delay in all developmental areas except self-care skills but it goes on
    to state that she  continues  to  slowly  progress  and  improve.   The
    physiotherapist's report also states that her motor skills continue  to
    improve.  The medical report from Dr  Adamovic-Satterthwaite  dated  in
    2013 states that her general development is delayed across all  aspects
    of development and she needs significant additional educational help to
    support her learning and attention as her concentration is poor.

59. She requires high levels of adult support but she gets  this  from  her
    parents as well as her  teachers  and  doctors.   The  MRI  scans  were
    satisfactory and it is clear that she has had  a  good  start  in  life
    because of the free treatment she has received on the NHS in the United
    Kingdom and through free special education in the United  Kingdom.   In
    2014 the Fourth Appellant was 6 years old and the doctor  in  community
    paediatrics made a report stating that she is happy and has  been  well
    since her last review.  It is clear that she is below national averages
    across the curriculum but she is maintaining slow  progress.   In  2014
    the report states that the Fourth Appellant's mother  mostly  stays  at
    home to support her.  In 2015 she was  told  to  discontinue  with  her
    spectacles.  There is also a report from Evelina London when the Fourth
    Appellant was aged 7 and at that date she was  speaking  in  sentences,
    was able to run slowly but was still having some difficulties with  her
    speech.  Her mother told  the  doctor  that  she  was  happy  with  her
    progress at school.  She had not been admitted to  hospital  since  her
    last visit to  the  Evelina  London  clinic  at  Guy's  and  St  Thomas
    Hospital.  Her mother reported that she is improving.  The 2015  report
    states that the Fourth Appellant looked well and was happy.  It goes on
    to state that she is still developmentally delayed but that is  because
    of her condition and wherever she is staying she will still  have  this
    condition. I have taken into account the said case of N.

60. It is difficult to know what treatment she will receive  in  Brazil  as
    her mother has not done any research into this.  I am  surprised  about
    this as she knew this hearing was coming  up.   She  has  not  been  in
    Brazil for seven years so the fact that she once worked in  the  health
    system is more or less irrelevant now.  The World  Health  Organisation
    article on file refers to a lot of health reform in  1996  and  70%  of
    Brazil's population receiving care in  the  public  system  in  Brazil.
    There is a private system in Brazil but that appears only to avoid  the
    queues and  inconvenience  in  the  public  system.   There  are  still
    problems in Brazil's national health system but these are mainly to  do
    with infectious diseases.  It is clear that the healthcare given in the
    cities in Brazil is better.  There is no reason for this family not  to
    return to Brazil and live in one  of  the  cities.   The  World  Health
    Organisation Report states that sometimes people travel to urban  areas
    to receive treatment that they could have received from primary  health
    units in their rural areas.  This is something  that  the  family  will
    have to assess on return.  The Deloitte article dated 2015 states  that
    the health system needs improvement but  that  could  be  said  of  the
    United Kingdom also.  I have also noted  the  report  from  Child  Fund
    International,  a  charity.   This  states  that  children   in   rural
    communities often lack access to basic medical care but  as  stated,  I
    believe that this family could go to stay in an  urban  area.   Medical
    treatment is considered a constitutional right for Brazilian  citizens.
    There is also a good education system in Brazil.

61. These are Appellants some of whom have been in the United Kingdom since
    1 March 2007.  At the date of the application all  of  them  were  here
    illegally.  I accept that this is an arguable case for considering  the
    Appellants' claims outside the Immigration Rules.  I have carried out a
    proportionality assessment.  If this was a  family  in  which  all  its
    members were healthy I would have no hesitation in  stating  that  they
    should be removed to Brazil.

62. The compelling circumstances in this case are based on  the  health  of
    the Fourth Appellant.  I have considered ZH Tanzania [2011] UKSC 4  and
    EV Philippines and others [2014] EWCA Civ 874.  These children are  not
    British citizens.  At the date of the application they had not been  in
    the United Kingdom for seven years.  I have to decide if the  need  for
    immigration control outweighs the best interests of the children.   The
    case of EV Philippines and others concerns children who are not British
    citizens.  It is clearly in the best interests  of  the  children  that
    they remain with both of their parents.  They are a  close  family.   I
    have considered their ages, the length of time they have been here, the
    length of time they  have  been  in  education  and  what  stage  their
    education has reached.  They have become  distanced  from  the  country
    which it is proposed to return them to but they both  speak  Portuguese
    as well as English and they will be with their  parents  who  are  from
    Brazil and have lived most of their lives there.  The  Appellants  have
    no entitlement to remain in the United Kingdom.   The  children's  best
    interests  do  not  of  themselves  have  the   status   of   paramount
    consideration.  The best interests of children can be outweighed by the
    cumulative effect of other considerations.

63. The starting point is that if both parents are being removed  from  the
    United Kingdom dependant children who form part of the household should
    also be removed unless there are reasons to  the  contrary.   I  accept
    that the Fourth Appellant has had considerable medical and  educational
    help in the United Kingdom but she has clearly developed  well  and  is
    now a happy child able to look after herself to a great extent.  She is
    always going to be slightly behind her peers as  far  as  communication
    and her education are concerned but the most  recent  reports  indicate
    that she is doing well and she  does  not,  according  to  the  medical
    evidence, require additional treatment apart from  her  regular  check-
    ups.  Having considered the medical reports on  the  Fourth  Appellant,
    the relevant case law on the best interests of the child and the health
    care available in Brazil I do not find that it  would  be  unreasonable
    for both the children of  this  family  to  go  to  Brazil  with  their
    parents.  It would not be disproportionate for this family to return to
    Brazil where the First Two Appellants have  lived  for  most  of  their
    lives and where  their  family  members  live.   As  it  would  not  be
    unreasonable Section 117B(6) does not apply.

64. I find that public interest  must  succeed  when  weighed  against  the
    rights of the family members in this case.   Little  weight  should  be
    given to private lives formed while the family  members'  situation  in
    the United Kingdom is precarious and based on the evidence before me  I
    am dismissing this appeal.

Notice of Decision

65. I dismiss these appeals under the Immigration Rules.

66. I dismiss these appeals on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray

