
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/23839/2013
     IA/23836/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Piccadilly Exchange                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 March 2014                              |On 27 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                                SOHAIL AHMAD
                                     and
                                 FAIZA LATIF
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown, Counsel instructed by Arshed & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan who appealed to the  First-tier
    Tribunal a decision of the respondent refusing  their  applications  to
    extend their leave to stay in the United Kingdom as  entrepreneurs  and
    also making the decision to remove them.

 2. The appeals were heard and dismissed by the First-tier  Tribunal  in  a
    determination that we find to be very unsatisfactory.  Many  criticisms
    were made of the First-tier Tribunal Judge some of which are, we  hope,
    rather extravagant but it is absolutely plain is that the determination
    was materially wrong in several respects.  Of  particular  significance
    is that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  used  what  appears  to  be  a
    standard paragraph that was wholly appropriate in a case where a person
    has given evidence  with  the  assistance  of  an  interpreter  in  the
    determination of an appeal  where  evidence  was  not  given  with  the
    assistance of an interpreter.  It  is  quite  impossible  to  read  the
    determination and be at all confident that the judge's mind  was  where
    it ought to have been.

 3. We have no hesitation in setting aside the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in its entirety.  We make it plain that none of  the  findings
    of fact of the First-tier Tribunal are  in  any  way  reliable  and  no
    weight whatsoever should be given to  them.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination is not merely wrong in some respects.  Its  findings  are
    completely flawed because we are not satisfied the judge  was  thinking
    about the case in front of him.

 4. We make it particularly clear that the adverse credibility findings are
    not to be regarded as reliable.  Indeed we do not  understand  why  the
    judge was getting  involved  in  making  credibility  findings  at  all
    because that does not seem to be  what  the  case  was  about.  Anybody
    looking at this decision if, for example, the appellants make a further
    application of any kind should be careful to make quite sure that  they
    give no weight whatsoever to anything that was decided  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in this case.

 5. Mr Harrison accepted there were difficulties in the decision and whilst
    we are not sure that he formally conceded that the decision  was  wrong
    he certainly did not raise any arguments that we need  to  consider  in
    great detail.  We set aside the decision that has been made.

 6. We then had to decide how best to proceed with the case.  Mr Brown made
    an application that it be decided by First-tier Tribunal but we see  no
    justification for that.  If this had been a case where there  had  been
    an unfair hearing and there were, for  example,  detailed  findings  of
    fact that needed to be made, we would have seen considerable  merit  in
    his position but we did not regard it as that kind of case.  This is  a
    case that has to be decided on fairly narrow grounds  and  is  not  the
    sort of case which needs to  be  decided  properly  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in order to be decided fairly.

 7. Mr Brown also asked for an adjournment so that better evidence could be
    produced.  In a nutshell it  was  his  case  that  the  appellants  and
    particularly the first appellant, had a very strong sense of  grievance
    because he had been misled by documents produced by  the  Secretary  of
    State. In particular he thought that imperfections in  the  application
    could be corrected at the invitation of the Secretary of State.  He may
    well have thought that but that is not relevant to us unless he thought
    it for a good reason.  If he  had  wanted  to  support  his  case  with
    documents they should have been available to the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    It seems they were not.  However we made enquiries at  the  hearing  to
    see if we could find the documents that he thought  would  be  helpful.
    We made some progress in that we found similar documents that indicated
    what had changed. We found nothing that gave us  any  reason  to  think
    that further enquiries would have revealed documents  that  would  have
    provided the assistance the appellants need.

 8. It follows therefore that although we understood the  reasoning  behind
    the application it was not only made very late in the day it  was  made
    in circumstances where we had no reason to think it  had  any  inherent
    merit. We refused it and decided to continue with the appeal. It is for
    the appellant's to prove  on  the  balance  of  probability  that  they
    satisfied that requirements of the rules.

 9. There is not very much that could be said.  For all its deficiencies it
    does seem to us that the First-tier Tribunal did do a reasonable job in
    summarising the respondent's case.  It was when  the  appellants'  case
    was considered that it fell into error.

10. The respondent's case on funding is summarised in paragraph  6  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination where it  explains  that  the
    respondent was not satisfied with the evidence from the United Bank and
    the Bank  Alfalah  Ltd  because  it  did  not  comply  with  the  Rules
    concerning confirmation  that  information  was  from  the  appropriate
    regulatory body.  Neither did the third party declaration  contain  the
    necessary signatures to show the funds were available  from  the  third
    party funders. Neither was the letter from  the  legal  representatives
    satisfactory because it did not show the authority or  registration  of
    the writer enabling them to practice in Pakistan. Further, a copy of  a
    bank statement was  deficient  because  it  was  an  internet  printout
    without the necessary confirmatory signatures.

11. It is very important to understand that there has been a change in  the
    Immigration Rules coinciding with the onset of the points-based system.
    In many cases the focus of the Rules has drifted away from deciding if,
    for example, a person can be maintained but focuses instead on  whether
    certain criteria, sometimes of a rather arbitrary kind, have been  met.
    If they are met an application succeeds and if they  are  not  met  the
    application fails.  This does not  have  to  be  justified  but  it  is
    clearly intended to simplify decision-making and although it is plainly
    arbitrary it is unlikely that a person who comes within the purpose  of
    the Rules cannot meet the requirements if they go about their  business
    in a proper way.

12. For the reasons given these appellants did not meet the requirements of
    the Rules and the application had to be refused.

13. Mr Brown was not able to draw anything  to  our  attention  to  suggest
    these findings are in any way wrong. Indeed it was not  his  case  that
    the applications ought to have been allowed because the Rules were met;
    it was his case that the deficiencies were correctable.  He said little
    to support that submission and we cannot agree with him.

14. We are aware of various policies adopted by the Secretary of  State  at
    various times but these are easy  to  misunderstand.   It  is  probably
    better to think of them not as a means of extending the Rules but as  a
    means of the Secretary of State  lawfully  allowing  applications  that
    would otherwise fail under the strict  criteria  she  set  out  in  the
    Rules.  They are to give the Secretary of State flexibility  where  she
    wants to exercise it.  Her discretion is not unfettered and  there  are
    occasions when the policy statement requires certain things to be  done
    but the policy statements are usually hedged in rather  general  terms.
    We have been shown nothing which imposed an obligation on the Secretary
    of State to send the matters back for further consideration or to  make
    enquiries about documents that are in any way deficient.

15. We were asked particularly to wait for an  additional  document  to  be
    produced today which we are told was a letter  from  the  Secretary  of
    State acknowledging the receipt of the application and saying, at least
    in the mind of the first appellant, that the Secretary of  State  would
    ask if anything needed to be corrected.   We  did  not  wait  for  this
    document because we do not see how it could possibly  be  relevant.   A
    document sent in acknowledgement of the application could not have  any
    bearing at all on what was sent with the application and so  could  not
    have been material to the applicants' decision about how they presented
    their cases.

16. We emphasise this because we understand that the appellants have a very
    strong sense of grievance.  They say, and we  make  no  findings  about
    this, that they are serious business people who want to  trade  in  the
    United Kingdom and they thought they had made an application that could
    have been corrected but we are told later that it could not.

17. Following the decision of the Court of Appeal in Rodriguez [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 2 we no purpose in rehearsing how the evidential flexibility  rules
    were once interpreted. Nothing said to us today showed that this  is  a
    case that  ought  to  have  been  allowed  for  reasons  of  evidential
    flexibility or fairness or similar administrative law concepts.

18. It is therefore clear we must dismiss the appeal under the Rules.

19.  Both  appellants  raised  human  rights  grounds  in  their   original
    application. To the extent that a burden  and  standard  of  proof  are
    relevant in human rights claims it is for the appellant  to  prove  the
    fact relied upon and the respondent to justify any interference in  the
    private and family lives of the appellants.

20. The appellants supported their claims in the most general terms.   They
    have been lawfully in the United Kingdom now for some time but  neither
    of them claims that they have developed the  very  strong  and  special
    relationships that carry a lot of weight when a  person's  private  and
    family life is considered.  This case is not presented for example,  on
    the basis that returning them to Pakistan would split up  a  family  or
    deprive a child of contact with a parent. These are not the only things
    that can lead to an appeal being allowed on human  rights  grounds  but
    nothing of comparable importance  is  alleged  and  we  see  no  reason
    whatsoever under the Rules, or at all, why the disruption to a  private
    life established during a period of  lawful  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom would  be  a  disproportionate  interference  when  the  proper
    purpose of enforcing immigration control is preserved.

21. It follows therefore that we have to say as a matter of law that  these
    appeals must be dismissed.

22. We do however wish to make it plain that it has been  explained  to  us
    the appellants are minded to make a further  application.   Nothing  we
    have done today is intended to discourage them from doing  that  or  to
    frustrate it in any way.  As we have said before,  but  will  emphasise
    again, the previous findings of the First-tier Tribunal do  not  assist
    and nothing we have said today is intended to indicate that any further
    application should or should not succeed.

Decision

    We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and we  substitute
    a decision dismissing the appellants' appeals.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 25 June 2014                   |








