
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23885/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 May 2015                                |On 17 June 2015              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL MURRAY

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MISS FLAVIA MBAZIMA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Arif, Arden Solicitors, Ealing House, North
Ealing, London


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary  of  State  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-Tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Zambia born on  22  February  1981.   She
    appealed against the decision of  the  respondent  dated  20  May  2014
    refusing to grant her a derivative residence card as the primary  carer
    of her father Mr Billy Hardley Mbazima born on  13  September  1935,  a
    British citizen.  The appeal was  heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal Richards-Clarke on 5 February 2015.  The appeal was allowed in
    a determination promulgated on 19 February 2015.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Cox on 15 April 2015.   The
    grounds of application are that no reasons  have  been  given  for  the
    findings  made  at  paragraph  44(a)  and   (j)   of   the   First-tier
    determination, that the appellant's father would be unable to reside in
    the United Kingdom if the appellant  is  not  granted  this  derivative
    right of residence.  The permission states  that  this  finding  cannot
    reasonably be inferred from the evidence.  The  evidence  is  that  the
    appellant's father is being helped to adapt to  his  situation  and  is
    being enabled to manage on his own.  Although it is recorded  that  the
    appellant's father needs to be monitored at night, the  Judge  made  no
    finding about the consequence of the absence of night time  supervision
    leading to the appellant's father being unable to reside in the  United
    Kingdom.  The  evidence  before  the  First-Tier  Judge  was  that  the
    appellant would  raise  her  father's  pillows  to  deal  with  choking
    episodes.

 4. The grounds go on to state that the Judge erred when he found that  the
    appellant's father would be unable to reside in the United  Kingdom  in
    the absence of his daughter. They state that the  judge  did  not  give
    satisfactory reasons for this finding.  The Judge states that the local
    Social Services have not  carried  out  a  full  community  care  needs
    assessment and on the evidence before him local  Social  Services  will
    not provide night time care to the appellant's father.  This  is  based
    on the oral evidence of the appellant.   The  grounds  state  that  the
    Judge could not be satisfied as to what the care  requirements  of  the
    appellant's father are and what care provisions would  be  forthcoming,
    without a full care assessment.  The judge states that if the appellant
    were to leave the UK there would be no one  to  assist  her  father  at
    night which would put him in difficulty. The judge then states that the
    appellant's father would  be  unable  to  return  to  Zambia  with  the
    appellant due to the lack of health care there and his lack  of  income
    but in the absence of any evidence to show that the appellant's  father
    would return to Zambia with his daughter if she were  to  return,  this
    finding indicates that her father may well  choose  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom. This of course undermines the claim that  he  would  be
    unable to reside here in his daughter's absence.

 5. Permission was granted on all these grounds.

 6. There is no Rule 24 response.



The Hearing

 7. Evidence has been supplied by the appellant's solicitor in the form  of
    emails between the appellant and Social Services.  The emails show that
    there was a  telephone  assessment  which  gave  more  details  of  the
    appellant's father's needs  and  that  her  father  was  identified  as
    meeting the criteria for a period of enablement which will help him  to
    become more independent at home and promote a better quality  of  life.
    It was found that there is  no  requirement  for  further  social  care
    relating to her father's current independence.   The  emails  refer  to
    care agencies which the appellant can  approach  independently  if  the
    appellant wants this.  The emails go on  to  state  that  there  is  no
    requirement for a community care assessment to take place.  I note that
    these emails are dated in June 2014.  The First-Tier hearing took place
    in February  2015.   There  is  no  evidence  that  the  appellant  has
    attempted to obtain a full community  care  needs  assessment  for  her
    father.  The grounds state "It is respectfully submitted  that  in  the
    absence of a full community care assessment, when there is no  evidence
    to suggest one would not be forthcoming if requested, the  Judge  could
    not be satisfied what the care requirements of the  appellant's  father
    are or what care provisions would be forthcoming.  It  is  respectfully
    submitted that without this information the Judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant's father would be unable to reside in the United  Kingdom  in
    the absence of his daughter has not been shown."

 8. I asked about this as the emails indicate that there is not going to be
    a further community care assessment carried out and it seems  that  one
    has not even been requested by the appellant or  her  father.  On  this
    basis I went ahead with this hearing.  A full community care assessment
    was not sought before the First tier hearing and has  not  been  sought
    since.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that  the  First-Tier  Judge  did  not
    properly assess whether the sponsor could stay in the United Kingdom if
    the appellant is removed.  She submitted that the correct test was  not
    applied by the Judge.

10. She referred to the said emails and the enablement period and submitted
    that these indicate that there is no requirement for more  intervention
    to assist the appellant's father.

11. The appellant states that she has to remain in the  United  Kingdom  so
    she can care for her father at night, as  he  chokes.   The  Presenting
    Officer submitted that that is not what the Social Services state.  She
    referred to the list of agencies which could give private care  to  the
    appellant's father if he felt that was necessary.  She  submitted  that
    the Judge did not consider the impact on the appellant's father if  the
    appellant has to leave the United Kingdom.

12. The Presenting Officer submitted that the Judge was aware that  a  full
    assessment has not been carried out and because of this the  Judge  was
    not entitled to make the finding that  the  appellant's  father  cannot
    stay in the United Kingdom if the appellant has to leave.

13. I was then referred to the relevant case law.  The  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that the following cases relate  to  children  but  are  both
    based on Regulation 15A of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 which  took  effect  on  8  November  2012  under  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Amendment  Number  2  Regulations,
    2012. This Regulation provides for a derivative right of residence  for
    primary carers of British citizens and is the same Regulation which  is
    relevant in this case.  I was referred to the  case  of  Maureen  Hines
    [2014] EWCA Civ 660, at paragraph 21, which states  that  nothing  less
    than compulsion will satisfy the required test.  The Presenting Officer
    submitted  that  in  that  case  the  carer  was   only   entitled   to
    accommodation if the sponsor would be effectively  compelled  to  leave
    the United Kingdom if the carer left.  The case goes on to  state  that
    what amounts to circumstances of compulsion may  differ  from  case  to
    case.  I was referred to the determination in Ms  Mbazima's  case  when
    her representative submitted that  the  sponsor  would  not  leave  the
    United Kingdom and go to Zambia because there is not sufficient  health
    care in Zambia. She submitted that the Judge has  not  dealt  with  the
    quality of the sponsor's life or how his life would be impaired if  the
    appellant leaves the United Kingdom.  She submitted that the judge  was
    unable to deal with that situation as there was not sufficient evidence
    before him.

14. I was then referred to  the  case  of  Jamil  Sanneh  [2013]  EWHC  793
    (Admin), at paragraph 19(iv).  The Presenting  Officer  submitted  that
    this states "Nothing less than compulsion will engage Articles  20  and
    21 of the TFEU".  She submitted that even if the quality or standard of
    life of the appellant's  father  is  diminished  as  a  result  of  the
    appellant leaving the United Kingdom that is not sufficient, it is only
    if the sponsor  is  compelled  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  if  the
    appellant is removed that this appellant's claim can succeed.

15. The Presenting Officer submitted that the Judge failed to  engage  with
    the correct test  and  these  requirements.   She  submitted  that  the
    evidence before the Judge did not show that the sponsor requires  extra
    care during the night, based on the Social Services report.

16. The Presenting Officer asked me to dismiss the appeal as the  terms  of
    the Regulations have not been met.

17. The appellant's representative submitted that with regard to the  first
    ground  of  application:  -  that  the  Judge  has  not  justified  his
    reasoning, I have to take into account  the  fact  that  the  sponsor's
    medical condition is very  serious.   He  has  problems  breathing  and
    chokes at night and needs woken up.  She  submitted  that  the  sponsor
    will die if he is not  wakened.   She  submitted  that  the  Judge  has
    referred to the medical report by the sponsor's GP  and  she  submitted
    that the consequences of the sponsor receiving no care  at  night  will
    lead to his death.

18. With regard to the second ground and the fact that  there  is  no  full
    community care needs assessment: - the Judge has  considered  the  GP's
    report. The representative submitted that even if there was a full care
    assessment report, the GP's report must be given more  weight  and  the
    Judge therefore made correct findings about the sponsor's condition.

19. The representative referred to ground 3, which is that the Judge failed
    to resolve a conflict in the evidence arising  in  submissions,  as  to
    whether the sponsor can live either in the  United  Kingdom  or  Zambia
    without his daughter, the appellant.  The Judge has found that the only
    night care the sponsor has is from the appellant  and  so  the  sponsor
    cannot survive in the United Kingdom without his daughter and he cannot
    survive in Zambia because of the health care situation there.

20. She submitted that the said case of Sanneh relates to quality  of  life
    but in this case it is a question of life and  death  and  the  sponsor
    will not be able to survive if the appellant is returned to Zambia.

21. I asked about private care and was told this is very expensive.   There
    is evidence of this on file.  The  representative  submitted  that  the
    sponsor only has a pension and cannot afford private care. I  was  told
    the costs of private care would have to be paid by the sponsor himself.

22. The Presenting Officer submitted that if the appellant has to leave the
    United Kingdom the sponsor will not be left without any  care.   He  is
    supported by his General Practitioner  and  by  Social  Services.   She
    submitted that if the appellant leaves and the sponsor is afraid he may
    choke at night fatally, he should be  contacting  the  Social  Services
    about this.  She submitted that there does not appear to have been  any
    recent attempt to obtain a full  care  assessment  report  from  Social
    Services.  She submitted that they clearly do not think that extra care
    at night is essential. She submitted that Social Services are doing all
    they can to make the sponsor independent.

23. The appellant's representative referred me to  the  appellant's  bundle
    and the GP report at page 27 which states: "Mr Mbazima  needs  constant
    care.  He needs his medications and eye drops to be administered due to
    his poor vision.  Due to the choking episodes at night someone needs to
    monitor him regularly at night.  He needs help  with  self  care,  e.g.
    washing hair and cutting toenails."  She submitted that  the  appellant
    has been told that night care is not available from Social Services.  I
    was referred to the findings of fact by the First-Tier Judge who  found
    the appellant and the sponsor both to be credible.

24. I asked if there is anything in writing to state that night care is not
    available from Social Services.  I was told  that  there  is  only  the
    appellant's oral evidence about this and about her  conversations  with
    Social Services.



Determination

25. The Judge has found the appellant and her father both  to  be  credible
    witnesses.  He has noted the correct burden and standard  of  proof  in
    his determination.

26. I note that as the Judge found the appellant to be credible he accepted
    her oral evidence that Social Services do not provide night time  care.
    This is the only evidence there is about this.  The appellant  has  not
    contacted Social Services since the email of 25 June 2014 in  spite  of
    permission to appeal being granted  and  the  basis  on  which  it  was
    granted.  I am not satisfied that night time care  is  never  available
    from Social Services.  In any case it is clear  from  the  emails  that
    Social Services do not believe that night time care  is  necessary  for
    the appellant's father.  It is also clear from the  determination  that
    the appellant has not kept in touch with the Department  for  Work  and
    Pensions about the costs of her father's night time care if it is found
    that this is needed.  This would have been helpful.

27. I have noted in particular the case law  supplied  by  the  respondent.
    This is based on Regulation 15A as is our appellant's  claim.   It  was
    submitted to the Judge at the First-Tier hearing that if the  appellant
    was genuinely seeking to address her father's situation she would  have
    taken active steps to progress her complaint about Social Services  and
    insisted on a full community care needs assessment for her  father  but
    she did not do so.  She has still not done this.  It was  also  put  to
    the First-tier Judge that  the  appellant's  father's  choking  can  be
    controlled by elevating the head of  his  bed.   Because  of  this  and
    because no reassessment of  financial  help  has  been  looked  at  and
    because the appellant has not insisted on a full community  care  needs
    assessment, I find that the burden has not been discharged.  The  Judge
    could not have been satisfied that the sponsor cannot remain in the  UK
    without the appellant as there was not sufficient evidence  before  him
    to come to this finding.

28. The case law provided makes it clear that the  test  in  this  case  is
    whether, if the appellant has to leave the United Kingdom it  would  be
    compulsory for her father to leave as  well  as  he  could  not  manage
    without her. There is no evidence that that  is  the  case  here.   The
    appellant is the primary carer but the sponsor also  has  support  from
    Social Services and his General Practitioner.  The  appellant's  father
    has stated that he would not go to Zambia with the appellant if she has
    to leave because of the lack of health care there.  This indicates that
    even if the appellant has  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  her  father
    intends remaining in the United Kingdom.  The Judge should  have  taken
    from this, that although it would not be his choice for his daughter to
    return to Zambia, he can manage without her with the support he has.

29. The First-Tier Judge made a material error of law when  he  found  that
    the appellant meets the requirements of Regulation 15A(4A) of the  2006
    Regulations and that she is entitled to a derivative right of residence
    in the United Kingdom.

30. The evidence before the Judge does not satisfy the required  test.  The
    evidence before him does not indicate that this is a matter of life and
    death as put to me by the appellant's representative.  I find that  had
    the appellant been certain of the facts  she  wishes  the  Tribunal  to
    accept she would have been in touch with  Social  Services  after  June
    2014 and would have obtained the full community care  needs  assessment
    report from the Social Work Department.  She  seems  to  have,  perhaps
    deliberately, avoided doing this. Social Services have been  doing  all
    they can to enable the sponsor to  live  independently.  This  was  the
    evidence before the First-tier judge who gave weight to the GP's report
    but the judge did not know whether Social Services had been made  aware
    of this report. At present they have not provided night time  care  but
    they are aware  of  the  sponsor's  condition  up  to  June  2014.  The
    appellant has not been in touch with them since then. The judge at  the
    First-tier hearing did not have sufficient evidence before him to  come
    to the decision he did.

Decision

I find that there is a material error  of  law  in  the  First-Tier  Judge's
determination.

No further hearing is required.

I dismiss the appellant's appeal and direct that the  First-Tier  Tribunal's
decision be set aside.

No anonymity direction has been made.





Signed                                  Date


Designated Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



