
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23442/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14 January 2014                              |On 18 February 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                               Nomilyn JAVIER
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Nomilyn Javier, born on 3 October 1983 and is  a  female
    citizen of the Philippines.

 2. The appellant had appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Callow)
    against a decision of the respondent  refusing  her  further  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant.
    The  decision  of  the  respondent  is  dated  23  May  2013  and   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal, dismissing  the  appeal,  was
    promulgated on 18 October 2013.

 3. The grounds of appeal (apparently  drafted  by  the  appellant  herself
    without legal assistance) are prolix  and,  as  both  Designated  Judge
    Baird (in the First-tier Tribunal) and Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chalkley
    observed, identify no error of law on the part of the judge.   However,
    Judge Chalkley added this when granting permission:

         However, the appellant is not represented in the United Kingdom and
         reading the judge's determination I believe  that  it  is  properly
         arguable  that  the  judge  may  have  erred  by   dismissing   the
         appellant's Article 8 human rights appeal and  then  purporting  to
         make a 'recommendation' to the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department.  Arguably,  rather  than  making  a  recommendation  he
         should have allowed the Article 8 appeal.  I grant permission.

 4. At the appeal hearing on 14 January 2014, the appellant did not  attend
    nor  was  she   legally   represented.    In   the   absence   of   any
    excuse/explanation from the appellant (whom I find was duly served with
    notice of the hearing by first-class  post  on  19  December  2013),  I
    proceeded with the hearing in her absence.

 5. With respect to Tribunal Judge Chalkley, I do not agree with the  basis
    upon which he has granted permission.  A recommendation by a First-tier
    Tribunal Judge lies wholly outside his or her role to determine appeals
    under the provisions either of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002 and his or her obligations under the Human  Rights  Act  1998.
    There is no obligation upon a judge to make  a  recommendation  nor  is
    there any obligation upon the Secretary of State to have any regard  to
    such a recommendation.  I simply do not see how the judge's decision to
    make a recommendation in this instance in any way undermines or may  be
    inconsistent with his analysis and decision in respect of the appeal on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds.  In essence,  the  judge  found  for,  entirely
    proper reasons which the grounds fail to show  are  arguably  wrong  in
    law, that the Article 8 ECHR appeal should  be  dismissed  but,  having
    some  sympathy  for  the  appellant's  position,  decided  to  make   a
    recommendation to the Secretary of State, no  doubt  being  well  aware
    that she was very unlikely indeed to act upon it.  The determination of
    the Article 8 appeal and the  making  of  the  recommendation  are  two
    entirely separate judicial acts.  I can identify no error of law either
    in the Article 8 ECHR analysis or the determination of the appeal under
    the Immigration Rules.

DECISION

 6. This appeal is dismissed.





Signed                              Date 11 February 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

