
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23315/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19th June 2013                               |On 21st June 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                              alexander amoako
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin, instructed by St. John Legal
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by a citizen of Ghana  born  in
    July 1976.  His original appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  in
    relation  to  a  Decision  made  on  13th  October  2012  refusing  his
    application for a residence card as confirmation of his right to reside
    in the UK as the family member, namely a spouse, of  an  EEA  national.
    His wife was originally of Ghanaian nationality  but  is  now  a  Dutch
    national.

 2. The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was dismissed by Judge Morris  in
    a determination promulgated on 4th January 2013.  The  reason  for  the
    original refusal was that the marriage was not valid because  customary
    marriages had to be registered within three months  in  Ghana  or  they
    were not valid.  The judge in the determination in the First-tier  made
    various  adverse  credibility  findings  and  dismissed   the   appeal.
    Permission having been granted to the Upper Tribunal, the  matter  then
    came before Judge Spencer on 18th March 2013  when  the  Appellant  was
    once again represented  by  Mr  Martin  and  in  fact,  as  today,  the
    Respondent was represented  by  Mr  Walker.   On  that  occasion  Judge
    Spencer found that the First-tier  Judge  had  made  an  error  of  law
    because she had decided the appeal on  a  basis  not  advanced  by  the
    Respondent without giving the Appellant the opportunity to adjourn  and
    to prepare the case. The First-tier Tribunal Judge appeared to find the
    marriage not to be genuine and had not made a finding as  to  validity.
    By the time the matter came before Upper Tribunal Judge Spencer it  was
    accepted that the marriage did not have to be registered  within  three
    months to be valid.  However, there was also an issue raised  by  Judge
    Spencer, namely that according to the case of  NA  (customary  marriage
    and divorce - evidence) Ghana [2009] UKAIT 00009 when the Tribunal  had
    expert evidence, a customary marriage was only  available  between  two
    Ghanaian citizens and in this case it is accepted  that  the  wife  had
    given up her Ghanaian citizenship.  Judge Spencer adjourned the case so
    that Mr Martin could prepare on the basis of the NA point and also  for
    a rehearing generally.

 3. A Transfer Order having been signed by the  Principal  Resident  Judge,
    the  matter  then  came  before  me  for  the  resumed  hearing.    The
    Appellant's  representatives  had  put  in  a  substantial  bundle   of
    documents including a lot of photographs of  family  members  attending
    the customary marriage and various other  documents  addressed  to  the
    Appellant and his wife  at  their  current  address  in  Watford.   The
    Appellant had also obtained a  further  expert  report  from  the  same
    expert who had given evidence in NA, Mercy  Akman.   It  was  she  who,
    before the Tribunal in NA, said  that  customary  marriages  were  only
    available to Ghanaian nationals.  In her new report she said that  she,
    after additional research and reflection, wished to clarify and  revise
    that opinion to say that customary marriages were available between non-
    Ghanaian citizens.  I have concerns about that expert  opinion  because
    it was not sourced or evidence-based which cast doubt, in my view, over
    not only that expert report but the evidence before the Tribunal in NA.
     However that all became somewhat irrelevant when Mr Walker produced  a
    UKBA document entitled "Customary Marriage and Divorce/Proxy  Marriages
    contracted in Ghana" dated 17th January 2012 which at page 3 refers  to
    those eligible to enter into such marriages and it includes:-

       o Ghanaian nationals resident in Ghana or abroad;

       o At least one of the parties must be a Ghanaian national;

       o If both parties are non-Ghanaian nationals  at  least  one  of  the
         parents of any of the couple must be a Ghanaian national

       o For a customary marriage to be registered.  Non-Ghanaian  nationals
         with no parental links to Ghanaian citizenship are not entitled  to
         customary marriage certificates.

    In this case the wife was of Ghanaian origin and her family are  there,
    so Mr Walker accepted on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  that  they
    were entitled to enter into a customary marriage  in  Ghana.   He  also
    accepted that they had in fact entered into a customary marriage  based
    on the new photographic evidence.  He did not challenge the genuineness
    of the relationship.

 4. Therefore, the Home Office Presenting Officer accepting that the couple
    have entered into a customary marriage in Ghana  he  also  accepted  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State that the Appellant is a family  member
    of an EEA national, exercising treaty rights in the  UK,  and  as  such
    entitled to succeed under the Regulations.  Accordingly the  appeal  is
    allowed under the EEA Regulations.





Signed                              Date 20th June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

