
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23773/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent &      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Manchester, Piccadilly                        |                              |
|On 5th August 2016 & 11th August 2016         |On 17th August 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                       mr pinakkumar satishbhai sharma
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Faryl (instructed by VAS UK)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mr McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an application to the Upper Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
    permission, against a judgment of the First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated
    on 11th January 2016 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Heynes.  Judge Heynes
    dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse him leave to remain as a spouse.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of India born on 9th  March  1987.   He  had
    sought, on 6th March 2015, indefinite leave to remain as a spouse.

 3. His spouse, Nadege Mayengo Sambenga  is  a  citizen  of  the  DRC  with
    indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom following her father's
    grant of asylum.  The Secretary of State rejected  the  application  as
    she did not accept that the couple were in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.

 4. Judge Heynes also found the relationship  to  be  neither  genuine  nor
    subsisting and dismissed the appeal.

 5. A Judge of the First-tier Tribunal granted permission to appeal  noting
    that Judge Heynes' decision was extremely brief and made  no  reference
    to  any  of  the  jurisprudence  on  the  subject   of   marriages   of
    convenience/genuine  and  subsisting  marriages.   The  judge  granting
    permission referred to the fact that the judge had failed to apply  the
    guidance to be found in Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ 14 and  Agho  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 1198 and Goudey [2012] UKUT 41.  I would point out  at  this  stage
    that the Judge who granted permission to appeal has misrepresented  the
    law.   The  cases  that  he  refers  to  all  relate  to  marriages  of
    convenience under the EEA  Regulations.   He  also  seems  to  conflate
    marriages of convenience with genuine and subsisting  marriages.   They
    are not the same.  A marriage between an EEA  national  and  a  non-EEA
    national to  be  considered  under  the  EEA  Regulations  may  not  be
    subsisting but nevertheless provides the non-EEA national spouse with a
    right to reside in the UK unless it is a marriage of convenience.  That
    does not apply under the Immigration Rules where it  is  a  requirement
    that a marriage not only be genuine but must also be subsisting and the
    latter involves a qualitative analysis of the relationship.

 6. Both representatives agreed that that was the case.

 7. The matter first came before me in Stoke on 5th August 2016.  My  first
    task was to decide whether the First-tier Tribunal had made an error of
    law and if so whether and to  what  extent  the  Decision  and  Reasons
    should be set aside.

 8. The Judge in his Decision and Reasons noted that the Secretary of State
    had reached the conclusions she did based on  the  marriage  interview.
    He indicated at paragraph 13 that he approached interview evidence with
    caution.  He said that parties to a  relationship  do  not  necessarily
    observe, recall or attach importance to the same things.   Some  degree
    of inconsistency does not, by definition, suggest a  marriage  that  is
    not genuine or subsisting.  Equally, consistent answers may result from
    parties to a marriage that is  not  genuine  having  prepared  for  the
    interview.  He noted that the circumstances of the  interview  in  this
    case were that it was conducted in English and he found at the  hearing
    that the Appellant's grasp of the language was inadequate to conduct  a
    safe hearing.   The  Judge  went  on  at  paragraph  14  to  find  that
    nevertheless, taken as  a  whole  and  making  allowance  for  language
    difficulties, the  answers  in  the  marriage  interview  were  broadly
    consistent and he did not  find  anything  that  cast  doubt  upon  the
    relationship.

 9. Having found that he disagreed with the Secretary of State's reasoning,
    he went on to consider for himself the genuineness of the marriage.  He
    was concerned at discrepancies and other matters arising  in  the  oral
    evidence of the Appellant and his Sponsor.  He noted that the wife  did
    not know, because she was not interested, when or why the Appellant had
    stopped studying.  That was the reason he first came to  the  UK.   The
    Judge found that to be of significance because the Appellant's evidence
    was that he had stopped studying because of his relationship  with  his
    wife.  He also noted there was a discrepancy as to when the couple  had
    last been out for a meal together.  The Appellant had indicated it  was
    two weeks previously whilst his wife  had  said  it  was  a  long  time
    before.  He noted that the wife's commitment to  the  relationship  was
    qualified.  She was only prepared to maintain the relationship  if  the
    Appellant was in the UK.  She would not be prepared to return with  him
    to India.

10. The Judge also noted that there was no supporting letters or statements
    from any objective third party as to the couple's relationship  and  on
    that basis he found the marriage to be not genuine or subsisting.

11. Ms Faryl argued that the fact that the wife was not prepared  to  leave
    the UK and travel to India with her husband was  not  relevant  to  the
    issue of whether the marriage was genuine and subsisting.   She  argued
    the findings were brief and inadequate to support the conclusion.

12. I was persuaded that the Judge's  consideration  of  the  evidence  was
    lacking in depth and he had found the marriage not subsisting  for  few
    reasons.

13. On that basis I found that the Decision and Reasons could not stand and
    should be set aside for rehearing.  Whilst I was  prepared  to  proceed
    immediately  to  redecide  the  case  on  5th  August,  there  was   no
    interpreter and it had previously been established that  the  Appellant
    required one.  With the consent of all parties I agreed  that  I  would
    redecide the case in Manchester on 11th August.  The Appellant in  fact
    lives in the Manchester area.

14. On 11th August the Appellant  gave  his  evidence  through  a  Gujarati
    interpreter and they were able to understand each other and there  were
    no interpretation difficulties.

15. Mr McVeety agreed that the appeal rested on the single issue of whether
    the marriage was genuine and subsisting.

16. The Appellant had adopted his statement as his evidence-in-chief and Ms
    Faryl asked him no additional questions.

17. In cross-examination the Appellant said that he had first met his  wife
    in the Arndale Shopping Centre in Manchester where  she  was  with  her
    friend.  He was asked when that was and he said it was January/February
    2011.

18. He was asked when they started to live together and he said  that  when
    they met he was working in Bolton but he was meeting his wife  once  or
    twice a week and in December 2011 he proposed to her.  The question was
    repeated as to when it was they started to live together  and  he  said
    December 2011 after he had proposed to her and then he  said  they  got
    married on 2nd April 2012.  He was asked where  they  had  first  lived
    together and he said it was in Bradford Street in Bolton and then  they
    moved to Carlton Street, also in Bolton.

19. The Appellant said that his wife had come to the UK because her  father
    was here and he said she was studying here  and  her  father  was  also
    here.  He said that she had indefinite leave to remain.

20. The Appellant had not met his wife's parents who also lived in  Bolton.
    He said he had not met them because they  were  not  happy  with  their
    daughter getting married to him because they did  not  share  the  same
    religion.  He indicated that whilst his wife goes to  church,  he  does
    not and is not religious.  He was able to name his wife's five sisters,
    none of whom he has met although they are all in the UK.

21. He indicated that his own family who are not in the UK approved of  the
    marriage.  He spoke to his family in India regularly  and  he  has  one
    sister and no brothers.  He said that his wife does not speak  Gujarati
    but will say "hi" on the telephone.  She has not met them.

22. In re-examination Ms Faryl put to the Appellant that he had  just  said
    in evidence that they had started living together in December 2011  but
    in his witness statement he said it was in early January 2012.  At this
    point Mr McVeety interjected indicating he was not going to take  issue
    with that slight discrepancy.

23. We then heard evidence from Miss Sambenga, the Appellant's wife.

24. She also identified and adopted her witness statement as being true and
    confirmed that she had been born in the  Congo  and  had  achieved  her
    status when her father was granted  asylum.   She  confirmed  that  her
    family being her  parents  and  five  sisters  lived  in  Bolton.   She
    confirmed that the family did not approve of  her  husband  because  he
    comes from another country and that is why they do not like  him.   She
    confirmed that they had never met him.

25. When asked when she had first met  her  husband  she  said  it  was  in
    December 2011.  She was quite certain that that was the  case  and  she
    said that they moved in together in January 2012.  She  confirmed  that
    they had met in the Manchester Arndale Centre.  The  remainder  of  her
    answers coincided with those of  her  husband.   In  re-examination  Ms
    Faryl asked again when she first met her husband  and  she  said  2011,
    December and it was put to her that her husband had said that it was in
    February 2011.  She confirmed it was December and confirmed  that  they
    had started living together a couple of  months  after  they  had  met.
    When she was asked to clarify that point she said it was  just  one  or
    two months after they had met.

26. While I have set aside Judge Heynes' decision, the discrepancies in the
    evidence before him remain relevant.  The Appellant and his  wife  have
    now provided further discrepancies which call their  relationship  into
    question.  The Appellant seems unaware that his wife and her family are
    refugees; he seemed to be under the impression  that  she  had  been  a
    student and had come to join her father.

27. The Appellant said the reason his wife's family did not  like  him  was
    because of the different religions whereas it was her case that it  was
    simply  because  they  were  of  different  nationalities.   The  major
    discrepancy however is the difference in the  length  of  time  between
    them meeting and starting to live together.  They can be  forgiven  for
    getting the date when they first met slightly differently but how  long
    they were seeing each other before they moved in together would not  be
    something that they would forget.  According to the Appellant's wife it
    was only about a month whereas according to the Appellant it was almost
    a year. That is a very considerable inconsistency. I also find it  less
    than credible that the Appellant would not have met any members of  his
    wife's family. When the  discrepancies  before  me  are  added  to  the
    matters that concerned Judge Heynes, I find that I cannot be  satisfied
    that the Appellant has established on a balance of  probabilities  that
    his marriage is subsisting and for that reason his appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction having been requested none is made.






Signed                              Date 16th August 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


