
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
IA/23202/2015

                                                   IA/23199/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8 June 2017                           |  On 19 June 2017                   |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                  jose Ubirajara Silverio (First Appellant)
               maria Martins Nery Silverio (Second Appellant)
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr E Wilford of Counsel instructed by M Reale
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appeal of Maria and  Jose  Silverio.   The  Appellants  are
    nationals of Brazil.  The first Appellant, Mr Silverio, arrived in  the
    United Kingdom on 2 February 2005 with six months' entry clearance as a
    visitor.  His wife and their son arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  24
    February 2006, also with six months' entry clearance as visitors.   The
    family then overstayed and on 31 July 2014 the Appellants  applied  for
    leave to remain, a separate application being made by their  son.   The
    Appellants' application for leave was refused  on  30  September  2014,
    however the application in relation  to  their  son  was  granted  with
    reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) on the  basis  that  he  was  aged
    between 18 and 25 and had spent more than half his life in  the  United
    Kingdom and he was granted 30 months' leave to remain.

 2. The Appellants' appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision  came
    before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Swinnerton for  hearing  on  15
    September 2016.  In a decision promulgated on 3 October 2016 the  judge
    dismissed the appeal.  An application for permission to appeal was made
    in time on 14 October 2016.  The grounds in support of the  application
    asserted that the  judge  erred  materially  in  law  in  that  despite
    accepting at [24] that the Appellants and their son lived together as a
    family unit and that they enjoy family life together  [25],  the  judge
    failed to engage with the central argument in the case and that is  the
    manner in which the Article 8 rights of the Appellants' son fell to  be
    considered in light of the jurisprudence, in  particular  that  of  the
    case of the judgment of Sir Stanley Burnton in Singh  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    630.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted to the Upper  Tribunal  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Saffer in a decision dated 26 April 2017  on  the  basis
    that:

      "It is  arguable  that  inadequate  consideration  was  given  to  the
article 8 rights of the    Appellants' adult son who resides with  them  and
has leave to remain."

     Hearing

 4. At the hearing  before  me,  Mr  Wilford  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellants and sought to rely  on  the  grounds  of  appeal.   He  also
    responded to the Rule 24  response  that  had  been  submitted  by  the
    Secretary of State.  His position essentially is  that  the  judge  had
    erred in separating the Appellants' son's family life from his  private
    life.  He also sought to rely on the decision of the European Court  of
    Human Rights in AA v The United Kingdom and the fact that even if  "you
    have attained majority, a family life with your  parents  is  found  to
    exist, this is a very significant element of your private  life  and  a
    holistic approach should be taken".

 5. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Tufan relied  on  the  Rule  24
    response which submitted that the grounds failed to appreciate that the
    Appellants' son had finished secondary  school  and  was  embarking  on
    tertiary education, that the Appellants' son was an adult, but the case
    does not appear to have been put on the basis that family life  existed
    in Kugathas terms.  The Rule 24 response submitted that the Appellants'
    son's position would in effect be no different to  that  of  a  foreign
    student coming to study in London and he could  continue  his  tertiary
    education absent the Appellants, and this was a  finding  open  to  the
    judge on the evidence at [28].

 6. Mr Tufan in addition to those points took issue with the fact  that  at
    [24] of the judge's decision there  was  no  consideration  of  whether
    there were compelling circumstances to justify consideration of Article
    8 outside the Immigration Rules.  He also submitted and  accepted  that
    the statutory considerations under Section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 were neither referred to nor spelt  out
    by the judge in his decision, although at [25] by implication the judge
    referred  to  the  precariousness  of  the  stay  by  the   Appellants.
    Ultimately, however, he agreed that these were material errors  of  law
    and that the decision of the judge could not stand.

 7. In light of Mr Tufan's helpful  concession,  I  agree  that  there  are
    material errors of law in the decision for both the reason set  out  in
    the grounds of appeal, in respect of which  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted and the reasons referred to by Mr Tufan at [6] above.

Notice of Decision

 8. I remit the appeal for a hearing de novo  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    before a judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Swinnerton.

 9. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed   Rebecca Chapman                              Date 16 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman



