
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/23721/2013
                                                               IA/23716/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5th June 2014                                |On 2nd July 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                 mr Antonio Russo Londono (first appellant)
              miss Ismenia Bastidas Londono (second appellant)
                        (no anonymity dierction made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Subramanian, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by Miss Ismenia Bastidas Londono and Mr Antonio Russo
    Londono,  both  citizens  of  Venezuela.  They   appeal   against   the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Greasley  issued  on  14th
    March 2014 dismissing under the Immigration Rules and  Article  8  ECHR
    their appeals against the decision of the Respondent made on  24th  May
    2013 to refuse residence cards based on retained  rights  of  residence
    under Regulation 10 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006  on  the
    basis of a relationship with a deceased family  member,  Antonio  Russo
    Trupiano.

 2. The Appellants were born on 23rd December 1994  and  4th  January  1961
    respectively. The second Appellant is the mother of the first.

 3.  On  29th  April  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hemingway  granted
    permission to appeal.  He admitted the  application  though  late.   He
    said:-

         "2.  The grounds, which are  not  always  wholly  easy  to  follow,
             assert, in effect, that the Judge erred in failing to consider
             Home Office policy, in  failing  to  adequately  consider  the
             evidence, and failing to consider legal submissions put to him
             and in failing to adequately consider Article 8  of  the  ECHR
             both within and outside the Rules.

         ...

         4.   It is arguable that with respect  to  the  male  Appellant  (a
             minor at the date of application  though  an  adult  now)  the
             Judge  did  not  adequately  consider  whether  he  meets  the
             requirements of paragraph 276ADE.  It  is  arguable  that  the
             Judge with respect to  each  Appellant  failed  to  adequately
             explain an adverse credibility assessment.

         5.   Permission to appeal is  granted.   All  the  grounds  may  be
             argued though, on the face of it, the Judge's  reasoning  with
             respect to the appeal  under  the  EEA  Regulations  might  be
             thought  to  be  sound.   Further,  it  is  not  obvious   the
             Appellants could benefit from the policy argument referred  to
             given the limited scope of that  policy.   Those  representing
             the Appellants may care to consider whether those  points  are
             to be pursued further or not."

 4. The Respondent submitted a response to the Grounds of Appeal under Rule
    24.  He simply said that they oppose the  appeal.   Their  position  is
    that  the  Judge  directed  himself  appropriately.   He  did  consider
    paragraph 276ADE in relation to the minor child and  found  that  there
    was not enough evidence to show continuous residence for seven years.

 5. The grounds are difficult to follow.  One of the  main  submissions  is
    that in the absence of evidence that the deceased had  been  exercising
    treaty rights in the UK the Respondent has a policy which would  enable
    her to undertake any investigation of the deceased EEA person in  order
    to establish whether or not  he  was  exercising  treaty  rights.   The
    relevant policy handout was submitted  to  the  Immigration  Judge  who
    failed to mention it.  No investigation  has  been  undertaken  by  the
    Respondent.  It is submitted too that the Judge failed to consider  the
    decision OA (EEA - retained right of residence)  Nigeria  [2010]  UKAIT
    00003 which refers to the need to legally safeguard family  members  in
    the event of the death of the European Union citizen.  It is  submitted
    that  the  Judge  also  failed  to  consider  Article  14  of  the  EEA
    Regulations  and  to  properly  consider  paragraph   276ADE   of   the
    Immigration Rules and the case law appertaining thereto.

 6. The basic facts of this case appear to be that the  Appellants  entered
    the UK for six months on 9th December 2002 and on 17th  September  2012
    their solicitors applied on their behalf for residence cards based upon
    their retained right of residence following the death of Mr Trupiano in
    Venezuala in 2011.   The Judge set out Regulation 10 which  defines  "a
    family member who has retained the right of residence".  It  defines  a
    person as satisfying the conditions of the category if:-

      i) he was a family member of a qualified  person  when  the  qualified
         person died;

     ii) he resided in the UK in accordance with these  Regulations  for  at
         least a year immediately before the death of the qualified  person;
         and

    iii) he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6):-




              is not an EEA national but would, if he were an  EEA  national
             be a worker,  a  self-employed  person  or  a  self-sufficient
             person under Regulation 6.

 7. The Judge heard evidence from the first Appellant who said that he  had
    lived in the UK for half of his life and spent a  great  deal  of  time
    with his father Mr Trupiano who had died in 2011.  The Judge notes that
    the first Appellant accepted that there were  no  supporting  documents
    regarding his father's business which he  understood  involved  a  tyre
    business.   The  Appellant  said  that  he  recalled  visiting  factory
    premises once in the UK.  He said his father kept his work to himself.

 8. His mother gave evidence.  She had lived with Mr Trupiano for more than
    twenty years.  She said that her husband  had  been  exercising  treaty
    rights in the UK but there  were  no  documents  to  prove  this.    Mr
    Trupiano had a car company in Venezuela.  He spoke  very  little  about
    it.  There were no documents and no business activity  was  established
    in the UK.  She said that her deceased husband had a separate family in
    Venezuela prior to her relationship with him and had four children from
    that relationship.  There was also evidence from the second Appellant's
    mother who said that she was not aware that Mr Trupiano had any  formal
    business interests in the  United  Kingdom  but  rather  in  Venezuela.
    Other family members gave evidence.

 9. In his  conclusions  the  Judge  appears  to  have  accepted  that  the
    Appellants had been in the UK for a year before the EEA  national  died
    but not that the EEA national was exercising treaty rights in  the  UK.
    He said that all the evidence before him suggested  that  the  business
    activities were based in Venezuela.

10. The Judge then went on to consider paragraph 276ADE.  He  set  out  the
    requirements.  He was not satisfied that the Appellants have  lived  in
    the UK for at least seven years.  There was  evidence  that  the  first
    Appellant had attended school in the UK between 2008 and 2011 but  said
    there is no evidence that the Appellant could establish either that  he
    was under the age of 18 years and had lived continuously in the UK  for
    seven years or, having been between 18 years and 25, had spent at least
    half his life continuously here.  He found that the evidence  given  by
    the first Appellant about visiting his father's car factory in  the  UK
    was untrue as clearly no such business existed and given  the  evidence
    of the second Appellant that she had returned to Venezuela in 2005  and
    2007 and had travelled  with  her  son,  continuous  residence  is  not
    established.  He noted that the second Appellant said  in  her  witness
    statement that her husband had been exercising treaty rights in the  UK
    then in  oral  evidence  said  that  the  car  business  was  based  in
    Venezuela. The EEA  national  had  died  in  Venezuala.  There  was  no
    evidence before the Judge to establish the  residence  claimed  by  the
    First Appellant and I do  not accept that he failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for his findings on this  point.  So  far  as  his  credibility
    findings are concerned  it seems to have been very clear that the First
    Appellant had said his father had a  business  in  the  UK  when  other
    family members said he did not. Again I find  that  sufficient  reasons
    were given.

11. With regard to Article 8 the Judge said he was not satisfied that there
    are no family members to whom the Appellants could turn  initially  for
    support on return to Venezuela.   He  found  that  Article  8  was  not
    engaged taking account of the principles set out in Gulshan (Article  8
    - new Rules -  correct  approach)  [2013].  Very  little  evidence  was
    provided of the Appellants' private and family life in  the  UK.  Judge
    Greasley considered the evidence before him and reached  conclusions he
    was entitled to reach on the evidence before him.

12. With regard to the argument that the Home Office should have  exercised
    their policy Mr Whitwell said that the policy is  a  domestic  violence
    one which was issued on 4th August 2011 and it refers to  seven  years'
    residence in the UK.  In the evidence that has been produced there is a
    gap in the evidence between  April  2005  and  2008  and  there  is  no
    evidence that the Appellants had lived in the UK continuously for seven
    years.   Mr  Subramanian  responded  that  the  policy  says  that   in
    exceptional circumstances checks will be made.  It is  clear  that  the
    EEA Regulations intend that if an EEA national dies his  family  should
    be allowed to remain in the  UK.   He  submitted  that  the  Judge  had
    ignored the policy.  The family were here as EEA dependants.  The first
    Appellant was a child at the date of application.  The family must have
    had  income  from  somewhere.  Mr  Subramanian  did  not  challenge  Mr
    Whitwell's submissions  on this policy and conceded  that there was  no
    evidence that the EEA national ever exercised treaty rights in the  UK.



13. The fact of the matter is that there was not one jot of evidence before
    the Judge that the EEA national was exercising treaty rights in the  UK
    and he was presented with contradictory evidence from the family  about
    the  locus  of  the  EEA  national's  claimed  business.  In  all   the
    circumstances of this case including the absence of  any  documentation
    and the fact that there is  nothing  to  suggest  that  there  was  any
    attempt by the  Appellants  to  obtain  documentation  relative  to  Mr
    Trupiano from relevant bodies such as HMRC, it is difficult to take the
    view that even if the policy referred to did apply, which has not  been
    established, there was any duty on  the  Secretary  of  State  to  make
    enquiries. The policy was not before me and it is not at all clear what
    submissions were made on  it  at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal but the Judge was entitled to take account of the  total  lack
    of documentary evidence and the discrepant oral evidence and  to  place
    weight on the fact that the family were unable to produce anything  and
    appeared to have no idea what Mr Trupiano did for a living or where  he
    did it.



Decision

I find that there is no material error of law in the determination of  Judge
Greasley and his decision is upheld.






Signed                              Date: 30th June 2014.

N A Baird
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Baird

