
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/23160/2013
     ia/23161/2013
     ia/23164/2013
     ia/23169/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30th January, 2014                         |On 20th February, 2014       |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                          MUHAMMAD SAEED UR REHMAN
                               FARKHANDA SAEED
                                LAAIBA SAEED
                                MARYAM SAEED
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Ashfaq Ahmed, a person registered by OISC at
                    level 3 instructed by Western Law Chambers.
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer .


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   All  appellants  are  all  nationals  of  Pakistan.   The  first  named
    appellant applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 1
    (General) Migrant, under the points-based system.  His wife, the second
    named appellant, and his two  children,  the  third  and  fourth  named
    appellants, claimed as the first named appellant's dependants.

2.   The first named appellant arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  in  August,
    2005, as a student and leave in that capacity was extended  until  31st
    October, 2010.  On 24th October, 2011, he was granted leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant until March,  2013.



3.   On  6th  March,  2013,  the  first  named  appellant  made  a  combined
    application for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  1
    (General) Migrant, under the points-based system and  for  a  biometric
    residence  permit.   The  second,  third  and  fourth  appellants  made
    applications as his dependants.   On  4th  June,  2013  the  respondent
    refused the first named appellant's application, because under Appendix
    A: attributes, the appellant had claimed  45  points  for  earnings  of
    �81,374.42 but, the respondent claimed, the documentation he  submitted
    as evidence of his previous earnings from Ample Financial  Services  in
    the  form  of  an  accountant's  letter  and  tax  documents,  did  not
    corroborate each other as specified under Appendix A of the Immigration
    Rules, because the tax documents do not specifically state  the  amount
    of earnings received during the period claimed, 1st  January,  2012  to
    30th June, 2012.  As a result, no  points  were  awarded  for  previous
    earnings and the Secretary of  State  concluded,  therefore,  that  the
    first named appellant had failed to meet the requirement  in  paragraph
    245CA(c) of Statement of Changes  in  Immigration  Rules,  HC  395,  as
    amended  ("the  Immigration  Rules")  and  under  Appendix  A  of   the
    Immigration Rules. The Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    refused the first named appellant's application and those of  his  wife
    and children which were dependant on it.

4.   The appellants appealed that decision  and  his  appeal  was  heard  by
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ferguson   in   Birmingham   who,   in   a
    determination promulgated on 22nd November, 2013, found that in respect
    of the business, Ample Financial Solutions, the  evidence  required  to
    show a calculation of income for the first named appellant  during  the
    relevant period had not been submitted.

5.   The appellant sent with his application a  copy  of  a  Return  to  the
    Federal Board of Revenue, but this was a document completed by  him  or
    on his behalf, showing his total income for the year to 30th June, 2012
    of Rs.17,196,500.  It was not a  document  received  from  the  Federal
    Board of Revenue.  An  accountant's  letter  of  18th  February,  2013,
    showed the first named appellant's half year earnings  for  the  period
    1st January, 2012, to 30th June, 2012, being Rs.9,630,056,  and  a  net
    taxable income  of  Rs.9,381,433.   There  was,  however,  no  evidence
    submitted in respect of that second half year earnings from the Federal
    Board of  Revenue.   The  judge  noted  that  the  specified  documents
    required by paragraph 19-SD were:-

         "(iv)     Official  tax  document  produced  by  the  relevant  tax
             authority or employer, showing earnings on which tax has  been
             paid or will be paid in a full tax year" and


         (v)   if  the  appellant  is  claiming  points  for   self-employed
             earnings,  a  letter  from  his  accountant  on  headed  paper
             confirming that the appellant received the exact amount he  is
             claiming or the net amount to which he is entitled.  This is a
             letter  from  the  appellant's  accountants  on  headed  paper
             confirming the gross and net pay for the period claimed.   The
             letter should give a breakdown of salary,  dividends,  profit,
             tax credits and dates of payments earned.  If the  appellant's
             earnings are a share of net profit of the company, the  letter
             should also explain this."

6.   The judge noted that the respondent refused  the  application,  because
    the two pieces of evidence submitted by the first named  appellant  did
    not corroborate each other.  This was  because  the  Federal  Board  of
    Revenue documents did not specifically state the amount of earnings the
    appellant received for the period claimed.   The  judge  dismissed  the
    appeal.  The grounds suggested that the  judge  had  misunderstood  the
    income calculation and failed to take into account the true  income  of
    the appellant for the period 1st January, 2012,  to  30th  June,  2012.
    The grounds also suggested that the judge had failed  to  consider  the
    appellant's private and family life under Article 8 of the ECHR.

7.   The day prior to the commencement of the  hearing  the  respondent  had
    contacted the Upper Tribunal  requesting  permission  to  withdraw  its
    decision.  The respondent was advised that permission was not  granted.



8.   At the hearing a gentleman from Western Legal  Chambers,  who  told  me
    his name was Ahmed, explained that the  appellants  were  not  present,
    because he had told them the day before that they need not  attend  the
    hearing.  He asked that the appeal be adjourned  because  he  had  also
    told Counsel not to attend the hearing.

9.   I adjourned the hearing until 2:00pm.

10.  At 2:00pm the appellants were  represented  by  Mr  Ashfaq  Ahmed.   He
    referred me to the appellants' bundle and in  particular  to  page  30,
    which was a copy of the letter from the  appellant's  accountant  dated
    13th April, 2013.  He reminded me that the receipts for the  full  year
    ended 30th June, 2012 were shown there as being  Rs.19,176,528.   That,
    he submitted, was reflected by the revenue document at pages 41 and  42
    which showed a similar figure.

11.  I pointed out to him that the documents at  pages  41  and  42  of  the
    bundle were not from the Federal Board of Revenue, but were returns  of
    income made by the appellant for the full year ended  30th  June,  2012
    and represented what the first named appellant claimed  he  had  earns.
    They were not independently produced and had not been agreed  with  the
    Federal Board of Revenue.

12.  I explained to him that in his application, the first  named  appellant
    was relying on income during the period 1st January, 2012 to 30th June,
    2012, which he said was in excess of Rs.9,381,000.  Mr Mahmood told  me
    that the accountant had calculated the  half  year  figures  simply  by
    dividing by two the figure for the full year.

13.  Mr Jack pointed out that the accountant's earlier letter at page 31  of
    the appellant's bundle dated 18th February, 2013,  does  actually  show
    half year receipts of Rs.9,630,000 and that this figure appeared to  be
    the actual earnings earned during that half year period.   It  was  the
    actual earnings earned during that half year period that was  relevant,
    and the appellant needed to demonstrate evidence that complied with the
    Rules showing this earning to achieve the 45  points  he  needed.   The
    accounts do not, as has been  suggested,  simply  take  the  full  year
    figure and divide by two.  They are on the face of it actual half  year
    earnings which is the evidence that the Secretary  of  State  requires.
    However, in order to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules the
    appellant needed to demonstrate a second source of evidence of his half
    year earnings for the period 1st January, 2012 to 30th June, 2012.   Mr
    Jack pointed out that the appellant now has submitted a letter from the
    regional  tax   office,   Faisalabad,   dated   30th   October,   2013.
    Unfortunately this was the actual evidence  that  was  required  to  be
    submitted with the appellant's application.  The document  at  page  39
    was not submitted with the application and is not therefore  admissible
    for the purposes of the appellants' appeal.

14.  Mr Ahmed suggested that it was almost impossible for the  appellant  to
    have filed the required evidence, because in Pakistan tax  returns  are
    made yearly.  The Immigration  Judge  simply  failed  to  consider  the
    evidence before him.  So far as Article 8 is concerned, the  judge  did
    refer in paragraph 12 to private life, but was wrong in  what  he  said
    because he did not properly apply Razgar v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2004] UKHL 27.  He invited me to allow the appeal.

15.  Paragraph 245CA of the Immigration Rules provides as follows:


    "245CA. Requirements for leave to remain

    To qualify for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant, an
    applicant must meet the requirements listed below. If the applicant
    meets these requirements, leave to remain will be granted. If the
    applicant does not meet these requirements, the application will be
    refused.
    Requirements:
    (a) The applicant must not fall for refusal under the general grounds
    for refusal, and must not be an illegal entrant.
    (b) if the applicant has, or has had, leave as a Highly Skilled
    Migrant, as a Writer, Composer or Artist, Self-Employed Lawyer, or as a
    Tier 1 (General) Migrant under the Rules in place before 19 July 2010,
    and has not been granted leave in any categories other than these under
    the Rules in place since 19 July 2010, the applicant must have 75
    points under paragraphs 7 to 34 of Appendix A.
    (c) in all cases other than those referred to in (b) above, the
    applicant must have 80 points under paragraphs 7 to 34 of Appendix A.
    (d) The applicant must have 10 points under paragraphs 1 to 15 of
Appendix B.
    (e) The applicant must have 10 points under paragraphs 1 to 3 of
appendix C.
    (f) The applicant must have, or have last been granted, entry
    clearance, leave to enter or remain:
         (i) as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant,
         (ii) as a Highly Skilled Migrant,
         (iii) as a Writer, Composer or Artist, or
         (iv) as a self-employed lawyer.
    (g) The applicant must not be in the UK in breach of immigration laws
    except that any period of overstaying for a period of 28 days or less
    will be disregarded."


16.  Paragraph 19 of Appendix A provides as follows:-

    "19. (a) In all cases, the applicant must provide at least two
    different types of the specified documents in paragraph 19-SD(a) from
    two or more separate sources as evidence for each source of previous
    earnings.
    (b) If the applicant is claiming points for self-employed earnings made
    in the UK, he must also provide the specified documents in paragraph 19-
    SD(b) to show that:
         (i) he is registered as self-employed,
         (ii) he was registered as self-employed during the period(s) of
         self-employment used to claim points, and
         (iii) he was paying Class 2 National Insurance contributions during
         the period(s) of self-employment used to claim points.
    (c) Each piece of supporting evidence must support all the other
    evidence and, where appropriate, be accompanied by any information or
    explanation of the documents submitted, including further documents
    such as a letter of explanation from the applicant's accountant, so
    that together the documents clearly prove the earnings claimed.
    (d) Full contact details must be provided for each supporting document
    for verification purposes.
    (e) Where an applicant is providing bank statements as evidence, the
    bank statements provided must:
         (i) be on official bank stationery, and must show each of the
         payments that the applicant is claiming, or
         (ii) electronic bank statements, which either:
             (1) are accompanied by a supporting letter from the bank on
             company headed paper confirming that the documents are
             authentic, or
             (2) bear the official stamp of the issuing bank on every page
         of the statement.
    (f) Where an applicant is providing official tax documents as evidence,
    the documents must be:
         (i) a document produced by a tax authority that shows details of
         declarable taxable income on which tax has been paid or will be
         paid in a tax year (for example a tax refund letter or tax demand),
         (ii) a document produced by an employer as an official return to a
         tax authority, showing details of earnings on which tax has been
         paid in a tax year (for example a P60 in the United Kingdom), or
         (iii) a document produced by a person, business, or company as an
         official return to a tax authority, showing details of earnings on
         which tax has been paid or will be paid in a tax year, and which
         has been approved, registered, or stamped by the tax authority.
    (g)  (i) Where an applicant is providing evidence from an accountant or
         accountancy firm, the accountant must be either a fully qualified
         chartered accountant or a certified accountant who is a member of a
         registered body.
         (ii) If the earnings were for work done while the applicant was in
         the UK, such evidence must come from an accountant or accountancy
         firm in the UK who is a member of one of the following recognised
         supervisory bodies:
             (1) The Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and
             Wales (ICAEW),
             (2) The Institute of Chartered Accountants in Scotland (ICAS),
             (3) The Institute of Chartered Accountants in Ireland (ICAI),
             (4) The Association of Chartered Certified Accountants (ACCA),
             (5) The Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy
             (CIPFA),
             (6) The Institute of Financial Accountants (IFA), or
             (7) The Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (CIMA).
         (iii) If the earnings were made while the applicant was not in the
         UK, the evidence must come from an accountant or accountancy firm
         which meets the requirements in (ii) or appears on the list of full
         members given on the website of the International Federation of
         Accountants.
    (h) If the applicant has exchanged some of his UK employment rights for
    shares as an employee-owner, the value of those shares will not be
    included when calculating the applicant's previous earnings.
    (i) The Secretary of State must be satisfied that the earnings are from
    genuine employment. If the Secretary of State is not satisfied, points
    for those earnings will not be awarded.
    (j) In making the assessment in paragraph 19(i), the Secretary of State
    will assess on the balance of probabilities and may take into account
    the following factors:
         (i) the evidence the applicant has submitted;
         (ii) whether the money appears to have been earned through genuine
         employment, rather than being borrowed, gifted, or otherwise shown
         in the applicant's financial transactions or records without being
         earned;

         (iii) whether the business from which the earnings are claimed can
         be shown to exist and be lawfully and genuinely trading;
         (iv) verification of previous earnings claims with declarations
         made in respect of the applicant to other Government Departments,
         including declarations made in respect of earnings claimed by the
         applicant in previous applications;
         (v) the applicant's previous educational and business experience
         (or lack thereof) in relation to the claimed business activity;
         (vi) the applicant's immigration history and previous activity in
    the UK;
         (vii) where the nature of the applicant's employment or business
         requires him to have mandatory accreditation, registration or
         insurance, whether that accreditation, registration or insurance
         has been obtained;
         (viii) any payments made by the applicant to other parties; and
         (ix) any other relevant information.
    (k) To support the assessment in paragraph 19(i), the Secretary of
State may:
         (i) request additional information and evidence, and refuse the
         application if the information or evidence is not provided. Any
         requested documents must be received by the Secretary of State at
         the address specified in the request within 28 working days of the
         date the request is sent, and
         (ii) request the applicant attends an interview, and refuse the
         application if the applicant fails to comply with any such request
         without providing a reasonable explanation.
    (l) The Secretary of State may decide not to carry out the assessment
    in paragraph 19(i) if the application already falls for refusal on
    other grounds, but reserves the right to carry out this assessment in
    any reconsideration of the decision.
    19-SD. (a) The specified documents in paragraph 19(a) are:
         (i) Payslips covering the whole period claimed, which must be
    either:
             (1) original formal payslips issued by the employer and
             showing the employer's name, or
             (2) accompanied by a letter from the applicant's employer, on
             the employer's headed paper and signed by a senior official,
             confirming the payslips are authentic;
         (ii) Personal bank statements showing the payments made to the
    applicant;
         (iii) A letter from the applicant's employer(s) during the period
         claimed (or in the case of winnings, the relevant awarding body),
         on company headed paper, which:
             (1) is dated after the period for which earnings are being
         claimed, and
             (2) clearly confirms the applicant's gross and net earnings
             during the period claimed, and the date and amount of each
             payment;
         (iv) Official tax document produced by the relevant tax authority
         or employer, showing earnings on which tax has been paid or will be
         paid in a tax year;
         (v) Dividend vouchers which show the amount of money paid by the
         company to the applicant, normally from its profits, and which
         confirm both the gross and net dividend paid. The applicant must
         provide a separate dividend voucher or payment advice slip for each
         dividend payment, to cover the whole period claimed;
         (vi) If the applicant is claiming points for self-employed
         earnings, a letter from his accountant on headed paper, confirming
         that the applicant received the exact amount he is claiming, or the
         net profit to which he is entitled. This is a letter from the
         applicant's accountant on headed paper confirming the gross and net
         pay for the period claimed. The letter should give a breakdown of
         salary, dividends, profits, tax credits and dates of net payments
         earned. If the applicant's earnings are a share of the net profit
         of the company, the letter should also explain this;
         (vii) Invoice explanations or payment summaries from the
         applicant's accountant, which include a breakdown of the gross
         salary, tax deductions and dividend payments made to the applicant,
         and which enable the UK Border Agency to check that the total gross
         salary and dividend payments correspond with the net payments into
         the applicant's personal bank account.
         (viii) Company or business accounts that meet statutory
    requirements  and clearly show:
             (1) the net profit of the company or business made over the
             earnings period to be assessed,
             (2) both a profit and loss account (or income and expenditure
             account if the organisation is not trading for profit), and
             (3) a balance sheet signed by a director;
             (ix) Business bank statements showing the payments made to the
         applicant;
             (x) If the applicant provides a combination of bank statements
             and a letter or invoice summary from his accountant, he must
             also provide any invoices generated during the period for
             which earnings are being claimed.
    (b) The specified documents in paragraph 19(b) are:
         (i) If the applicant's National Insurance is paid by bill, the
         original bill from the billing period immediately before the
         application.
         (ii) If the applicant's National Insurance is paid by direct debit,
         the most recent bank statement issued before the application,
         showing the direct debit payment of National Insurance to HM
         Revenue & Customs.
         (iii) If the applicant has low earnings, an original small earnings
         exception certificate issued by HM Revenue & Customs for the most
         recent return date.
         (iv) If the applicant has not yet received the documents in (i) to
         (iii), the original, dated welcome letter from HM Revenue & Customs
         containing the applicant's unique taxpayer reference number.".


17.  The first named  appellant  has,  as  the  judge  identified,  provided
    evidence as to the net profits for the year  to  30th  June,  2012  for
    Ample Financial Services and the letter of 18th February, 2013 sets out
    those earnings during the second half of that year, 1st  January,  2012
    to 30th June, 2012.  Unfortunately he  did  not  provide  the  document
    which he has subsequently provided, namely evidence from  the  Regional
    Tax Officer of income during the period 1st January, 2012 to 30th June,
    2012 with his application.

18.  I do not accept the suggestion made on behalf  of  the  appellant  that
    that information could not have been submitted  with  the  application,
    because, of course  it  has  now  been  provided.   Unfortunately,  the
    evidence that has now been provided may not be considered,  because  it
    postdates the appellant's application, having been dated  7th  October,
    2013.

19.  I find that the judge did not misunderstand the  evidence  before  him;
    it is clear to me that he perfectly well understood the  evidence,  but
    that  evidence  was  lacking.   The  appellants  did   not   meet   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

20.  So far as Article 8 is concerned, the appellants did  not,  of  course,
    raise any human rights appeal in theirs Grounds of Appeal.   The  judge
    did, however, consider Article 8 in paragraph 12 of his  determination.
    What he said is this:-

         "The family has resided in the United Kingdom for  some  years  now
         and so there will be some breach of their private life if they  are
         removed.   There  is  no  evidence  about  their  circumstances  to
         determine whether or not this would be  a  disproportionate  breach
         and since the burden is on them to establish this, it has not  been
         discharged on the evidence available."

21.  It was suggested that this was inadequate, because, the judge  had  not
    applied Razgar v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL
    27.  However, there was no evidence before the judge in support  of  an
    Article 8 appeal.  The only thing the judge knew was  that  the  family
    had been in  the  United  Kingdom  for  some  years,  the  first  named
    appellant having entered the United Kingdom in August  2005.   However,
    no other evidence in support of the appellants'  Article  8  claim  had
    been submitted on their behalf.  I find that the  judge  did  not  err.
    There was simply insufficient evidence for  him  to  make  any  finding
    other than the one he did.

22.  I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not  err  in  law
    in the making of his determination which I uphold.  The appeal  of  the
    first named appellant is dismissed and those of the second,  third  and
    fourth appellants are dismissed in line with it.

Decision

The appellants' immigration appeals are dismissed.

The appellants' human rights appeals are dismissed.

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
