
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23490/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th October 2017                          |On 23rd October 2017          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              mr akmal tasveer
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Shah, Solicitor


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. For ease of reading I shall continue to refer to  Mr  Tasveer  as  "the
    Appellant" and the Secretary of State as "the Respondent" as they  were
    said to be at the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan whose appeal was  allowed  under
    Article 8 ECHR (and dismissed  under  Articles  2  and  3  ECHR)  in  a
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Khawar  promulgated  on  9th  May
    2017.

 3. The Secretary of State lodged grounds of  application.   The  Appellant
    had raised Article 2 and 3 ECHR claims at the hearing and the judge had
    considered that and found the Appellant's claims to be not credible and
    a fabrication.  However, the judge then failed to have  regard  to  the
    fact that the Appellant had lied  about  the  danger  to  his  life  in
    Pakistan and his  ability  to  return  there  when  he  considered  the
    Appellant's innocent  explanation  that  he  had  sat  the  TOEIC  exam
    himself.  Reference was made to the case of SM and Qadir .   ETS  cases
    are fact-sensitive and credibility is crucial and key in  these  cases.
    The grounds say that the judge failed to  consider  his  deception  and
    consequently the finding on the ETS deception and credibility is flawed
    and unsafe.  Other grounds are put forward,  namely  that  consequently
    the finding under Appendix FM EX.1. is infected and unsafe because  the
    Appellant cannot get past the suitability provisions of Appendix FM.

 4. Permission to appeal was duly granted.

 5. The agents for  the  Appellant  lodged  an  extensive  Rule  24  notice
    submitting that there was no material error  in  law  for  the  reasons
    stated therein.

 6. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.

 7. Before me Ms Ahmad for the Home Office relied on her grounds.   It  was
    said that the findings of the judge were  clearly  unsafe  for  reasons
    given in the grounds. As such the decision  should  be  set  aside  and
    because further fact-finding would  be  required  the  case  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. For the Appellant Mr Shah submitted that the judge had given very clear
    reasons in paragraphs 33 to 37 as to the Appellant's ability in English
    and the fact that he had not used deception as had been claimed by  the
    Home Office.  As such there was no error in law by the  judge  and  the
    decision should stand.

 9. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

10. What Mr Shah says about paragraphs 33 to 37  is  correct  in  that  the
    judge did give reasons why the Appellant  had  not  used  deception  in
    terms of a proxy test taker.

11. The difficulty with that finding is that it takes no account at all  of
    the specific finding of the judge that the Appellant  had  "fabricated"
    (paragraph 30) his Article 2 and Article 3 claims.   Accordingly,  what
    the judge seems to have done is to have compartmentalised the issue  as
    to suitability under Appendix FM in paragraphs 33 to 37,  and  has  not
    taken into account his specific finding that  the  Appellant  had  lied
    about a material part of his claim.  It  therefore  seems  to  me  that
    because he did not do that the decision is not safe.  It cannot  simply
    be inferred that the  judge  had  taken  the  previous  fabrication  of
    evidence into account in deciding  the  Appellant's  suitability  under
    Appendix FM because that is not the way the decision has been  written.
    The judge has therefore failed to take into account a  crucial  finding
    in his assessment of whether or not the Appellant had used deception in
    the taking of the test.

12. It therefore seems to me that the decision is not safe and will have to
    be set aside and the matter heard again.  I have concluded that because
    further fact-finding is necessary the appeal should be remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be heard by a judge other than Judge Khawar.

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act  and  Practice  Statement  7.2  the
    nature and extent  of  the  judicial  fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.  There is no need for an anonymity order.

Notice of Decision

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

15. I set aside the decision.

16. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.






Signed     JG Macdonald                                Date    19th  October
2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

