
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-VP/DH-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23981/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8 December 2016                        |On 5 January 2017                |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                            MORSHADA KHANAM SUMA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. M. Hasan, Kalam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Goodrich, promulgated on  25  July  2016,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant leave to remain.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


         "The grounds of application state that the judge failed to consider
         human rights and this is an error of law.  This  was  raised  as  a
         ground of appeal and the grounds state that the  2nd  appellant  is
         entitled to a decision on her human rights  not  only  relating  to
         Appendix FM but also outside the Rules.


         The judge has not dealt with human rights in his decision."


 3. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I  announced  that  I  found  that  the
    decision contained a material error of law, and that  my  full  reasons
    would follow.


    Submissions


 4. Mr. Hasan relied on the grounds of appeal.  The main  appellant  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, the husband of the Appellant, had been granted
    ILR following the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The  judge  had
    failed to consider the Appellant's human  rights  claim,  which  should
    have been considered.  His failure to make a finding on the Appellant's
    human rights constituted a material error of law.


 5. Mr. Armstrong relied on the Rule 24 response.  He  submitted  that  the
    grounds were little more than disagreement.  The judge's findings  were
    open to him.  The Appellant had never made an application  under  human
    rights or based on long residence.  It was not wrong of  the  judge  to
    conclude that she should have made a  human  rights  application.   The
    Appellant's husband had applied for a Tier 1 visa but then had switched
    it to a long residence application.  The judge was aware of  the  facts
    and had addressed them accordingly.  The Appellant  had  never  made  a
    human rights application and there were no insurmountable obstacles  to
    her making an application from Bangladesh.  As the  Appellant  did  not
    fall under the ten year Rule she could not succeed as a dependant.  She
    had to make an application in her own right.


 6. In response Mr. Hasan submitted  that  the  judge  needed  to  consider
    whether the application would be successful.  Human rights were a  live
    issue in the grounds of appeal.  I asked Mr. Hasan whether paragraph 15
    of the decision was an  accurate  recording  of  his  submissions.   He
    stated that, with respect, it was not exactly what  he  had  submitted.
    He had said that as a ten year residence application could not  include
    a dependant,  the  appeal  in  respect  of  this  Appellant  should  be
    considered individually.


Error of Law Decision


 7. The judge found that the Appellant's husband  met  the  requirement  of
    paragraph 276B and was therefore entitled to leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis of long residence (paragraphs 18 to 21).   He  therefore  allowed
    the Appellant's husband's appeal.
 8. In paragraph 22 he states:


         "The second Appellant has not been resident in the UK for 10 years.
          Her leave has always been as a dependent, the long residence Rules
         do not cover dependents.  It is accepted that  she  must  therefore
         make a separate charged application under  Appendix  FM.   In  this
         context I dismiss her appeal."


 9. I have considered the grounds of appeal which were  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal as they relate to the Appellant.  In paragraph  1(b)  the
    grounds state:


         "The second  appellant's  matter  now  falls  under  D-LTRP.1.1  of
         Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules  because  she  now  meets  the
         requirements contained within paragraph  R-LTRP.1.1(a)  to  (c)  of
         Appendix FM for limited leave to remain as a partner."


10. Further in paragraph 3 of the grounds of appeal before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal it states that the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the
    Human Rights Act 1998.  In paragraph 3(b) there  is  reference  to  the
    case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  The grounds submit that the decision is
    disproportionate.  In paragraph 3(b) there is reference to  the  public
    interest question under section 117B.


11. I find that the judge did not consider the  second  Appellant's  appeal
    under human rights at all, either under Appendix FM of the  immigration
    rules, or outside the immigration rules.  Paragraph 22 contains all  of
    his consideration of her case.  He merely states that she  should  have
    made a separate application.  It is clear from the  grounds  of  appeal
    that both the Appellant and her  husband  were  appealing  against  the
    decision on the basis that it breached their  rights  under  Article  8
    ECHR.  The fact that the Appellant's husband's appeal  was  allowed  on
    the basis of long residence did not mean that the  judge  was  entitled
    not to consider the Appellant's  appeal  under  the  immigration  rules
    relating to Article 8, or under Article 8 outside  of  the  immigration
    rules.


12. It was submitted  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the Appellant met the requirements of  Appendix  FM,  and
    also that the decision was a breach of her  right  to  a  family  under
    Article 8 outside the immigration rules.  The judge failed to deal with
    this ground of appeal at all.  I find that the failure of the judge  to
    address the Appellant's human rights is a material error of law.


13. The Appellant and her husband now have a child.  It was agreed  between
    the representatives that it would therefore be appropriate to remit the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal as further evidence would need to  be
    adduced.  I have taken account  of  the  Practice  Statement  dated  10
    February 2010, paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the  error  has
    been to deprive a party  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair
    hearing or other opportunity for the party's case  to  be  put  to  and
    considered by the First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent  of
    the fact-finding necessary to enable this  appeal  to  be  remade,  and
    having  regard  to  the  overriding  objective,  I  find  that  it   is
    appropriate to remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal


Notice of Decision


14. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
    material error of law in respect of the Appellant, and paragraph 22  of
    the decision is set aside.


15. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  stands  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's husband.


16. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.


17. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 4 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

