

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/23215/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|No hearing                                    |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8th July 2013                              |On 10th July 2013            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President

                                   Between

                           DONNABEL PASCUA McCOOL

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of the Philippines, appealed  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal against simultaneous decisions made by the respondent  on
    9 October 2012 to refuse to vary her leave and to give  directions  for
    her  removal.   Judge  Quigley  dismissed  the  appeal.   She  was  not
    satisfied on the evidence  before  her  that  the  appellant's  claimed
    relationship, on which her  application  was  based,  was  genuine  and
    subsisting.   She  gave  no  separate  consideration  to  the   removal
    decision.

 2. On the appellant's application,  permission  to  appeal  against  Judge
    Quigley's decision was granted. The grant of permission indicates  that
    the dissent from the Judge's conclusions on the relationship  discloses
    no error of law, but that  the  appeal  against  the  removal  decision
    should have been allowed on the authority of Adamally.

 3. On 30 May 2013 I wrote to the parties as follows:

        "I refer to  your  appeal.   Permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
        Tribunal has been granted on the sole ground that the Secretary  of
        State ought not to have made a removal decision in your case as she
        had no power to do so.


        I propose to determine this appeal without a hearing, to set  aside
        the decision in relation to the removal decision and to  substitute
        a determination allowing the appeal against  the  removal  decision
        only.


        Any submissions to the contrary must be made within 21 days of  the
        date of this letter".

 4. No response has been received and I proceed to act as heralded  in  the
    letter.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law in  its  approach  to  the  appeal
    against the removal decision.  I set aside the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  I remake the decision.

 6. The appeal against the refusal to  vary  leave  is  dismissed  for  the
    reasons given by Judge Quigley, which I adopt.

 7. The appeal against the removal decision is, however, allowed.

















                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                           Date: 8 July 2013
