
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23686/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13th December, 2013                        |On 30th January, 2014        |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                                iqbal hussain

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Hashmi, Assistant Solicitors with Maya Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh,  who  was  born  on  27th
    January,  1981.   In  an  application  dated  4th  October,  2012,  the
    appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
    on the basis of long residence.   His  application  was  refused  under
    paragraph 322(1) of Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules  HC  395,
    as amended, ("the Immigration Rules"), because it was for  a  variation
    of leave to enter or remain for a purpose not  covered  by  the  Rules.
    The appellant appealed to the First Tier Tribunal.  First Tier Tribunal
    Judge Holt heard  the  appeal  and  dismissed  it  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 11th October, 2013.

2.   The appellant asserted that he had  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for
    fifteen years and that, having been brought to the United Kingdom as  a
    15 year old child by adopted parents who subsequently abandoned him and
    then disappeared, his removal would breach his rights under  Article  8
    of the European Convention for  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  and
    Fundamental Freedoms.

3.   The judge  noted  that  since  9th  July,  2013,  provisions  to  grant
    indefinite leave to remain after a period of fourteen  years'  presence
    in the United Kingdom had been removed from the Immigration  Rules  and
    replaced by paragraph 276B, which she set out at length.

4.   The judge did  not  find  the  appellant  to  be  a  credible  witness.
    Indeed, she found him and his witness to be both wholly unreliable  and
    dishonest witnesses.

5.   The judge noted that the appellant had produced  an  NHS  medical  card
    dated 27th July, 2004 and that it contained his  name  and  an  address
    where he had lived.  She believed that the card was issued on that  day
    suggesting that he entered the United Kingdom on a date some time prior
    to 27th July, 2004.  Other documents suggesting that he had been in the
    United Kingdom some time prior to 2001 were found not to  be  credible.
    The judge made a finding that the appellant  had  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for ten years at the  most  and  did  not  therefore  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.   She  found  that  he  did  not
    satisfy the requirements of private life within paragraph 276ADE of the
    Immigration Rules and that his removal  would  be  proportionate.   She
    dismissed his appeals.

6.   The appellant sought  to  challenge  the  determination  and  gave  the
    following grounds:-

         "(1) In paragraph 42 it is indicated that  the  Respondent  is  not
             required to prove that the Appellant does have bonds and  ties
             in Bangladesh.  It is submitted that where  she  has  accepted
             that the Appellant has remained in the United Kingdom  for  10
             years at most at paragraph 43, that findings should have  been
             made as to what bonds and ties can be  realistically  referred
             to in Bangladesh.  The Appellant  confirmed  that  he  has  no
             family  ties/social  ties/cultural  ties  to  Bangladesh   and
             indeed, he  indicated  that  he  could  not  be  sure  of  his
             background.   It  is  conceded  that  the  immigration   judge
             throughout the determination criticises the Appellant as  well
             as the witnesses and makes stark comments that she found  them
             wholly incredible and wholly unreliable  however,  it  is  not
             clear upon what information she found the  Appellant  to  have
             given inconsistent statements.  She seems  to  have  taken  an
             initial approach that she simply was not  prepared  to  accept
             that adoptive parents  would  have  left  him  in  the  United
             Kingdom and as such, was  not  prepared  to  then  accept  the
             Appellant's version of events throughout his life.


         (2)  It is submitted that the judge failed  to  consider  paragraph
             276(ADE) of the Immigration Rules.  As such the  Appellant  is
             above the age of 18 years, has  lived  continuously  for  less
             than 20 years and has no ties including  social,  cultural  or
             family to a country which he  would  have  to  go  if  he  was
             required to leave the UK.  The appellant confirmed that he has
             no family members and there is no  suggestion  that  the  UKBA
             have suggested that he  has  an  elaborate  circle  of  family
             relatives to return to in Bangladesh.


         (3)  It is submitted that permission be sought to argue  Article  8
             Private and Family Life carefully."

7.   That application was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Jeremy  Gibb.



8.   At  the  hearing  before  me,  Ms  Hashmi  suggested  to  me  that  the
    Immigration  Judge  had  failed  to  make  clear  findings  as  to  the
    appellant's ties in Bangladesh; it was incumbent on her  to  make  such
    findings.  However, submitted Ms Hashmi, the judge seems to have simply
    taken the approach that the appellant was  incredible  and  unreliable,
    but not given any reasons why he  has  given  inconsistent  statements,
    because she was not prepared to accept that adopted parents would  have
    left him in the United Kingdom alone  shortly  after  arrival  and  she
    seems to have then used that to disbelieve the appellant's  version  of
    events throughout his life.

9.    Ms  Hashmi  submitted  that   the   judge   has   given   details   of
    inconsistencies in the appellant's  account  in  paragraph  36  of  the
    determination, but she does not appear to have given any account to the
    evidence of the witness relied on by the appellant.  Alternatively, the
    judge failed to consider paragraph 276 of the Immigration Rules and  if
    the judge was not satisfied as to his ties including  social,  cultural
    or family ties, then she should  have  made  it  clear  what  ties  she
    thought he did have.  As far as Article 8 is concerned, the only  issue
    is proportionality and she should  have  found  that  the  respondent's
    decision was entirely disproportionate.  She failed  to  consider  that
    the appellant had been in the United Kingdom since the age of 15.   She
    failed to consider his lack of education.

10.  Mr Harrison submitted that the grounds amounted to a  misrepresentation
    of the determination, that they disclosed no error of law on  the  part
    of the judge and urged me to uphold the determination.  Ms  Hashmi  did
    not seek to make any further submissions.

11.  I reserved my determination.

12.  The judge pointed out in her determination that  the  burden  of  proof
    was on the appellant and the standard of proof  was  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities.  She correctly set out Paragraph 276B of the Immigration
    Rules in full and also set out the requirements of Paragraph 276ADE  in
    paragraph 11 of her determination.

13.  The judge's findings start at paragraph 12  and  at  paragraph  15  she
    said this:-

         "The critical finding is that I found the appellant, and indeed his
         witness, to be wholly unreliable and dishonest witnesses.   I  will
         set out below my findings on individual points and  explain  why  I
         found them to be wholly unreliable.  It should be noted  that  some
         of the individual points,  on  their  own,  would  not  necessarily
         undermine the appellant's case.  However, the examples of  my  lack
         of satisfaction are  multiple  and  the  adverse  findings  act  in
         concert, as well as individually."


14.  At paragraph 16 she pointed out that she heard the appellant give  oral
    evidence during which she found that,

         "He constantly prevaricated and avoided answering the question.  On
         a couple of occasions I had to intervene and point out that he  had
         not answered the questions posed.  Further, constantly  during  his
         evidence he gave one answer when he first answered the question and
         then immediately changed it to something  significantly  different.
         The situation was such that at least twice during  the  appellant's
         evidence I intervened, stopped the hearing and  encouraged  him  to
         use the services of the interpreter if  he  was  not  sure  how  to
         answer the questions clearly.  I advised him, in  terms,  that  his
         evidence would be  more  detailed  and  reliable  if  he  used  the
         interpreter.  Nonetheless he was adamant  that  he  understood  the
         questions and said that he was confident answering in English."


15.  At paragraph 17  she  noted  that  the  appellant  gave,  "inconsistent
    answers, not because he had failed to understand the  answer,  or  that
    his English language skills were insufficiently  sophisticated.   I  am
    quite satisfied that  he  gave  inconsistent  answers  because  he  was
    lying."

16.  At paragraph 18 of her determination, the judge noted that  during  the
    course of  the  hearing  the  appellant  became  increasingly  nervous,
    particularly  during  cross-examination.   The  judge   found   herself
    satisfied that his nervousness was due  to  the  fact  that  it  became
    patently obvious to him during the course  of  his  evidence  that  his
    answers were both illogical and inconsistent.

17.  The judge makes it clear that her findings are  based  on  the  subject
    matter of the appellant's answers given during his oral hearing, rather
    than his demeanour.  In paragraph 20 the judge found it incredible that
    for the first time during the hearing before her the appellant  claimed
    that he was unsure as to his country of birth.  She noted that  he  had
    always represented himself as being from Bangladesh.  At paragraph  1.7
    of  his  application  form  he  indicated  that  his  nationality   was
    Bangladeshi and that he was born in Bangladesh.  In  his  statement  he
    emphasised that he has no cultural ties with Bangladesh, as opposed  to
    any other south Asian country.  The judge noted that  on  5th  October,
    2012  the  appellant's  current   solicitors   sent   the   appellant's
    application form to the UK Border Agency and  that  the  top  of  their
    letter referred to the appellant's nationality  as  being  Bangladeshi.
    She noted also later in her determination that he had claimed  to  live
    with some people who were both Bangladeshi.   The  appellant  indicated
    for the first time during the course of the hearing that he thought  he
    probably was from Bangladesh, but could be from Burma  or  even  India.
    The judge found that the appellant had recently  decided  to  embellish
    his case for his own private reasons.  She did not believe that he  did
    not know what his country of origin was.

18.  In paragraph 23 of her determination the judge  noted  that  the  court
    interpreter who had been booked was a Bangladeshi Sylheti  speaker  and
    from time to time when the appellant's evidence  was  inconsistent  and
    confused he did use the interpreter.  The judge noted that it was clear
    that they both understood each other.

19.  At paragraph 25 the judge noted that the appellant claimed that he  had
    been brought to the United Kingdom by adoptive parents, although he did
    not explain whether he had been formally  or  informally  adopted.   He
    claimed that having been brought to the United Kingdom,  they  remained
    for a few weeks and then took him to a takeaway restaurant  where  they
    left him.  The judge noted that the implication was that  he  had  been
    abandoned and not had any contact with them since.  No attempt was made
    to explain why this had been done and the judge was not satisfied as to
    the credibility of his claim because no explanation had been offered as
    to why a couple would behave in this way.  There was no explanation  as
    to why a couple would bother to  bring  the  appellant  to  the  United
    Kingdom only to abandon him subsequently.  She also noted in  paragraph
    26 that the appellant was completely vague about other elements of  the
    relationship with his so-called adoptive parents.   She  believed  that
    they were a figment of his  imagination  invented  to  explain  why  he
    claimed that he had no contacts in Bangladesh.

20.  The judge noted that the appellant claimed that  his  adoptive  parents
    had multiple visas and claimed that they  could  come  and  go  to  any
    country they liked.  She found it inconceivable that as a 15  year  old
    child he knew little about his adoptive parents but had  actually  knew
    details of their visas.  This was another reason for not believing him.

21.  The appellant relied on several documents to show that he had  been  in
    the United Kingdom since at least 2001.  The first document was at page
    16 of the appellant's bundle and was an envelope with  a  postal  stamp
    from 2001, but as the judge pointed out to Counsel at the hearing,  the
    envelope had been amended to change the name of the person to whom  the
    letter was sent.  It was clear that the appellant had  originally  been
    addressed to "Iqbil Hussin" but had been amended so it read  Mr  "Iqbal
    Hussain".  The appellant also relied upon a letter at page  17  of  his
    bundle dated 16th December, 2002 from British Telecom.  Again, this was
    addressed to Mr Iqbal Hussin.  At page 18 was another  letter  from  BT
    which again was addressed to Mr Iqbal Hussin and at page 21 was a third
    document from British Telecom being a letter dated October 2003 ,but it
    was addressed to Mr Iqbal Hussin.  The first document  which  contained
    the appellant's name was an NHS medical card issued on 27th July, 2004.



22.  At paragraph 32 the judge noted that the appellant had been frank  that
    he had obtained false identity documents  including  a  false  passport
    which "somebody gave" him.  He knew that it was false but had  used  it
    to obtain employment  at  Netto  Supermarket  and  Next,  the  clothing
    retailers.  The appellant did not indicate any  regret  or  remorse  in
    using false documentation indicating that the appellant had no  respect
    for the need to use  genuine  documents  and  also  disregard  for  the
    requirement of permission and status to  work  legally  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

22.  The  judge  further  noted  that  in  cross-examination  the  appellant
    admitted that he had used a passport and other false personal documents
    to obtain credit, including a loan from the Halifax  Bank  and  also  a
    credit card.  He indicated that he had not repaid the loan fully.   The
    judge believed that this was simply another example of the  appellant's
    disregard for the law and of his dishonesty.

23.  At paragraph 34 the judge noted that the  appellant  had  also  claimed
    that his parents had British passports on  the  occasion  when  he  was
    raided  by  Border  Agency  officers  in  2009.   This   evidence   was
    inconsistent with his claim that his adoptive  parents  allegedly  told
    him that they had multi-entry visas.  He told  officers  in  2009  when
    encountered that he had lost contact with his adoptive parents  "a  few
    years ago".  The judge noted that in 2009 that would have been thirteen
    years ago.  When asked what the truth was  at  the  hearing  the  judge
    noted that the appellant replied, "after a few weeks they  left".   She
    noted that this failed to explain the confusion in his evidence.

24   The judge also noted that one telephone bill  he  relied  on  showed  a
    call to Bangladesh lasting for 24 minutes.  It  was  suggested  by  the
    respondent that this telephone call was evidence that he did still have
    contacts in Bangladesh.  The appellant claimed that he had not made the
    call and that somebody else had done  so.   He  was  asked  whether  he
    recalled making that call and said he did not recognise it and believed
    that a friend used  his  phone.   The  judge  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant did not recall the individual telephone call and  was  merely
    saying the first thing that came into his  head.   The  judge  did  not
    believe that one such call would  necessarily  establish  that  he  had
    links with Bangladesh but in the context of this  appeal  and  all  the
    other inconsistencies in the appellant's account she believed that  his
    evidence was significantly undermined and was not  prepared  to  accept
    his claim that he had no links or ties.

25.  The appellant called a witness  on  his  behalf,  Mr  Moznu  Miah.   He
    claimed to have stayed with this witness  until  he  was  20,  but  the
    witness claimed that he had only stayed until he was 18.   The  witness
    presented himself as "Moznu Miah" in  his  witness  statement  and  was
    introduced as such.  He had signed his  witness  statement  using  that
    name and confirmed his name and address without hesitation.  When asked
    about his nationality he produced a passport from  his  pocket  in  the
    name of "Mohammed  Nanzurul  Hassan".   The  judge  believed  that  the
    photograph in the passport was the person appearing before  her.   When
    asked why the witness had a passport in a different name, he  indicated
    that he had gone on a trip to perform Haj and told that he could not go
    because he did not have a Muslim name.  He claimed that he changed  his
    name.  The judge did not believe the reasons given by the  witness  for
    the change of name and said as much in open court, to give  Counsel  an
    opportunity to explore concerns about the apparent  dishonesty  of  the
    witness.  The judge did not know the true reason for the witness having
    two names, but was satisfied that it  was  for  some  wholly  dishonest
    private reason or reasons.

26.  On the evidence before the judge, she found that she was not  satisfied
    as to his blanket assertion that  he  had  no  family  or  contacts  in
    Bangladesh.  She noted that she had found him to be a wholly unreliable
    witness and found that he did not meet the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE.  She went on to consider his Article 8 appeal but found that it
    would be wholly proportionate to facilitate  immigration  control  over
    the appellant's right to a private life.  She dismissed the appeal.

27.  I find  that  my  careful  examination  of  the  judge's  determination
    reveals that the judge did not err on a point of law.

28.  The appellant simply failed to discharge the burden of proof on him  to
    show that he had no ties including  social,  cultural  or  family  with
    Bangladesh.  That was a finding which, on  the  evidence  presented  to
    her, she was entitled to make.  Her findings are  supported  adequately
    by clear and logical reasons.   First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Holt  was
    entitled to find that the appellant's account of being left by adoptive
    parents was nothing more than a figment of the appellant's imagination.
     On her finding she was entitled to find that  the  appellant  did  not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  Her finding  that  the
    appellant's removal would be proportionate is  not  perverse.   As  the
    judge pointed out, the appellant has shown total disregard for the laws
    of this country and admitted to using false documentation to enable him
    to obtain loans (which apparently he has not repaid) and to obtain work
    to which he was not entitled.

29.   In  the  circumstances  I  uphold  the  judge's  determination.    The
    appellant's immigration appeal is dismissed and the  appellant's  human
    rights appeal is dismissed.

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

