

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers:  IA/23414/2014

                                                        IA/23417/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre |             Decision & Reasons      |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 8 March 2016                       |             On 17 March 2016        |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                        abimbola temitope popoola (1)
                   nicole adunolaoluwa opemio popoola (2)
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms V James, instructed by Rotherham & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although an anonymity direction was made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    there has been no application for it to be continued and I can  see  no
    reason to make a similar order in the Upper  Tribunal.   The  direction
    previously given is therefore rescinded.

 2. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Mills argued that there  was  a  legal
    error in the decision and  reasons  statement  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge H Clark in allowing the appeal under the  immigration  rules  for
    the reasons outlined in  the  ground  of  appeal.  Mr  Mills,  however,
    conceded that this would have  no  bearing  on  the  outcome  were  the
    decision to be remade because there was no challenge  to  the  findings
    relating to the reasonableness of expecting  the  second  appellant  to
    leave the UK.  Those findings would have to be applied in accordance to
    s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,  which
    would  reduce  to  nothing  the  public  interest  in  removing  either
    appellant.

 3. Ms James accepted this approach, thereby conceding  the  error  of  law
    issue.

 4. Although I had some questions as to whether there was in fact an  error
    on a point of law, primarily  because  it  was  not  clear  to  me  how
    paragraph 276A0  of  the  immigration  rules  might  apply,  given  the
    agreement between the parties and because it would make  no  difference
    to the disposal of this appeal, I did not hear argument on this  aspect
    and make no findings on it.

 5. I simply confirm the position  taken  by  the  parties,  and  make  the
    following decision.



Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed to the limited  extent  that  the
decision of Judge Clark contains an error on a point of law but there is  no
need to set her decision aside because the error is not material.




                               Signed                     Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
