
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23550/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9 November 2016                        |On 14 November 2016               |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                         mr hassan mohammed sadique
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Chowdhury instructed by Liberty Legal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh and his date  of  birth  is  5
    March 1990.  He made an application for leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant and  this  application  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State in a decision of 10 June 2015.  It was refused under
    paragraph 322(3) of the  Immigration  Rules.   Paragraph  322(3)  is  a
    discretionary ground on  which  leave  to  remain  should  normally  be
    refused if there has been a "failure  to  comply  with  any  conditions
    attached to the grant of leave to enter or remain".

2.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and his appeal came before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Samimi.
    The appeal was determined on the papers  at  the  appellant's  request.
    Judge Samimi made a number of findings and the relevant findings as far
    as this decision is concerned are the following;

         "8.  The Grounds of appeal have submitted that the  Respondent  has
             failed to grant the Appellant 60 days to find  an  alternative
             College.  There is no reference to the Appellant  having  been
             awarded 60 days in order to find a new College.  There  is  no
             indication from  the  respondent's  refusal  letter  that  the
             respondent has followed her own guidance in this regard.


         9.   Accordingly, I allow the Appellant's appeal to the extent that
             the  Respondent  should  apply  her  policy  of  allowing  the
             appellant 60 days to register at a new College.   The  Tier  4
             sponsor guidance  at  paragraph  400  sets  out  the  position
             clearly;


              'What happens to our sponsored students if our  organisations
             licence is withdrawn?


                    . Immediately end (curtail) the permission to  stay  in
                      the United Kingdom of any students  whom  we  believe
                      were actively involved (complicit) in any  dishonesty
                      by the former sponsor (for example,  if  the  student
                      agreed that the sponsor would arrange a non  existent
                      course for him/her so he/she could come to the United
                      Kingdom); and


                    . Reduce the length of the permission to  stay  in  the
                      United Kingdom of any other students (those who  were
                      not actively) involved to 60 calendar days,  to  give
                      them a chance to find a new sponsor.  (If  a  student
                      has  less  than  six  months  of  his  or  her  leave
                      remaining, we will not curtail his/her leave).'

         12.  In  relation  to  the  Respondent's  refusal  under  Paragraph
             322(3), there is no evidence  before  me  to  corroborate  the
             Respondent's allegations that the  Appellant  has  received  a
             caution for stealing from his employer's Iceland.   There  are
             no  statements  or  contemporaneous  reports  supporting   the
             aforementioned allegations.  I therefore do not find that  the
             Respondent has satisfied the burden of proof in  showing  that
             the Appellant has failed to comply with  the  requirements  of
             the Immigration rules, in accordance with Paragraph 322(3).


         13.  The appeal is  allowed,  to  the  extent  that  it  should  be
             remitted to the Secretary of State to allow  the  appellant  a
             period of  sixty  days  in  order  to  give  the  Appellant  a
             reasonable opportunity to make a new PBS application."


3.   The judge also had regard to the case of Thakur (PBS decision -  common
    law fairness) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00151  and  Patel  (revocation  of
    sponsor licence - fairness) India [2011] UKUT 211.

4.    Confusingly at the end of the decision under the  heading  'Notice  of
    Decision' the following is stated: "I  dismiss  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules".

5.   The appellant was granted permission to appeal by Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Baker on 3 October 2016.  The appellant argues  that  the
    judge should have allowed the appeal to the extent that  there  was  no
    lawful decision.  There was no cross  appeal  by  the  respondent,  but
    there is a response under Rule 24 of the 2008 Procedure Rules in  which
    the Secretary of State makes it clear that her  position  is  that  the
    decision under paragraph 322(3) of the  Immigration  Rules  at  [12]  (
    where the judge seemingly allows the appeal under  the  Rules)  is  not
    accepted. He relied on EG and NG (UT  rule  17:  withdrawal;  rule  24:
    scope) Ethiopia [2013] UKUT 00143 specifically at  [45]  and  [46]  and
    argued that it  was  not  necessary  for  the  respondent  to  make  an
    application for permission to  appeal  in  relation  to  the  paragraph
    322(3) point and it is sufficient to raise the issue  in  the  rule  24
    response. It was also argued by Mr Tufan that the appellant had already
    been given 60 days in order to find a new sponsor and  that  the  judge
    erred in her conclusions at [13] of the decision.

6.   Mr Choudhury on behalf  of  the  appellant  maintained  the  ground  of
    appeal and in response to the rule 24 response argued that the decision
    under paragraph 322(3) was one that  was  open  to  the  judge  on  the
    evidence.  He did not make submissions relating to the EG and NG point.
    However, he did not argue that the judge intended  to  or  should  have
    allowed the appeal under the Rules.

7.   The decision  entirely  lacks  clarity.  On  the  one  hand  the  judge
    purports to dismiss the appeal under the Rules but this not  consistent
    with paragraph 12.  I have considered whether the  final  paragraph  of
    the decision indicating that the appeal is dismissed under the Rules is
    a typographical error and whether the judge's intention  was  to  allow
    the appeal under the Rules, but this is not consistent with the finding
    that the judge makes at paragraph 13. I  have  considered  whether  the
    judge intended to allow the appeal on fairness grounds only and dismiss
    it under the Rules, but this does not sit well with the conclusions  at
    12. She may have intended to allow the appeal on both grounds, but this
    was not argued and in any event the outcomes (following a  decision  to
    allow on fairness grounds and a decision to allow under the Rules)  are
    different.  I am unable to conclude whether the intention of the  judge
    was to allow or dismiss the appeal  under  the  Rules  or  on  fairness
    grounds and I am not prepared to speculate. Because of this ambiguity I
    cannot accept the  appellant's  representations  that  what  the  judge
    should have done following on from her findings is to allow the  appeal
    on the basis that there is no lawful decision. However, I  accept  that
    there is a material error of law in the purported decision  to  dismiss
    the appeal under the Rules. It is irrational because it does not follow
    the findings in the main body  of  the  decision.    I  set  aside  the
    decision. If indeed the judge did allow the appeal on fairness  grounds
    similarly I set aside that decision.

8.       It is clear to me that the judge did not properly engage  with  the
    terms of paragraph 322(3) or the  appellant's  evidence.  She  did  not
    properly direct  herself  on  the  law.   The  issue  was  whether  the
    appellant had breached  a  condition  of  leave,  not  whether  he  had
    received a caution. It may be that for one reason or another the  judge
    did not have sight of the appellant's witness statement, but it reached
    the FtT by the time the matter came before her.  It was  faxed  to  the
    Tribunal on 9 March  2016.  She  either  failed  to  consider  material
    evidence or  there  was  a  material  procedural  irregularity  as  the
    statement had not been linked to the file. The matter was determined on
    the papers and the judge did not have the assistance of  the  appellant
    or a legal representative at a hearing.

9.       In respect of the findings relating to fairness, the judge did  not
    engage with the evidence of the  appellant  contained  in  his  witness
    statement which indicates that he had in fact been given 60 days  in  a
    previous decision.  The issue for the judge  was  whether  or  not  the
    licence had been reinstated at the date of  the  decision  and  if  not
    whether the appellant should have been given a  further  60  days.   Mr
    Tufan agreed that the licence had at some stage been reinstated, but he
    was unable to provide clear details of this.

10.  There needs to be a de novo hearing and  the  parties  agreed  with  me
    that the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a re-
    hearing.  The FtT will need to determine the appeal under the Rules and
    if necessary on fairness grounds.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed. The decision of the FtT to dismiss the  appeal  under
the rules is set aside. If the judge made a decision to allow the appeal  on
fairness grounds, this is also  set  aside.  The  appeal  will  be  re-heard
afresh.

Direction

I direct the respondent to provide the appellant and the FtT with relevant
details including dates regarding the revocation and re-instatement of the
sponsor's licence.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date 11 November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
