

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/23226/2014
                                                               IA/23584/2014
                                                               IA/23593/2014
                                                               IA/23587/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                        |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 3 December 2015                           |On 23 December 2015         |
|                                             |                            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                     MISS anN CHIYIGA EGUEKE Christopher
                                 MASTER ATB
                                  MASTER AB
                                  MISS ATB
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr N Klear of Counsel
For the Respondent:    M S Kandola, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.      The appellants are citizens of Nigeria born on 29 February 1972,  20
   May 2008 (the second and third appellant are twins) and 14 February  2011
   respectively. They are a mother, her two sons and a daughter.  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge  Cooper  dismissed  the  appellants  appeals  pursuant  to
   Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights in  a  Determination
   dated 27 February 2015. Permission to appeal  was  initially  refused  by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge  Pirotta  and  subsequently  granted  by  Upper
   Tribunal Judge Perkins stating that it is his concern that the First-tier
   Tribunal Judge should  have  shown  more  concern  about  the  impact  of
   removing the  appellants  when  carrying  out  her  Article  8  balancing
   exercise.




2.      As the second, third and fourth appellant's appeal  rests  or  falls
   with that of the first appellant, their  mother,  I  shall  consider  the
   first appellant's appeal and for the sake of convenience refer to her  as
   "the appellant". I shall specifically refer  to  the  second,  third  and
   fourth appellant where necessary.



3.      Thus the appeal came before me.

   First-tier Tribunal's Findings


4.       The respondent refused the appellant's  application  to  remain  in
   the United Kingdom outside the Immigration Rules on the bases of her  and
   her children's private life in the United Kingdom.



5.        The  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed   the   appellant's   appeal,
   concluding that :



          [38] I found all the witnesses who  appeared  before  me  entirely
          genuine and credible. There is copious  medical,  educational  and
          social work evidence to show that the boys suffer from autism to a
          high level. Whilst it is evident that they  have  the  benefit  of
          very substantial support from a number of specialists, I  have  no
          doubt that it is still a huge burden  on  the  appellant  to  look
          after them every day, whilst also trying to give some attention to
          their younger sister. The appellant is no longer in a relationship
          with the children's father and apart from  occasionally  attending
          to help when the twins have to go to a  hospital  appointment,  he
          seems to have effectively abdicated responsibility. There  was  no
          evidence of any attempt, for example, to obtain financial  support
          from him.


          [40] Turning to Article 8, I am satisfied that the respondent  has
          correctly applied the  Immigration  Rules  under  appendix  FM  in
          paragraph 276 ADE, and that the conclusions  she  reached  in  the
          refusal letters are correct, i.e that the appellants  cannot  meet
          the  requirements  of  those   rules   and   neither   did   their
          representatives submit otherwise."


          [41] "The issue is therefore raise whether removing the family  to
          Nigeria, given the particular consequences for the  treatment  and
          ongoing support of the twins, and the effect on  them  of  such  a
          change of environment, would amount to an interference with  their
          private or family life which is disproportionate, even  given  the
          respondent's lawful and legitimate aim  of  maintaining  effective
          immigration control."


          [42] "the appellant's case centred largely on the lack of any,  or
          adequate or affordable,  provision  of  support  in  education  in
          Nigeria for children with autism.  The  respondent  cited  from  a
          number of background cases in support  of  their  contention  that
          such  provision  did  exist,   naming   a   number   of   specific
          organisations in Nigeria: autism Associates  Nigeria,  the  or  LG
          Health Foundation and Autism Centre (located in the Niger  Delta),
          the Zamarr Institute, the Patrick Speech and Language  Centre  and
          the Autistic Healing School run by the Nigerian  Autistic  Society
          (see paragraph 29-30 in the 7 May 2014 refusal letter)."


          [43] "in response to that the appellant called Miss Julia  Wilkins
          as a witness. She adopted her letter of 12 May 2014 as part of her
          evidence. She  confirmed  that  she  was  the  branch  officer  of
          Haringey Branch of the National Autistic Society  and  the  family
          support worker specialising in families that have autism  at  Mark
          Field, a  centre  in  North  London  for  families  with  disabled
          children. She had been running the Haringey branch of the  Society
          for 15 years and had a 20-year-old son with autism."


          [45] "in her letter and her oral evidence she asserted that  there
          was no appropriate  schooling  for  children  like  the  twins  in
          Nigeria and that they would be likely to face  negative  attitudes
          throughout their lives, as they would  be  regarded  as  "cursed".
          "Violence is often inflicted upon autistic children in Nigeria and
          Miss Christopher's fears for their well-being  if  she  returns  a
          well-founded". She  said  at  her  letter  that  she  worked  with
          Nigerian families with autistic children and that the  stories  of
          maltreatment of  children  with  autism  there  were  consistently
          shocking. She rejected the respondent's assertion that  there  was
          autism awareness in Nigeria and that therefore the children  would
          not suffer. "As someone who  works  for  the  Nigerian  specialist
          autism worker who is leaving work with the Nigerian government  to
          set up a rudimentary very first step autism  awareness  system  in
          the country, I can state with confidence that this is  not  so  at
          all. There may well exist  pockets  of  awareness  in  this  large
          country  but  they  absolutely  have  not  extended  to  the  main
          population. It is highly unlikely that  the  boys  will  have  any
          access of any sort autism support within Nigeria".


          [47] "extracts produced by the expert to the effect that there  is
          very limited provision for autistic children in Nigeria, and  that
          which does exist is very expensive. That is  consistent  with  the
          contents of the section headed "challenges" in  the  article  from
          the Nigerian Health Journal by Dr Frank- Briggs."


          [48] "I however, even if this is the case, it is well  established
          in case law that the lack, or indeed  the  cost,  of  medical  and
          similar provision in  the  country  to  which  a  person  will  be
          removed, or the difference in standards between such provisions in
          the United Kingdom and in that country, will not engage Article 8,
          save  the  most  exceptional  circumstances.  This  position   was
          usefully summarised in MM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for  the
          home Department [2012] EW CA C IV 279."

          [52] in the case  of  the  appellants  before  me,  I  accept  the
          evidence from the appellant that her two sisters are in the United
          Kingdom that they have  a  strong  family  bond  and  the  sisters
          provide her with financial support (in addition to the substantial
          support provided by the local authority by way of housing, as well
          as the educational support following the twins being "statemented"
          as having special educational needs by the  local  authority)".  I
          accept that the sisters here would not be able to provide the same
          level of emotional and practical support if  the  appellants  were
          returned to Nigeria.

          [53] "it emerged at the hearing that not only do  the  appellant's
          parents live in Nigeria, but that she also has two  other  sisters
          there, both of whom are married with children. The  appellant  and
          her  sisters  here  assert   that   their   parents   are   wholly
          unsympathetic towards the appellant and the twins. They  say  that
          they have told the appellant that she should  beat  the  twins  to
          make them speak" on their one visit to the United Kingdom a couple
          of years ago the parents did meet the children, but did  not  want
          anything to do with them.

          [57] I  accept  from  the  background  evidence  produced  by  the
          appellant is that  there  is  a  degree  of  misunderstanding  and
          societal prejudice in Nigeria towards those  suffering  from  this
          condition, but against that I do set the evidence  that  there  is
          some  educational  and  social  provision  there.  In  the   final
          paragraph of Mr Nwokolo's  own  paper,  referred  to  a  potential
          further  development,  namely  an  announcement  by  the   Federal
          Ministry of Education in 2013  that  it  had  set  up  a  national
          education and assessment centre for autism in  Abuja  which  would
          commence work in January 2014. The extract states that Mr  Nwokolo
          has not seen or heard of the location and nor did he know  of  any
          child diagnosed who had been  there,  but  this  was  an  official
          government announcement, and he has not actually sent that it  was
          not carried through. No evidence has  been  produced  to  indicate
          that the institutions referred to by the respondent in the refusal
          letter do not exist  or  operate  now.  His  paper  says  that  an
          estimated 190,000 children in  Nigeria  may  be  living  with  the
          condition, so it is clearly not unknown in that country.

          [58]. Section 117B of the Act confirms  that  the  maintenance  of
          effective immigration control is in the public interest, and  that
          it is also in the public interest that persons who seek  to  enter
          or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially  independent.
          Furthermore, little weight should be given to a private life of  a
          person which was established when that person was  in  the  United
          Kingdom unlawfully.


          [59] the appellant's position  is  that  she  is  not  financially
          independent and that she has been in the United Kingdom unlawfully
          since the expiry of her visit visa in 2003.  Whilst  I  understand
          the emotional problems she encountered in  an  early  relationship
          which turned out to be violent,  she  remained  unlawfully  for  a
          further five years before  conceiving  and  giving  birth  to  the
          twins. The children's private lives have, of course, also all been
          established when they had no  lawful  entitlement  to  be  in  the
          United Kingdom.

          [60] I recognise that it will indeed be  very  difficult  for  the
          appellant to return to Nigeria with her children.  However,  given
          the above considerations  regarding  their  private  life  in  the
          United Kingdom, and taking account of the respondent's lawful  and
          legitimate aim of maintaining effective immigration control, I  do
          not find that the interference with the  right  to  enjoy  private
          life is disproportionate.


          [61] with regard to family life, there will be no interference  as
          such with the rights of any of the individual appellants to  enjoy
          family  life  within  the  immediate  nuclear  family  since   the
          appellant and her  three  children  will  be  removed  to  Nigeria
          together as a family unit.

          [62] it is a fact that  the  appellant's  parents  and  two  other
          sisters are in Nigeria. Whilst I accept that the appellant and her
          sisters in the  United  Kingdom  have  truthfully  conveyed  their
          current attitudes to the appellant and her twins, it is  the  case
          that the parents have only met them once, and the sisters have not
          met them at all. Her sisters here have  explained  how  they  each
          came to understand and  sympathise  with  the  appellant  and  her
          children,  and  I  am  not  convinced  that  in  due  course  such
          understanding and sympathy would not  arise  in  the  parents  and
          siblings in Nigeria, once they  have  got  to  know  the  children
          better; no doubt the sisters here would actively seek  to  support
          the appellant  in  bringing  that  about,  possibly  assisting  in
          relocating to Nigeria and "educating" the parents and siblings out
          of their traditional positions.


          [63] in light of those findings,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
          removal of the appellants will in fact interfere with their  right
          to respect for family life. If I am wrong in that conclusion, I am
          nevertheless   satisfied   that   such   interference   would   be
          proportionate  to  the  pursuit  of  the  respondent  lawful   and
          legitimate aim of maintaining effective immigration control.


       The grounds of appeal




6.       The grounds of appeal state the following which  I  summarise.  The
   first ground of appeal is that the Judge made an irrational finding based
   on the evidence. After finding that the appellants received financial and
   emotional support from the appellant sisters in the United Kingdom, found
   that there was no dependency such as to attract the protection of Article
   8. The Judge did not record  the  extent  of  the  appellant's  emotional
   dependency on adult siblings in the United Kingdom who provided her  help
   and support on a regular basis and caring for her siblings.




7.       The appellant  had  explained  in  evidence  that  caring  for  two
   severely autistic children of the same age, had meant that  it  had  shut
   her out from the reality of life. She needed the break that  her  sisters
   allowed her for caring for the children. The Judge should have concluded,
   on her own findings, that the appellant, a  single  parent,  did  have  a
   family life with the two siblings in the United Kingdom, who had provided
   her with invaluable assistance in the  care  of  her  children  and  much
   needed financial support.  Having  found  the  evidence  to  be  entirely
   credible, there was simply  no  room  for  the  Judge  to  conclude  that
   "further elements of dependency, involving  more  than  normal  emotional
   ties," between the adults was not present. On an  irrational  perspective
   of the evidence the only conclusion that she could come to was  that  the
   appellant had family life with her siblings.




8.       The second ground of appeal is that the Judge  erred  in  law  when
   she made an inspirational decision at paragraph 62 and stated that  while
   she accepts that  the  appellant  and  as  two  sisters  have  truthfully
   conveyed their current attitudes to the appellant and her  twins....  She
   is not convinced that in due course such understanding and sympathy would
   not arise in the parents and siblings in Nigeria, once they have  got  to
   know the children better"




9.      The Judge recorded that autism  is  considered  to  be  a  curse  in
   Nigeria. The appellant's sibling in her evidence in court said  that  her
   parents have a negative attitude towards the boys and it is evident  that
   there is a massive challenge. Autism not something  that  is  known  back
   home as here in the United Kingdom there are other children  that  suffer
   from similar conditions and that there is that awareness and acceptance.



10. The Judge records in  her  determination  that  there  is  a  degree  of
   misunderstanding and societal prejudice in Nigeria and refers to Dr Frank
   Briggs report but at the same time fails to consider: "there  is  a  high
   level of discrimination against children with "unseen" disabilities. Many
   schools and services are available for physically disabled  children  but
   very  few  facilities  exist  for  autism  and  related  behavioural  and
   communication handicaps. The special schools  reject  autistic  children.
   The Judge also failed to record other objective material, detailing  that
   autistic children are often branded as witches and targeted for appalling
   treatment.

           The hearing


11. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  both  parties  as  to  whether
   there is an error of law in the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge. Mr Klear said that the appellant relies on three main grounds. The
   first is the assessment of the dependency on the appellant's  sisters  in
   this country. The support available to the appellant and  the  assessment
   of s55 in respect of the twins who are suffering from  autism.  He  added
   that the Judge found that the sisters have a strong  bond  and  that  the
   appellant is a lone  parent  with  three  children.  There  were  further
   elements of dependency as set out in the  case  of  Kugathas.  The  Judge
   found that there would be difficulty for the appellant to look after  her
   children. The Judge speculated when he said that the appellant's  parents
   and siblings in Nigeria will accept the appellant's autistic twins. There
   was background evidence provided  as  to  the  societal  prejudice  about
   autism. The Judge did not consider the best  interests  of  the  children
   which was a statutory duty.  Nor  did  he  consider  the  impact  on  the
   children who suffer from autism and the change  of  country  without  the
   benefit of the local support that the twins have  been  getting  in  this
   school and how it will affect them. The children are blameless.




12. Mr Kandola on behalf of the respondent submitted it is not true  to  say
   that no other Judge would come to a different conclusion. The  Judge  did
   consider the family support that the appellant and her  children  receive
   in this country but it is not up to the level of good. The appellant came
   to this country in 2003 and overstayed. Disparity of care is not a reason
   to allow the children to remain. He submitted that the s55  ground  is  a
   rationality challenge and the children do not trump the public  interest.
   The children have been living on the public purse  and  are  not  British
   citizens and therefore  are  not  entitled.  He  cited  the  case  of  EV
   Philippines where it was stated that it is not the  duty  of  the  United
   Kingdom to educate everyone in the world.




       Discussion and Decision as to whether there is an error of law




13. Therefore, the appeal involves two steps, the first being  to  determine
   whether there is an error of law in the determination of  the  first-tier
   Tribunal Judge and the second, if I find there  was  an  error,  to  hear
   evidence or submissions to enable me to remake the decision  or  send  it
   back to the First-tier Tribunal for redetermination.



14.  Having  considered  the  determination  as  a  whole,  I  find  Judge's
   consideration of the appellant's appeal in respect of Article  8  of  the
   European Convention on Human Rights is not materially flawed.  The  Judge
   considered Lord Bingham's step by step approach in the case of Razgar,  R
   (on the Application of) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 and in so doing  recognised
   that at all stages of the Article  8  assessment  when  deciding  whether
   there is a family or private life, when  deciding  whether  any  existing
   family or private life is the subject of  an  interference  having  grave
   consequences  and  when  deciding  whether  any  such   interference   is
   proportionate to the legitimate public end sought  to  be  achieved,  the
   approach is to take into account a wide range of circumstances  including
   the appellants previous family and personal circumstances and the  likely
   developments in the future.




15. There was no dispute that the appellant does not meet  the  requirements
   of the Immigration Rules. The appellant's application was  made  pursuant
   to Article 8 of the European convention on Human Rights in respect of her
   and her two three children's private life  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
   evidence is that the appellants twin sons  suffer  from  autism  and  are
   receiving a lot of support from social  services  in  this  country.  The
   appellant claims that Article 8 is engaged because they will not  receive
   the same support in Nigeria. It was also argued that  societal  attitudes
   to autism in Nigeria are appalling and people  with  autism  are  treated
   badly and these circumstances are sufficient for the appellant to receive
   the protection of Article 8 and preclude the respondent from removing the
   appellant from this country.




16. It is not in dispute that  the  appellant  has  lived  in  this  country
   unlawfully since her visit visa expired  in  2003.  The  Judge  therefore
   found that the appellant, had her children have  lived  in  this  country
   unlawfully for a very long time and this informed her decision. The Judge
   cannot be criticised  in  that  she  did  not  understand  the  appellant
   circumstances completely. It is evident from the determination, she  took
   into account all the evidence provided by the appellant, relating to  the
   twins medical, educational and social work  evidence.  She  accepted  the
   evidence that the twins do suffer from autism to a high level. The  Judge
   in a very careful determination set out all the evidence and applied  the
   established  jurisprudence  to  the  facts  of   this   appeal   in   her
   determination.




17. The Judge considered the background evidence on  autism  in  Nigeria  to
   satisfy herself that medical and social provisions exist in  Nigeria  for
   children suffering from autism.  She  found  that  there  are  a  lot  of
   organisations which provide care for autism in Nigeria and named the main
   ones in her determination. The Judge took into account  at  paragraph  42
   that there are organisations in  Nigeria  who  cater  for  children  with
   autism.




18. Having found the above, she into account the case of  MM  (Zimbabwe)  in
   which it was stated that availability of medical treatment in the  United
   Kingdom within the country to which it is proposed to deport an applicant
   under Article 3 and Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights
   establishes that even where a claimant is suffering from  mortal  illness
   such as advanced HIV/AIDS and, if deported, would deteriorate rapidly and
   suffer from an early death, no breach of Article 3  is  established.  She
   further relied on the guidance in the case that the  essential  principle
   is that the European Court of Human Rights does not impose an  obligation
   on the contracting States to provide those  liable  to  deportation  with
   medical treatment lacking  in  their  "home  countries".  This  principle
   applies even where the consequences will be that the deportee's life will
   be significantly shortened.  The  case  stated  that  the  principle  was
   expressed in those cases in relation to Article  3,  it  is  a  principle
   which must apply to Article 8. The court stated that it makes no sense to
   refuse to recognise a "medical care" obligation in relation to Article  3
   but to acknowledge it in relation to Article 8. In N v  UK  the  European
   Court of Human Rights took the view that no separate issue under  Article
   8 arose.




19. The Judge  also  took  into  account  the  negative  societal  attitudes
   towards autism in Nigeria. She took into account the appellant's and  her
   sister's evidence that in Nigeria the appellant parents and sisters blame
   the twins condition on the appellant's  lack  of  parenting  skills.  The
   Judge considered the appellant's evidence that her relationship with  her
   parents and sisters in Nigeria has  deteriorated  since  the  twins  were
   diagnosed as autistic. She stated in the determination that when  one  of
   the sisters was  asked  during  her  evidence  whether  living  with  the
   children might change her parent's  attitude,  she  replied  "I  honestly
   don't think it's going to change their attitude. When you do see the boys
   it is very evident that you've got  a  massive  challenge.  This  is  not
   something that is known back  home.  Here  in  the  UK  there  are  other
   children that suffer from similar conditions, and there is that awareness
   and acceptance".




20. The Judge accepted that  there  is  a  degree  of  misunderstanding  and
   societal prejudice in Nigeria towards those suffering from this condition
   but stated that there are  some  educational  and  social  provisions  in
   Nigeria although they may not  be  up  to  the  standard  of  the  United
   Kingdom. She also referred to the evidence in the final paragraph  of  Mr
   Nowokolos own paper preferring to a potential for the development, namely
   an announcement by the Federal Ministry of Education in 2013 that it  had
   set up a National Education and Assessment Centre  for  Autism  in  Abuja
   which would commence work in January 2014. The Judge found  this  was  an
   official government announcement and  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
   program has not been carried through. She also found that  there  was  no
   evidence provided to indicate that the institutions referred  to  by  the
   respondent in her refusal letter did not exist or operate at the  current
   time. She also noted Dr Frank Briggs paper stating that  an  estimate  of
   under 190,000 children in Nigeria may be living with the  condition,  and
   found the condition autism is clearly not unknown in  that  country.  The
   Judge therefore did her due diligence and found that there  is  help  for
   autistic children in Nigeria.




21. The Judge was entitled to take into account that the appellant  and  her
   children who are not British citizens and are not entitled to rely on the
   public purse and  receive  the  special  treatment  and  care  on  social
   services of this country. The Judge found that the medical  condition  in
   itself does not entitle them to continue to receive British and  special-
   needs education for the rest of their lives in this  country.  These  are
   sustainable findings and there is nothing unreasonable or perverse  about
   them and are in line with the case of EV Philippines which  was  referred
   to by the Judge at paragraph 28 of her determination  that  none  of  the
   appellant's family were British citizens. It  is  clearly  stated  in  EV
   Philippines that  if  the  parents  are  removed,  then  it  is  entirely
   reasonable to expect the children to  go  with  them.  Because  the  best
   interests of children are to remain with their parents. In EV Philippines
   states "although it is of course a question of fact for the  Tribunal,  I
   cannot see the desirability of being educated at the  public  expense  in
   the UK can outweigh the benefits to the children of remaining with  their
   parents. Just as we cannot provide medical treatment for the world, so we
   cannot educate the world".




22. The  Judge  considered  the  evidence  within  the  prism  of  the  best
   interests of the children and societal attitudes to autism in Nigeria  as
   it might impact on the children. The Judge did not find that  these  were
   exceptional  circumstances  where  the  appellant  should  succeed  under
   Article 8 when they are not able to succeed under the Immigration  Rules.
   These are sustainable findings.




23. The other complaint made about  the  determination  is  that  there  was
   sufficient  evidence  before  the  Judge   to   find   that   appellant's
   relationship with her sisters in this country does engage Article 8.  The
   Judge accepted the evidence from the appellant and her two  sisters  that
   they have a "strong family bond" and that the sisters  provide  her  with
   financial and emotional support in this country. The Judge  was  entitled
   to find that the family bond did not amount to a  relationship  over  and
   above that expected between siblings.




24. The Judge noted in  her  determination  that  "it  emerged"  during  the
   hearing that not only do the appellant's parents live in Nigeria but  she
   also has two other sisters both of whom are married with  children.  This
   shows that this important piece of information was not disclosed  earlier
   and no reason has been given in the  determination  for  why  it  had  to
   emerge during the hearing and it was not disclosed earlier. This  clearly
   indicated to the Judge that the  appellant  had  two  sisters  living  in
   Nigeria who  could  offer  her  support  notwithstanding  their  lack  of
   understanding about autism.




25. The Judge found that there is awareness in Nigeria about autism and  the
   parents and sister's attitude to the twins might change once they  engage
   with each other and got to know the children better. The Judge also  said
   that the sisters in this country  would  actively  seek  to  support  the
   appellant in bringing that about and  to  assist  her  in  relocating  to
   Nigeria and educating the parents and siblings out of  their  traditional
   positions.  The  complaint  is  that  the  Judge  speculated   that   the
   appellant's parents and sisters would eventually come around to accepting
   the appellant's twins with their condition. Even if that was speculation,
   it is not a material error in the circumstances of this appeal.




26. The Judge obviously did not accept that  merely  because  the  appellant
   does not have parents and siblings to support her on her  return,  should
   in itself be a reason for the whole family to continue to  live  in  this
   country given that they have been living here lawfully and  have  been  a
   burden on the public purse.  The  Judge  took  into  account  the  public
   interest as she was duty-bound to do,  and  found  that  the  appellant's
   circumstances do not trump those of the respondent.




27. The Judge obviously did not  find  the  appellant  circumstances  to  be
   exceptional circumstances or  that  they  fit  into  the  gap  where  the
   Immigration Rules end and the European Convention on human rights start.




28. On the evidence in this appeal, I find that  a  differently  constituted
   Tribunal would not decide this case differently and the  decision  is  in
   accordance with the established jurisprudence.




29. I therefore find  that  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
   determination and I uphold it.





           DECISION

             The appellants' appeals are dismissed


Signed by

Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal                       Dated  this  15th
day of December 2015







