
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23161/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Decision sent              |
|On 10 June 2015                                 |On 26 June 2015            |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                           RENNISON MARIGA OKEMWA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not represented
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Kenya born 12 December 1981.  He  entered
    the United  Kingdom  as  a  student  on  13  January  2003,  his  leave
    subsequently being varied so as to  expire  on  31  October  2004.  The
    appellant was thereafter granted four years leave to  remain  as  a  UK
    Ancestry Migrant, leave in this capacity last being conferred until  11
    September 2013.

 2. On or around the 29 July 2011 the appellant  made  an  application  for
    Indefinite Leave to  Remain.   This  application  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State  in  a  decision  dated  9  May  2014,  pursuant  to
    paragraphs 193(iv), 322(1A) and 322(2) of the Rules - ostensibly on the
    basis the appellant  submitted  documents  with  his  application  (and
    previous applications) which the Registrar  of  Births  and  Deaths  in
    Kenya has now identified as not being 'genuine'.

 3. On the same date the Secretary of State made a decision to  remove  the
    appellant pursuant  to  section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 4. The appellant appealed the aforementioned decisions to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. This appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pacey  and
    dismissed in a determination promulgated on 13 November  2014  -  Judge
    Pacey being satisfied that the birth  certificates  the  appellant  had
    relied upon in his application to  the  Secretary  of  State  were  not
    genuine.

 5. The appellant sought, and obtained, permission to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal; the grounds lodged in support of such  application  being  in
    the following terms:

           "1. In the grounds submitted the Appellant raised Article 8  and
           in  the  skeleton  argument  submitted  it  is  stated  "in  the
           alternative the Appellant relies on Article 8 ECHR. He has  been
           settled in the UK for valid leave for 11 years and most  of  his
           adult life. He is working in the UK, as is his partner,  and  he
           has 2 young children who have lived their whole lives in the UK.
           Family are not reliant on public funds. He  has  settled  family
           life and strong private life. To force him to  return  to  Kenya
           would breach Article 8 ECHR. The Tribunal is asked to  find  the
           Appellant and his family's Article 8 will be breached if  he  is
           forced to leave the UK."

           2. No findings were made in the determination dated 12  November
           2014 in relation to Article 8 and there was no consideration  of
           Section 55 to safeguard the welfare of the Appellant's  children
           and this results in an error of law."

 6.  Thus the appeal came before us.

Error of Law

 7. It is not in dispute that the appellant raised Article 8 ECHR  grounds,
    albeit briefly, in his notice of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  and
    that such grounds were also particularised in a skeleton argument drawn
    on his behalf for the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. By section 86(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
    the First-tier Tribunal is required to determine any matter raised as a
    ground of appeal. Despite the clarity  with  which  this  provision  is
    drawn, and the obvious intention of the appellant to rely upon  Article
    8 ECHR as a ground before it, the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  give
    any consideration to such ground.

 9. Ms Fijiwala accepts that such a failure constitutes an error of law  in
    the First-tier Tribunal's determination. Whilst she, initially,  sought
    to persuade us that despite this failure in the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination should stand, it was subsequently accepted that where, as
    in the instant case, there had been no engagement at all  with  one  of
    the grounds relied upon by an appellant, the appropriate course  is  to
    set the First-tier Tribunal's determination aside and for the  decision
    under appeal to be re-made in relation to such ground.

10. We agree that this is so and set the First-tier  Tribunal's  aside  for
    its failure to consider a matter raised as a ground of  appeal,  namely
    whether the appellant's removal would lead to a  breach  of  Article  8
    ECHR.

11. We announced this conclusion during  the  course  of  the  hearing  and
    subsequently  directed  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  would  re-make  the
    decision under appeal for itself.

Re-making of decision

12. Although the appellant  sought  to  assert  before  us  that  both  the
    Secretary of State and First-tier  Tribunal  were  incorrect  in  their
    conclusion that he had produced documents to  the  Secretary  of  State
    that were not  genuine,  we  observe  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    finding in this regard was not the subject of challenge in the  grounds
    of application lodged in support of the application for  permission  to
    appeal. Whilst this is not determinative of the scope of the  re-making
    of the decision, in the instant case there is nothing  before  us  that
    leads us to re-open this aspect of the appellant's case.

13. The appellant produces little evidence of substance on this  issue,  in
    the face of evidence from the Secretary of State - which  was  accepted
    by the First-tier Tribunal - to the effect that contact had  been  made
    by the FCO in Nairobi with the Acting Senior Assistant Director of  the
    Register of Births and Death in that city, who confirmed  that  neither
    of the birth certificates relied upon by the appellant are genuine.

14. Having considered whether to exercise  our  discretion  to  remake  the
    decision under the Rules we have decided, in the all the  circumstances
    of this case, that we should not do so. The scope of our  consideration
    is therefore limited to Article 8 ECHR.  For the sake  of  completeness
    we identify that had we considered the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules, on the evidence available to us we would have dismissed  it.  We
    are entirely satisfied that the Secretary of State has demonstrated  to
    the required standard that the birth certificates relied  upon  by  the
    appellant are not genuine.

15. Turning then to  Article  8  ECHR.  Although  the  appellant  made  his
    application for settlement prior to 9 July 2012 i.e. the  date  HC  194
    came into force, that application did not include  within  it  a  human
    rights application based on his private and family  life.  Given  this,
    and the date of the Respondent's decision, we must  give  consideration
    to whether the appellant meets the requirements of Paragraph 276ADE  or
    Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules. We find that he does not.

16. It is immediately apparent from what we say above as to the  production
    by the appellant of documents which are not genuine, that he  fails  to
    meet the suitability requirements of the  Rules.   In  any  event,  the
    appellant also fails to meet other substantive  requirements  of  these
    Rules.

17. In relation to paragraph 276ADE, the appellant has not lived in the  UK
    for 20 years [sub-paragraph (iii)] , is not under the age of  25  [sub-
    paragraphs (iv) and (v)] and there is no evidence before us that  there
    are any very significant obstacles to  his  integration  into  life  in
    Kenya, a country where he grew up and where his brother resides.

18. As to Appendix FM, Ms Obure -  the  appellant's  partner  -  is  not  a
    British citizen and neither is she settled in the UK. As a  consequence
    the Applicant cannot meet the requirements of section E-LTRP (leave  as
    a partner).  Neither can he meet the requirements  of  section  R-LTRPT
    (leave as a  parent)  because  neither  of  his  children  are  British
    citizens nor have they lived here for 7 years continuously.

19. We therefore turn to consider Article 8 ECHR outwith  the  confines  of
    the Rules. There have been numerous judicial pronouncements relating to
    the task that the Secretary of State and the  Tribunal  must  undertake
    when considering such issue - the most recent statements by  the  Court
    of Appeal being found in Singh v The Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department, Khalid v The Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2015] EWCA Civ 74; PG (USA) v The Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2015] EWCA Civ 118 and Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v SS (Congo), BM (Afghanistan), BB (Pakistan), FA (Somalia),
    AC (Canada), KG (India) [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387.   We  have  taken  into
    account and applied the ratio of these decisions.

20. In summary, a failure to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules
    is a weighty factor in determining  an  Article  8  claim  outside  the
    Rules, such weight  being  particularly  significant  where  the  Rules
    provide a "complete code" or where "any gap between the Rules and  what
    Article 8 requires is comparatively narrow"; this  being  because  such
    claim will already have been addressed to  a  significant  extent  when
    rejecting it  under  the  Rules.  Where  there  are  matters  that  are
    substantial and which could play no, or no  significant,  part  in  the
    consideration under the Rules, then a full assessment will be  required
    in which they are balanced against all  other  relevant  considerations
    including the public interest in effective immigration control.

21. Moving on to the relevant circumstances of the appellant's  claim.  The
    appellant's immigration history in the UK is set out above  we  do  not
    recite it again at this stage. He has now lived in the UK for in excess
    of 12 years and speaks English fluently. We accept  that  he  has  been
    working in the UK - the  documents  before  us  including  within  them
    copies of payslips in the appellant's name relating to employment at an
    organisation named "Dimensions", which assists  persons  with  learning
    difficulties. We accept the appellant's evidence that  he  is  a  youth
    worker at this organisation. We also accept that he  raises  funds  for
    charity and helps coach young footballers.

22. The appellant met his partner, Miss Lorna Obure, in the UK in 2004, and
    there are now two children of the relationship - born 21 February  2009
    and 13 March 2012 respectively.  We  accept  that  the  appellant,  his
    partner and children reside together and form a family unit in the UK.

23. Miss Obure, who is also a Kenyan national,  arrived  in  the  UK  on  6
    September 2001 with leave to enter as a student, which was subsequently
    extended until 30 November 2007. She  thereafter  remained  in  the  UK
    under the International Graduate Scheme with leave conferred  until  28
    December 2008 and, subsequently, applied in time for leave as a Tier  1
    Highly Skilled Post Study Migrant. Such application was  refused.  Miss
    Obure was thereafter unsuccessful in her appeal against  such  refusal,
    her appeal rights being exhausted on 14 April 2009. On 25 May 2009  she
    applied for leave to remain as the appellant's dependent,  leave  being
    granted in this capacity until 11 September 2013.

24. On 9 September 2013 Miss Obure made an application for Indefinite Leave
    to Remain outside the  Immigration  Rules,  an  application  which  was
    refused by way of a decision  dated  29  March  2014.  The  appellant's
    children were named  dependents  on  this  application.   A  subsequent
    appeal against the aforementioned decision was dismissed by the  First-
    tier Tribunal in October 2014 and permission to appeal was subsequently
    refused. We have not been  provided  with  a  copy  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination. On 15 April 2015 Miss Obure  made  a  further
    application for leave to remain - this time on the basis of her  length
    of residence here. We have not  been  provided  with  a  copy  of  this
    application, which we are told remains pending before the Secretary  of
    State.

25. Returning to the children, we are told nothing of the circumstances  of
    the appellant's youngest child, which is unsurprising given the child's
    age. As the circumstances of  the  eldest  child,  we  accept  that  he
    attends primary school and, according to a school report for  the  year
    2013-2014, is exceeding the expected level of development in every area
    that is monitored. We have no doubt that the appellant's  eldest  child
    has established emotional bonds both with his school friends  and  with
    his teachers.

26. Given what we have  said  above,  we  accept  that  the  appellant  has
    established a substantial private and family life  in  the  UK  and  we
    further find that the interference caused by his removal  would  engage
    Article 8.

27. There can also be no dispute that  the  appellant's  removal  to  Kenya
    would not be anything other than in accordance with  the  law  (in  the
    wider sense given to this phrase when the ECHR is under consideration),
    and would be in pursuance of a legitimate aim.

28. The final issue  before  us  in  relation  to  article  8  is  that  of
    proportionality.

29. From 28 July 2014, as a consequence of  the  introduction  of  sections
    117A-117D of the Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  the
    Tribunal is required  to  take  into  account  a  number  of  specified
    considerations. In doing so in this case we observe that the  appellant
    can speak English fluently and has passed the  Life  in  the  UK  Test.
    Furthermore, he has, during  his  time  in  the  UK,  been  financially
    independent and we accept that if he were allowed to remain  here  this
    would continue to be so.

30. By section 117B(5) we are required to give  little  weight  to  private
    life established by a person at a time when that  person's  immigration
    status is precarious. The appellant's status in the UK has at all times
    been precarious, given that his continued presence  here  has,  at  all
    times, been dependent on obtaining a further grant  of  leave  (See  AM
    (s117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC)).

31. The appellant can gain no benefit from section 117B(6),  Ms  Obure  not
    being a qualifying partner, and  the  appellant's  children  not  being
    qualifying children (as to which see s117D).

32. We are further required by section 55 of the  Borders  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 to consider the circumstances and  best  interests
    of the appellant's children: see JO Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC).

33. We have  set  out  above  that  which  we  have  been  told  about  the
    circumstances of the appellant's children, evidence  we  unhesitatingly
    accept. Having considered this evidence we find that the best interests
    of the children will undoubtedly be served by  the  existing  state  of
    affairs being preserved. However, whilst we treat such interests  as  a
    primary consideration, they are not a trump card.

34. Despite the best interests of the children being to remain in the UK in
    the family unit, given all that we are told  we  nevertheless  conclude
    that it is entirely reasonable to  expect  the  children  to  accompany
    their parents to Kenya. There is no evidence before us (i) that  either
    child would have any difficulty adapting to life in  Kenya,  (ii)  that
    there is any well-founded fear for the children's safety  there,  (iii)
    that they would suffer significantly, or at all, in their education  by
    moving to Kenya or (iv) that either child has a relevant  health  issue
    that cannot be treated in Kenya.

35. Although Ms Obure has an outstanding application for leave to remain in
    the UK, this, in our view, does not render it unreasonable for  her  to
    return to Kenya  either  immediately,  with  the  appellant,  or  after
    awaiting the outcome of such application -  even  if  such  outcome  is
    positive. She is a Kenyan national and like the appellant has built  up
    her private life in the UK whilst her leave here has  been  precarious.
    We have not been provided with any evidence that  she  would  face  any
    difficulties integrating back into Kenyan society.  It  is  Ms  Obure's
    choice whether she awaits  a  decision  on  her,  and  her  children's,
    pending applications, but the fact of  such  applications  having  been
    made does not, in our view, render it unreasonable to  expect  her  and
    the children to return to Kenya with the appellant.

36. There is a significant public interest in refusing permission to remain
    to those persons, such as the appellant, who have failed to establish a
    right to remain under the Immigration Rules. Looking  at  the  evidence
    before  us  as  a  whole,  we  find  that  there  are   no   compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Rules that lead  us
    to conclude that it would not be proportionate to remove this appellant
    to his homeland. Whilst the appellant has a significant private life in
    the UK, this was built up at a time when his leave was  precarious  and
    we attach little weight to it.  As  to  the  appellant's  family  life,
    despite it being in the best interests of the children to remain in the
    UK, and having treated such interests as a  primary  consideration,  we
    nevertheless find that it is reasonable to expect them and their mother
    - Ms Obure - to move to Kenya to be with the appellant.

37. The public interest  in  removing  a  person  who  does  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules is ample  justification,  on  the
    facts of this particular case, for the appellant's removal to Kenya. In
    our conclusion  there  is  nothing  in  the  facts  of  this  case,  as
    presented, which comes anywhere close to leading us  to  conclude  that
    the appellant's removal would be a disproportionate  interference  with
    his private and family life in the United Kingdom.

38. For this reason we remake the decision by dismissing the appeal brought
    on Article 8 ECHR grounds - both  within  and  outwith  the  Rules.  As
    identified above, the First-tier Tribunal also found that the Secretary
    of State had made out her  case  in  relation  to  the  application  of
    paragraph 322 of the Rules - a conclusion which we do not disturb.

Decision

For the reasons given above:

      i) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside;
     ii) Having remade the decision under appeal for ourselves,  we  dismiss
         it on all grounds.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 12 June 2015















