
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23754/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |Decision Promulgated               |
|On 4 November 2016                 |On 18 November 2016                |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                         ASEOBONG OMORO LARRY-ETTAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Parkin of Highland Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as  they  were
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge S Alis promulgated on 4 March 2016 which  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against a refusal of the Appellants application  for
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

Background

 4. The Appellant was born on 28 October 1992 and is a national of Nigeria.

 5. On 29 July 2014, the Appellant applied for leave to remain as a Tier  4
    Student.

 6. On 4 September 2014, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The reason given  was  that  on  the  basis  of  the  bank
    statements that were submitted which were  identified  in  the  refusal
    letter the Appellant did not meet the maintenance requirements  as  set
    out in paragraph 245ZX(d) of the Rules.

The Judge's Decision

 7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Alis ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the  Respondent's
    decision. The Judge found that the sole issue in the case  was  whether
    the Appellant had  submitted  his  father's  bank  statement  with  his
    application for leave to remain  as  he  asserted  in  which  case  his
    application should have been granted and his appeal succeed.

 8. The Judge found heard oral evidence from the Appellant, copies of those
    documents in the Respondents bundle that they  claimed  were  submitted
    with the application and subsequently returned to the  Appellants  last
    known address albeit he  had  moved  without  ,  as  he  was  required,
    notifying the Respondent of his change of address  and  the  Appellants
    bundle of evidence.

 9. In reasons set at paragraphs 20 -26 the Judge set out the  reasons  why
    he was satisfied that the Appellant had not submitted the  Access  bank
    statement which was in his fathers sole name with his  application  and
    therefore the appeal failed.

10. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that the  Judge  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for his decision and that the private life claim  that
    was advanced in the grounds of appeal had not been considered.

11. On 9 August 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne gave  permission  to
    appeal on both grounds.

12. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr  Parkin  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that:

      a) He acknowledged that there was more force in his argument under the
         Rules than Article 8.

      b) There was confusion in paragraph 23 in that  there  was  a  missing
         word or words and therefore it was  not  entirely  clear  what  the
         Judge was saying.

      c) The Respondent did not produce evidence to show  their  system  and
         what documents they had received. It was  not  enough  to  ask  the
         court to draw an inference from the fact that  his  bank  statement
         was not referred to in the refusal letter that it was not produced.

      d) At best the Respondents case was as  consistent  with  them  having
         lost the bank statement as the Appellant not submitting it.

      e) He relied on the caselaw set out in paragraph 11 of the grounds.

      f) The Judge failed to give weight to the Appellants own evidence.

13. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Mc Vitie submitted that:

      a) This was a 'he said/she said' case where the Judge had  to  balance
         the evidence from both sides.

      b) The Appellant had produced no evidence of what he submitted to  the
         Respondent as there was no  evidence  of  any  covering  letter  or
         identification of the documents in the application.

      c) The case was not analogous with Basnet (validity of  application  -
         respondent) [2012] UKUT 00113(IAC) as in that  case  the  Appellant
         had produced  evidence  of  what  he  provided  in  this  case  the
         Appellant had not.

      d) The Appellant bears the burden of proof and he  had  not  satisfied
         the evidential burden of proving his case and he had not  met  that
         burden.

      e) Article 8 was not a good point as this was a student who  had  been
         in the UK for a very short period.

14. In reply Mr Parkin  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  conceded  that  the
    decision was within the range of decisions open to the Judge but needed
    proper reasoning.

The Law

15.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or  giving
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

16. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.

17. In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC),  it  was
    held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly
    the reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a  tribunal  found  oral
    evidence to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a  document  to
    be worth no weight whatsoever, it  was  necessary  to  say  so  in  the
    determination and for such findings to be supported by reasons. A  bare
    statement that a witness was  not  believed  or  that  a  document  was
    afforded no weight was unlikely to  satisfy  the  requirement  to  give
    reasons.

Finding on Material Error

18. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

19. I will deal with the ground raised in respect of Article 8 as it  seems
    to me that this was entirely without merit. While I accept that Article
    8 was raised in very general terms  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  ('The
    appellant does enjoy his private life in the UK') this  argument  could
    not have been expected  to  succeed  without  more  detailed  and  fact
    specific evidence. There was no skeleton argument  in  the  Appellant's
    bundle and no evidence that related to anything other than  his  course
    of study. While of course the matter could have been addressed in  more
    detail in the hearing I have read the Judges notes of the  hearing  and
    he notes that Mr Inoma who represented the Appellant  there  stated  in
    his closing submissions  'No  HR  appeal.'  This  was  a  quite  proper
    concession to make: the Appellant was in the UK as a  student  and  had
    only been in the UK since 2013. He  was  in  the  UK  for  a  temporary
    purpose as a student only for the period he could meet the requirements
    of the Rules. Had the Judge considered the matter outside the Rules  he
    would have been statutorily required to attach  little  weight  to  the
    Appellants private life by virtue of the provisions of s  117B  (5)  as
    the Appellants status was precarious at the time that his private  life
    was established. An appeal could not have succeeded on that  basis  and
    it is clear that this was acknowledged by the advocate who  represented
    him in the lower court: it is not an error of law that another advocate
    thinks that the case should have been presented differently.

20. The Appellant entered the UK as a Tier 4 student and on  29  July  2014
    submitted an application for further  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    student. His application was refused in a letter dated 4 September 2014
    on the basis that he did not meet  paragraph  245X(d)  as  he  was  not
    awarded the  10  points  under  the  PBS  Rules  for  maintenance.  The
    Respondents case as set out in the refusal letter is that the Appellant
    submitted only a joint bank  statement  in  his  parents  names  ending
    ..2195 (Zenith) dated 31 July 2014, his own statements  ending  ...0387
    (Zenith) dated 31 July 2014 and another in his name  ...0444  (NatWest)
    dated 31 July  2014  and  these  taken  together  did  not  demonstrate
    sufficient funds for the full 28 day period on their own. The Appellant
    asserts that the Respondent failed to consider all of the  evidence  as
    he asserts that he also submitted a bank statement in his father's sole
    name ending ...9698 at the Access Bank which if taken into account with
    the other funds would have met the financial requirements.

21. The Judge properly identified that the issue in the  case  was  whether
    the Appellant submitted the bank  statement  from  Access  Bank  as  he
    stated. He properly identified that the Appellant bears the  burden  of
    proving his case which was that he met the requirements  of  the  Rules
    because he provided the mandatory evidence that he  had  the  necessary
    funds.

22. The Judge considered what documentary evidence the  Appellant  produced
    to show that he had produced the required documents. The  Appellant  he
    found  did  not  produce  any  covering  letter  with  his  application
    (paragraph 23) identifying what documentary evidence he  was  producing
    in support of his application which would of course have  been  helpful
    as the online application itself does  not  specifically  identify  the
    individual bank statements he had produced. Therefore there was nothing
    in  the  initial  application  process  that  supports  the  Appellants
    assertion that he provided a bank statement in his father's name.

23. The Judge found (paragraph 20) that the Appellant attended an interview
    to have his online application  processed  on  31  July  2014  and  the
    Appellant accepted in his witness statement he was told that  the  bank
    statements he produced did not meet the  maintenance  requirements  and
    there is nothing in his witness statement to  suggest  that  he  argued
    with this summary or suggested to the caseworker at this stage that  he
    met the funding requirements which might be expected if, as he asserts,
    he had sent all of the necessary bank statements.

24. The Appellant also accepted that while the letter he received from  the
    caseworker following this meeting  referred  specifically  to  a  joint
    statement it made no mention of an account in his father's  sole  name.
    The Judge also noted that the Appellant provided  a  joint  sponsorship
    declaration from his parents which the Respondent asserted was  because
    the bank statement was in joint names.

25. The Judge found (paragraph 24) that the Appellant produced  a  copy  of
    the statement from Access in his father's name but it  could  not  have
    been the one he used as they post-dated the application.

26. I accept that paragraph 23 has not been proof read and there is a word,
    probably 'me' that was missed out but I am satisfied that the Judge was
    merely remaking that the bundle that was returned to the Appellant  was
    of no assistance to the Appellant as  he  did  not  receive  it  as  he
    changed address without notifying the Respondent. He  also  noted  that
    the Respondent had, they said a copy of what the Appellant had sent  in
    their bundle and of course this was reflected in  the  refusal  letter.
    Any  failings  in  this  paragraph  could  not  have  made  a  material
    difference to the outcome of the case.

27. Mr Parkin argued that the Respondent bears the burden  of  proving  how
    their system works on the basis of Basnet.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    burden of proof is on the Appellant to prove that he met the  financial
    requirements of the Rules : he provided no evidence that  he  submitted
    the statement of his father and indeed  all  the  evidence  before  the
    Judge pointed the other way: what happened at the interview, the  joint
    sponsorship statement , no reference  to  the  bank  statement  in  any
    document originating from the Appellant or from the  Respondent.  I  am
    satisfied that the ratio of Basnet was not that the  Respondent  always
    bears the burden of proving its system in every case.  Also  the  facts
    were very different as it related to on line applications and  how  the
    procedure contrasted to a personal application. While in this case  the
    application was online there was an interview in order to progress  the
    application where the Appellant accepted in his witness statement  that
    he was told that the bank statements he had produced did not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules and therefore al of the  bank  statements  he
    asserts were provided cannot have been before the caseworker.   I  note
    that paragraph 32 of Basnet  in  considering  procedural  fairness  the
    court suggested

         "In cases of a failure to collect the fee in an application made in
         time, there is prompt communication with the applicant to afford an
         opportunity to check or correct the billing data."

28. Thus I am satisfied that it would have been open to the Judge  to  find
    that he had the opportunity to address the issue of funding  after  the
    interview when the failure to meet the threshold was identified.  There
    can be no suggestion he was treated unfairly.

29. Mr Parkin also relied on Kissule but this  was  a  fact  specific  case
    before the High Court and does not bind me although I note that in that
    case that when told his  application  was  defective  (for  want  of  a
    photograph) the Appellant it  was  accepted  submitted  an  application
    including a photograph but was then out  of  time.  In  this  case  the
    Appellant was told at an interview that he did  not  meet  the  funding
    requirements and has not produced any evidence  that  he  produced  his
    fathers  bank  statement  either  before  or  in   response   to   this
    information.

30. I remind myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set
    aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT  85  (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
    sufficient reasons to  be  given  in  a  decision  in  headnote  (1)  :
    "Although there is a legal duty to give  a  brief  explanation  of  the
    conclusions on the central issue on  which  an  appeal  is  determined,
    those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole  makes
    sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge."

31. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

32. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.



DECISION

33. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                                              Date
17.11.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
