
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23672/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 December 2015                  |On 14 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                        HASSAN TESLIM ADIGUN HOSSEIN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, who was born on 5 May 1982, is a  national  of  Nigeria.
    He married his wife in Nigeria in 2008 but  his  account  is  that  she
    could not cope with Nigeria and left the country. He then  entered  the
    United Kingdom, as a student, on 10 February 2010  but  three  or  four
    months later became ill and stopped studying and took about a  year  to
    recover.  During that time he got  back  in  contact  and  resumed  his
    relationship with his wife.  It was around this time that his wife  had
    one of her children taken into care by the London Borough of Islington.



2.   The Appellant applied for leave to remain by letter on  7  April  2014.
    The letter sent by those then instructed by him was far from competent.
     It appears it had certain documents attached to it which  are  not  in
    the  Tribunal  file  but  are  in  the  Respondent's  possession.   His
    application was refused on 15 May 2014 and he appealed on 30 May  2014.
    The grounds were general in nature but did assert that  the  Respondent
    had failed to consider all the evidence, which had been submitted.

3.   The appeal was initially due to be heard at York House on  12  December
    2014 but it was adjourned the day before.  I am presuming of the courts
    own motion but that is not clear from the papers.  The appeal then came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Tynan on 12 June  2015.   Neither  the
    Appellant nor his solicitor attended. During the  current  hearing  the
    Appellant asserted that his solicitor had told him that he did not need
    to attend and that he was going to appear on his behalf.

4.   The appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Tynan on  3  July
    2015.  It is a very short decision, which just rehearses the history of
    the application and then states at paragraph 5 that:

         "Mr Archie, the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  invited  me  to
         dismiss the appeal. I first read the  grounds  of  appeal  and  the
         original application for leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.
         They are both poorly drafted  documents.   As  noted  already,  the
         application contains only very limited information  in  support  of
         the Appellant's application."

5.   It is  not  clear  to  me  whether  the  Respondent  had  received  the
    documents which were referred to in the letter of application  and  why
    they were not before the Tribunal.  They  were  certainly  not  in  the
    Tribunal's file.

6.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge went on to state that:  "the  grounds  of
    appeal comprise nothing more than a pro forma list of grounds   and  do
    not relate to the facts of the case."

7.   At paragraph 6, he also stated that:

         "... there was no  explanation  for  their  non-attendance.  Having
         considered the application and the grounds of appeal I have decided
         that the appeal should be dismissed."

8.   I accept that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  very  little  in  his
    file but I am concerned that this is a human  rights  appeal.   I  find
    that , at the very least, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  should  have
    addressed the issues raised in the letter, including the fact that  the
    Appellant's wife was living here, that her child had been removed  from
    her care and that he needed to support her. The letter  of  application
    had also referred to a number of documents being attached and,  if  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge did not have those documents in his file,  he
    should at least have tried to discover where they  were  and  why  they
    were not in the file.

9.   Therefore I find that  there  were  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision, In particular, the totality of the  evidence
    was not addressed  and  the  Appellant's  case  was  not  treated  with
    sufficient procedural fairness.

10.  I have also shown the Respondent documents sent [to]  the  Tribunal  in
    response to directions given by the Tribunal, which the appellant  says
    were documents which were given to his solicitors and which he believed
    had been submitted.  These documents indicate that the Appellant's wife
    is suffering from a number of conditions.

Notice of Decision

11.  I find  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Tynan's  decision  contained
    errors of law and cannot stand.

Directions

12.  The appeal is to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de
    novo by a First-tier Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Tynan.


Signed   Date:  8 January 2016

Nadine Finch
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

