
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23890/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Belfast                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 9 November 2016                         |On 17 November 2016              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between
                                 SANGWAN [C]
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     in person.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge M R Oliver, dismissing her appeal  under  the  Immigration
   (European Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the  EEA  Regulations")  against  a
   decision made by the respondent on 1 June 2015 2015 to  refuse  to  issue
   her with a residence card as  confirmation  of  his  permanent  right  of
   residence as the spouse of an EEA citizen.


2. The appellant is a citizen of Thailand. She is  married  to  Michael  [C]
   who holds dual Irish and  British  citizenship.   The  couple  have  been
   married since 1 December 2005, and have two children who are  also  Irish
   Nationals.   The  appellant  first  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  21
   September 2006 with leave to enter as a  spouse,  valid  until  9  August
   2008.  An application for an EEA Residence card made on 24  October  2006
   was withdrawn, and she was later in 2008 granted leave  to  remain  as  a
   spouse until 23 September 2010.

3. On 19 April 2010, the appellant applied for an EEA Residence  Card  which
   was issued in October 2010, valid until 7 October 2015 and on 23  January
   2015, she applied for an EEA residence  card  to  confirm  her  permanent
   right of residence.

4. The appellant's case is that she has acquired permanent residence as  she
   and her husband have lived in the United Kingdom for  at  least  5  years
   while he was employed full-time by Moy  Park.   The  appellant  has  also
   worked full-time since 2007.

5. The respondent refused that application as she was not satisfied  on  the
   basis of the evidence provided that she had not  provided  evidence  that
   her husband had been employed as claimed, or that she had completed  five
   years' continuous residence.

6. The appellant lodged an appeal against  that  decision,  supported  by  a
   number of documents relating to  her  employment  and  residence  in  the
   United Kingdom. There was also a letter  from  Moy  Park,  her  husband's
   employer, confirming that he had worked for them continuously until 2014.



7. The appellant chose not to have  an  oral  hearing.  The  judge  was  not
   satisfied on the material provided that the appellant and her husband had
   been living in the United Kingdom for the relevant  period,  nor  was  he
   satisfied that Mr [C] had been employed by Moy Park as claimed.

8. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  the
   grounds that Mr [C]  had  been  employed  continuously  from  1998  until
   October 2014 by Moy Park, as shown by the documents submitted.

9. On 9 May 2014, First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne  granted  permission  to
   appeal.



   The Law

10. An applicant who wishes a residence card as confirmation  of  her  right
   of permanent residence as the spouse of an EEA  national  must  meet  the
   requirements of reg. 15  of  the  EEA  Regulations.   This,  in  summary,
   requires her to show that she, and in this case her  husband,  have  been
   living in the United Kingdom for a period of at least 5  years  while  he
   was a "qualified person" or had himself acquired permanent  residence  as
   he would still be a person  who  was  resident  in  accordance  with  the
   regulations for the purposes of reg. 15 (1) (b)  as  once  acquired,  the
   permanent right of residence is lost only if reg. 15 (2) or (3)  applies.
   That does not appear to be the case on these facts.


11. As Mr [C] is a dual Irish and British Citizen, he does not  fall  within
   the definition of EEA National as set out in reg. 2. That is  because  in
   2012, the Immigration (European Economic Area) Amendment Regulations 2012
   (SI 2012/1547) amended the definition of EEA national subsequent  to  ECJ
   handing down judgment in McCarthy. The definition  of  EEA  national  now
   excludes those who are also British Nationals.


12.  This is subject to the transitional  provisions  are  set  out  in  the
   Schedule which provide, so far as is relevant:


   Amendments to the definition of EEA national

   2.-(1) Where the right of a family member ("F") to be admitted  to,  or
   reside in, the United Kingdom pursuant to the 2006  Regulations  depends
   on  the  fact  that  a  person  ("P")  is  an  EEA  national,  P   will,
   notwithstanding the effect of paragraph 1(d)  of  Schedule  1  to  these
   Regulations, continue to be regarded as an EEA national for the  purpose
   of the 2006 Regulations where the criteria in subparagraphs (2), (3)  or
   (4) are met and for as long as they remain satisfied in accordance  with
   subparagraph (5).

   (2) ...

   (3) The criteria in this subparagraph are met where F-

   (a)was on the 16th July 2012 a person with a  right  to  reside  in  the
   United Kingdom under the 2006 Regulations; and

   (b)on the 16th October 2012-

    (i) held a valid registration  certificate  or  residence  card  issued
   under the 2006 Regulations;

    (ii)  had  made  an  application  under  the  2006  Regulations  for  a
    registration  certificate  or  residence  card  which  had   not   been
    determined; or

    (iii) had  made  an  application  under  the  2006  Regulations  for  a
    registration certificate or residence card which had been  refused  and
    in respect of which an appeal under  regulation  26  could  be  brought
    while the appellant is in the United Kingdom (excluding the possibility
    of an appeal out of time with permission) or was  pending  (within  the
    meaning of section 104 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002.

   ...

   (5) Where met, the criteria in subparagraph (2),  (3)  and  (4)  remain
   satisfied until the occurrence of the earliest of the following events-

   ...

   (d)the date on which F  ceases  to  be  the  family  member  of  an  EEA
   national; or

   (e)the date on which a right of permanent residence under regulation  15
   of the 2006 Regulations is lost in accordance with regulation  15(2)  of
   those Regulations.

   (6) P will only continue to be regarded as  an  EEA  national  for  the
   purpose of considering the position of F under the 2006 Regulations.




13. In October 2010 the appellant was issued with  a  residence  card  valid
   until 7 October 2015 and so falls within Sch3 article  2(3)(b)(i).  There
   is no indication that any of the criteria in article  2  (5)  apply,  and
   thus she was entitled to the benefit of the transitional provisions which
   preserve for her the original definition of EEA national  which  did  not
   exclude those who were also British Citizens.


14. It is unfortunate that  the  appellant's  application  for  a  permanent
   residence card concentrates on showing her work history rather than  that
   of her husband.  That is an understandable error.  It is also unfortunate
   that she did not complete the section in the application  form  in  which
   details of her and her husband's absences from the United Kingdom  should
   have been recorded.   In the circumstances, and given  the  very  limited
   evidence of Mr [C]'s employment, I consider that the judge  was  entitled
   to conclude that it had not been  shown  that  Mr  [C]  had  been  living
   continuously in the United Kingdom or working here as a qualified  person
   (or with the permanent right of residence)  for  a  continuous  five-year
   period.

15. For these reasons, I  conclude  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal did not involve the making of an error of law and I uphold it.

16. It is, however, open to the appellant to make a  fresh  application  for
   permanent residence, supported by documents such as  an  original  letter
   from HMRC setting out Mr [C]'s tax and NI contributions since he  entered
   the NI system, a schedule of dates  both  were  absent  from  the  United
   Kingdom and other evidence of  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Any
   application needs to be made promptly given that the EEA Regulations have
   now been replaced by the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
   2016 which will enter into effect fully on 17 February 2017 and may alter
   the appellant's position.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

   1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error of law and I uphold it.


Signed                                  Date:  17 November 2016
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

