
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23442/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd June 2016 and 11th July 2016           |On 1st August 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI



                                   Between

                            DISTIN JAY GARUILLES
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Litigant in person, unrepresented; formerly
                    represented by Theva Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Presenting Officer (3 June 2016)
     Miss Z Ahmad, Senior Presenting Officer (11 July 2016)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Joshi promulgated on 22nd October 2015 against the Secretary of State's
    decision to refuse leave  to  remain  on  29th  May  2014  pursuant  to
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR.

 2. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Parkes. The grounds upon which  permission  was  granted  may  be
    summarised as follows:

         "The grounds  argue  that  the  Appellant  and  his  representative
         attended when the case was listed as a float but  not  reached  and
         did not receive a notice of the renewed hearing which is itself  an
         error.  It is also argued that he cannot be reintegrated  into  the
         Philippines and that the judge had not applied  a  facts  sensitive
         approach to the case.

         If the Appellant and his representative did not  know  of  the  re-
         listed hearing that would be an error of law, there is little merit
         in the other submissions but they would have to be re-argued.   The
         First-tier Tribunal file does show that a  notice  of  hearing  was
         sent to the Appellant and his representatives on 7th March 2015 and
         it is surprising that if the representatives did not hear of a  new
         date they were prepared to do nothing and made no contact with  the
         First-tier Tribunal to chase the matter up. That  said,  it  is  an
         error if they genuinely did not know of the date."

 3. The Secretary of State provided a Rule 24 reply that was considered  by
    all parties before the hearing commenced.

Error of Law

 4. At the close of submissions on the second hearing I  indicated  that  I
    would reserve my decision which I shall now give.  I  find  that  there
    was an error of law in the decision, such that it should be set  aside.
    My reasons for so finding are as follows.

 5. Pursuant to directions that I gave on 3rd June 2016 indicating that the
    Tribunal would be assisted if the Appellant filed further  evidence  in
    relation to the non-receipt of the notice of hearing sent  out  on  7th
    March 2015, the Appellant produced a signed letter by  himself  wherein
    he confirmed that he did not receive the  notice  of  hearing  and  was
    therefore unaware  of  the  15th  July  2015  adjourned  hearing  date.
    Attached to  his  letter  was  a  separate  letter  from  his  previous
    solicitors (Theva Solicitors) which stated inter alia as follows:

         "We now request the learned Tribunal to consider this letter as  an
         official statement from our firm that  we  have  not  received  the
         notice of hearing informing the hearing date of 15th July 2015."

 6. I am prepared to accept the Appellant's evidence as  truthful  that  he
    did not receive the notice of hearing informing him of the hearing date
    of 15th July 2015.  My reasons for so finding are  that  the  Appellant
    did previously attend the Tribunal for his hearing which took place  on
    4th February 2015 when he was allocated to the  "float"  list  but  the
    Tribunal was unable to deal with his appeal that day  due  to  lack  of
    court time at IAC Hatton Cross.  That notice of hearing would also have
    been sent to the Appellant's representatives Theva  Solicitors  and  on
    balance I find it credible that the Appellant would not  have  attended
    the first hearing to then receive the second notice and  simply  ignore
    it, only to complain about it later.

 7. In relation to the notice being sent to the legal  representatives  and
    their afore-mentioned letter,  I  am  just  satisfied  that  the  legal
    representatives did not receive the notice of hearing informing them of
    the hearing date of 15 July 2015 and accept that letter on balance.

 8. Like Judge Parkes, I formally note my quiet surprise at the solicitors'
    conduct of the appeal.  I do also note  that  the  solicitors  did  not
    attend either of the two hearings before me to assist the Appellant and
    they also did not attend  Hatton  Cross  on  4  February  2015  either.
    Indeed, it appears that Theva Solicitors have not attended the Tribunal
    once throughout the course of the Appellant's appeal.

 9. The solicitors also failed to provide  a  witness  statement  from  the
    supervising solicitor at the firm confirming  the  non-receipt  of  the
    notice of hearing, which one would have expected from  them  so  as  to
    assist the  Tribunal  as  officers  of  the  court.  I  do  record  the
    Tribunal's astonishment at the apathy shown towards the  directions  of
    this Tribunal. However, as the solicitors removed themselves  from  the
    record on 13 June 2016 the matter will go no further.

10. Given that the Appellant was not informed of the notice of hearing I do
    just find that there is sufficient error in the Tribunal proceeding  to
    determine   the   appeal   in   the   Appellant's   absence   and   his
    representative's absence such that  the  determination  should  be  set
    aside in the interests of fairness (pursuant to the decision in Nwaigwe
    (Adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 418 (IAC).  In light of  the  above
    findings, I set aside the  decision  and  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in their entirety.

Decision

11. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.  The decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal is set aside and the appeal is remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard by a differently constituted bench.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini
