
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/23007/2013
     IA/22985/2013
     IA/23018/2013
     IA/23005/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th September 2014                          |On 8th October 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                 mr George Ehimhen Odijie (first Appellant)
               mrs Josephine Aimiede Odijie (second Appellant)
          miss Trinita Ebinehita Odijie (a minor) (third Appellant)
         miss Anita Eboscremhen Odijie (a minor) (fourth Appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Sadiq, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The first Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born  on  27th  July  1974.
    The second Appellant is his wife and the third  and  fourth  Appellants
    his minor children.  The appeals of the  second  to  fourth  Appellants
    ride  and  fall  on  that  of  the  first  Appellant.   All  references
    hereinafter in this determination are to  the  first  Appellant  unless
    specifically shown  in  the  alternative  to  be  directed  at  another
    Appellant.

 2. The first Appellant was granted leave to enter the UK as a  student  on
    25th January 2004.  He was subsequently granted four  extensions  as  a
    student expiring on 30th November 2008.  Subsequent  applications  for
    leave to remain as a Tier 1 Post-Study Migrant and as  a  student  were
    refused but on 25th January 2011 he was granted leave to  remain  as  a
    post-study migrant until 25th January  2013.   On  19th March  2011  a
    subsequent application for leave to remain pursuant to Article 8 of the
    European Convention of Human Rights was refused.  On 25th January  2013
    the Appellant made a combined application for leave to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  under  the  points-
    based system (PBS) and for a biometric residence  permit  (BRP).   That
    application was refused by the Secretary of State on 29th May  2013  on
    the grounds that the Appellant did not meet the requisite provisions of
    Appendix A: attributes.  The second Appellant first entered the  United
    Kingdom on 8th January 2008  as  a  visitor.   The  Appellant  obtained
    extensions to her visa as a dependant until 25th January 2013 when  her
    application to vary leave to remain was refused.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Chambers sitting at Manchester on 14th October 2014.   In
    a determination promulgated on 28th January 2014 the Appellant's appeal
    was dismissed under the Immigration Rules but was allowed  pursuant  to
    Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.

 4. The Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    on 5th February 2014.  On 17th February 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Mailer granted permission to appeal.  He noted the dates  of  birth  of
    the  first  and  second  Appellants  and  that  the  third  and  fourth
    Appellants were born respectively on 14th December 2008 and  9th  April
    2010.  He also noted the first and second Appellants have a third child
    aged 6 months.  He observed  that  the  Appellant  had  relied  at  the
    hearing on Article 8 grounds alone and that  the  Appellants  contended
    that although the application failed on a technicality it  was  not  of
    their making and that the defect was cured quickly but too  late.   The
    Appellants had stated in evidence that he had been here for almost  ten
    years and set up a business as a consultant last year.  He acknowledged
    that his uncles, aunts and  remaining  brothers  and  sisters  were  in
    Nigeria and although  he  could  return  to  Nigeria  and  establish  a
    business there it would not do as well as his businesses in the UK.

 5. Judge Mailer noted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  found  that
    the evidential flexibility policy did not apply in this case  and  that
    in allowing the  appeals  under  Article  8  he  found  that  the  lead
    Appellant had made business friends and acquaintances and that the  two
    children were at school and had formed ties.  He also  noted  that  the
    second Appellant had a private life of her own  and  further  that  the
    Respondent's decision  did  not  preserve  or  encourage  the  economic
    wellbeing of the country.  Judge Chambers had concluded that the  first
    and second Appellant were contributors to the UK's wellbeing  and  that
    as a matter of fact the family was law abiding and of  good  character.
    He considered  that  "on  somewhat  exceptional  facts"  the  need  for
    immigration control was outweighed.

 6. Judge Mailer noted that  the  grounds  asserted  that  the  failure  to
    provide the bank letter was not a "technicality" but a material failure
    to satisfy the Rules.  Further the grounds asserted that the fact  that
    the family was a law abiding family could not  positively  influence  a
    proportionality assessment and that no proper reasons  were  given  for
    the finding that their circumstances were "exceptional."

 7. In granting permission Judge Mailer considered  that  it  was  arguable
    that the judge had regard  to  irrelevant  matters  in  the  Article  8
    proportionality assessment and that further the judge  did  not  factor
    into the equation the Appellant's statement in evidence that  he  would
    be able to maintain his business in Nigeria.  He also  considered  that
    it was arguable that the circumstances were  not  shown  to  have  been
    "exceptional" as found and that the grounds overall were arguable.

 8. No Rule 24 response was served by the Appellant's solicitors.  It is on
    that basis that the  appeal  comes  before  me.   For  the  purpose  of
    continuity throughout the proceedings Mr  Odijie  and  his  family  are
    referred to herein as the Appellants and the Secretary of State as  the
    Respondent albeit that this is an appeal by  the  Secretary  of  State.
    The Appellant is represented by his instructing solicitor Mr Sadiq.  Mr
    Sadiq is familiar with this matter having appeared  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  The Secretary of  State  is  represented  by  her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer Mr Harrison.

Submissions/Discussion

 9. Mr Harrison starts by  reminding  me  that  this  case  was  considered
    outside the Immigration Rules under Article 8  and  he  relies  on  the
    Grounds of Appeal.  He notes that it is set out within Judge  Chambers'
    determination that it is  common  ground  that  the  Appellants  cannot
    succeed under Appendix FM and submits that the judge has not considered
    what compelling or exceptional circumstances would exist.  He considers
    that the judge's conclusions under  the  Rules  (i.e.  that  they  were
    missed by a "technicality") and the fact that the Appellants were found
    to  have  been  law  abiding  should   not   positively   influence   a
    proportionality assessment on Article 8 grounds.  Further  he  contends
    that the family can continue to enjoy their  family  life  together  in
    Nigeria as they do in the  UK  and  that  their  private  life  can  be
    continued in its essential form in  Nigeria.   The  Grounds  of  Appeal
    recite that the first Appellant stated at the appeal that he  would  be
    able to maintain his business from Nigeria.  I put it that way because
    I refer later to this determination to that finding.

10. Mr Sadiq submits that the Appellant would now succeed under  the  Rules
    although if an application were made at date of hearing and due to  the
    changes of the Rules he would not meet the requirements due to the  way
    in which the money is held and its origins.  He submits the  judge  has
    carried out a proper analysis albeit that  there  is  no  reference  to
    authority, in particular Gulshan (Article  8 -  new  Rules -  correct
    approach)  [2013]  UKUT  640  (IAC).   He  further  contends  that  the
    reference to the word "technicality" by the judge is not one that it is
    unfair to criticise  him  for  as  the  judge  has  accepted  that  the
    Appellant fails under  the  Rules.   He  submits  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to use the word and that  does  not  in  itself  constitute  a
    material  error  of  law.   Mr  Sadiq  further  emphasises  that   upon
    instruction from his client he vehemently opposes the  suggestion  that
    there has been any admission that he could carry out his business  from
    Nigeria.  His consultancy business is UK based and he also runs  an  IT
    based business centred in Liverpool.  He submits that there is  no  way
    whatsoever that the existing business could be  run  from  Nigeria  and
    that perhaps what was misconstrued was the ability of the Appellant  to
    run "a business" out  of  Nigeria  which  he  submits  would  apply  to
    probably virtually any Appellant who comes before the Tribunal  and  is
    of Nigerian origin who may face the prospect of being returned  to  his
    home country.

The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

13. Much turns herein with regard to the analysis carried out by the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge in his conclusions and  findings  to  be  found  at
    paragraph 19 of his determination.  I acknowledge that  the  judge  has
    failed to go through  the  proper  motions  although  as  can  be  seen
    hereinafter whether his  conclusions  ultimately  are  right  or  wrong
    remains another matter.  There is  a  requirement  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to carry out a proper analysis pursuant to Article  8  outside
    the Rules and to give due consideration to the effect  of  authorities.
    In addition I accept that the  fact  that  the  Appellants  have  shown
    themselves to be a law abiding family of good  character  does  not  of
    itself positively influence a proportionality assessment on  Article  8
    grounds.  Consequently I am satisfied that there is a material error of
    law in the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  and  I  set
    aside the decision and proceed to remake it.

Remaking of the Decision

14. It is accepted that the Appellant cannot succeed under the  Immigration
    Rules.  His claim consequently has to be considered pursuant to Article
    8 outside the Rules.  The  first  Appellant  has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for ten years.  His three children have been born in the UK and
    he has already established a number  of  businesses  in  this  country.
    There is no suggestion that his business acumen would not be of benefit
    to the UK.  I am also satisfied that whilst the first  Appellant  could
    carry on a business in Nigeria the fundamental nature of  the  business
    activities in which he is involved are such that he would not  be  able
    to carry out  current  businesses  and  forthcoming  proposed  business
    ventures outside the UK.

15. The Tribunal in Gulshan made clear and  has  repeated  subsequently  in
    Shahzad  (Article  8:  legitimate  aim)  [2014]  UKUT  00085  (IAC)  at
    paragraph (31):

         "Where an  area  of  the  rules  does  not  have  such  an  express
         mechanism, the approach in R (Nagre) v Secretary of State  for  the
         Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) ([29]-[31]  in  particular)
         and Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT
         640 (IAC) should be followed: i.e. after applying the  requirements
         of the rules, only if  there  may  be  arguably  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8
         purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them."

16. The Court of Appeal in MM (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985 at paragraph 128 went on to state:

         "Nagre does not add anything to the debate save for  the  statement
         that if a particular person is outside the  Rule  then  he  has  to
         demonstrate, as a preliminary to a consideration outside  the  Rule
         that he has an arguable case that there may  be  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside the  Rules.   I  cannot  see  much
         utility  in  imposing  this  further  intermediary  test.   If  the
         applicant cannot satisfy the Rule, then there either is or there is
         not a further Article 8 claim.  That will have to be determined  by
         the relevant decision maker."

17. The above authorities set out the current position of the law.  As  the
    High Court said in MM (Lebanon) if an applicant cannot satisfy the Rule
    (and the Appellant cannot in this instant case) then there either is or
    is not a further Article 8 claim and that has to be determined  by  the
    relevant decision maker.  I have looked at the facts of this matter and
    I fully understand and appreciate the position from  which  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge came from and despite setting aside his  errors  in
    indicating whether or not the family is of good character  as  being  a
    criteria and the fact that the Appellant has stated clearly that he  is
    not in a position to maintain  his  business  from  Nigeria,  the  fact
    remains that this family has effectively been in this country  for  the
    whole of the lives of the  children  and  in  the  case  of  the  first
    Appellant for ten years and in the case of the second Appellant for six
    years.

18. The law under Article  8  is  set  out  succinctly  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge at paragraphs 12 and 13 where he recites Article  8  and
    at paragraph 14 where he sets out the test in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  I
    adopt those paragraphs.  He further  accepts  that  the  threshold  for
    establishing the interference with private or family life is not a high
    one and that once the  Article  is  engaged  the  focus  moves  to  the
    remaining questions.  In this case this is a  family  where  the  first
    Appellant has studied over many years in the  UK.   He  is  effectively
    integrated into UK society and he and his family  live  here  and  have
    established businesses.  Those businesses I accept cannot be  in  their
    present form continued in  Nigeria.   Further  whilst  the  failure  to
    provide the appropriate documents cannot be considered a technicality I
    acknowledge  that  the  defect  was  to  all   intents   and   purposes
    subsequently rectified although with  the  ever  moving  feast  of  the
    requirements to satisfy the Rules they may not  be  sufficient  at  the
    present time.

19. CDS (PBS "available": Article 8) Brazil  [2010]  UKUT  00305  (IAC)  is
    authority for stating that where an applicant establishes belatedly  by
    evidence that funds are in fact available, the strength of  the  public
    interest in  removal  might  be  weaker  and  thus  a  disproportionate
    interference with private life.  Ultimately I agree with  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge that the facts of this individual case
    including  the  private  life  established  by  the  first  and  second
    Appellant, the established school life and family life of the third and
    fourth Appellants and the history of the Appellant's life in the UK  is
    such as to override the legitimate aim of the economic wellbeing of the
    country not being met by the Appellant in this particular case.   I  am
    satisfied that in the particular circumstances so far as it relates  to
    this family (as indeed was Immigration Judge Chambers) and on the facts
    of this case the exceptional circumstances relating to those facts that
    the established private life of all outweighs the need for  immigration
    control and applying the Gulshan and post-Gulshan authorities that this
    appeal succeeds under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  In such
    circumstances I remake the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing
    the appeal on human rights grounds.

Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law.  I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  but  in
    remaking the decision I remake it allowing the appeal of the Appellants
    pursuant to Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  of  Human  Rights
    outside the Immigration Rules and I dismiss the appeal of the Secretary
    of State.



21. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   No
    application is made to vary that order and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

