
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/23908/2014
                                                               IA/27608/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 January 2016                   |On 29 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     MRS BRIGID OLUWAFUNMILAYO ADENIRAN
                  MISS CYNTHIA ADENIKE ANJOLAOLUWA ADENIRAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondents:   Mr L Doyle, Solicitor from M & K Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For ease of reference I shall refer to the parties as they were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal. Thus, the Secretary of State is the Respondent
    and Mrs Adeniran and her daughter are the Appellants.

 2. This is an appeal by the Respondent against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Landes (the judge), promulgated on 27 May 2015, in which
    she allowed the Appellants' appeals on Article 8 grounds outside of the
    Immigration Rules.

 3. The appeals brought before the First-tier Tribunal were in turn against
    the Respondent's decisions of 9 May 2014, in which the applications for
    a residence card based upon Regulation 15A of the Immigration (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the  Regulations)  were  refused.   No
    removal directions had been set and no notice under section 120 of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 served.

 4. Prior to the appeals coming before the judge, the Appellants had had  a
    previous appeal before the First-tier Tribunal in October 2014.  There,
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Nixon had  decided  there  was  no  right  of
    appeal against the Respondent's decisions. That decision was challenged
    to the Upper Tribunal and on  28  January  2015  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Pinkerton concluded that Judge Nixon had erred  in  law.   The  appeals
    were therefore remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal.

The hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes

 5. In a thorough and well-structured decision, the judge  first  concluded
    that the Appellants had rights of appeal.  The judge then  went  on  to
    consider the merits of the  appeals  in  respect  of  EU  law  and  the
    Regulations. The issue was essentially whether the first Appellant  had
    a derivative right based on  the  well-known  Zambrano  principle.   In
    summary, the judge found  that  because  the  first  Appellant's  older
    child, David, was an Irish citizen, the first Appellant had  failed  to
    show that it was not possible for the family unit to go to Ireland, the
    country of which David is a national.  On this basis  the  judge  found
    that neither the second Appellant nor David would be  forced  to  leave
    the territory of the European Union as a  result  of  the  Respondent's
    decisions. The appeals therefore failed under the Regulations.

 6. I note that the arguments on behalf  of  the  first  Appellant  at  the
    hearing were not put on the basis of NA [2015] ECWA  Civ  140  and  the
    reference made to the Court of Justice therein (see paragraphs  18  and
    62 of the decision).

 7. The judge then went on to consider Article 8, basing her decision to do
    so on the decision of the Upper Tribunal in the case  of  Ahmed  (Amos;
    Zambrano; reg 15A(3)(c) 2006 EEA Regs) [2013] UKUT 00089  (IAC)  (Ahmed
    in fact became NA when it reached the  Court  of  Appeal).   The  judge
    considered  all  the  relevant  factors  thoroughly,  directed  herself
    correctly to the approach in respect of Article  8,  and  concluded  in
    clear terms that it would not be reasonable for  either  David  or  the
    second  Appellant  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  for  Nigeria.   She
    concluded therefore that the Respondent's decisions would constitute  a
    breach of Article 8. Finally, at paragraph 62, the judge commented that
    she did not propose to consider the potential impact of her  Article  8
    decision as regards any derived rights of residence under EU law.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 8. The grounds contended that the judge had erred in considering Article 8
    at all, that in the alternative she  erred  in  concluding  that  there
    would be breach of that provision, and finally that there was  in  fact
    no right of appeal in the first place.  In  granting  permission  on  6
    August 2015, First-tier Tribunal Judge Nightingale  was  not  impressed
    with grounds two and three (expressly refusing permission thereon), but
    deemed the issue of jurisdiction to consider Article 8 to be arguable.

The hearing before me

 9. At the outset of the hearing Mr Doyle  very  fairly  accepted  that  in
    light of the Upper Tribunal decision in  Amirteymour  and  Others  (EEA
    appeals; human rights)  [2015]  UKUT  00466  (IAC),  and  perhaps  more
    particularly the very recent Court of Appeal decision in TY (Sri Lanka)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 1233, the judge had, albeit through  no  fault  of  her
    own, erred in concluding that she had  jurisdiction  to  determine  the
    Article 8 issue.  He accepted that in this respect the judge's decision
    could not stand. He also acknowledged that there was no "cross  appeal"
    in respect of the judge's conclusions on the EU law issue.

10.  Mr Doyle suggested in oral submissions and by way of a  detailed  Rule
    24 response that these  appeals  should  be  stayed  in  light  of  the
    upcoming hearing before the Court of Justice in the  NA  case,  a  case
    that is due to be heard, as I understand it, in February this year.  Mr
    Doyle referred  to  the  unfortunate  history  to  these  appeals,  the
    financial difficulties with which the first  Appellant  finds  herself,
    and the effect of this on her ability to make a new application.

11. Mr Staunton simply relied on ground one and suggested that there was no
    need for a stay of these proceedings.

Decision on error of law

12. There is clearly an error of law in this case, as has been accepted  by
    Mr Doyle.  The judge did not have jurisdiction to consider the  Article
    8 issue, as is clear from TY.  Given that this was the  sole  basis  on
    which she allowed the appeals, the error was obviously a material  one.



13. I therefore set aside the decision.

14. Although the decision is set aside, I would wish to make it clear  that
    but  for  the  jurisdictional  error,  the  judge's  findings  on   and
    consideration of the Article 8 claim was in my view impeccable.

Disposal

15. I informed the parties at the hearing that I would not stay these cases
    pending the outcome of NA in the Court of Justice.  This  is  primarily
    because there has been no "cross-appeal" by the Appellants against  the
    judge's decision in respect of the EU law issue. As a consequence, that
    particular point has been resolved against the Appellants. The error of
    law in these  appeals  relates  only  to  the  jurisdiction  concerning
    Article 8: the legally sound conclusion on  the  EU  law  issue  stands
    (see, for example, paragraphs  19-20  of  EK  (Article  4  ECHR:  Anti-
    Trafficking Convention) Tanzania [2013] UKUT 00313 (IAC)). Further,  as
    far as I am aware, there is no general stay being placed upon cases  in
    which the NA judgment may have some bearing. Finally, the  judgment  in
    NA is not expected until later this year and I see no  good  reason  to
    add significant delay to the final resolution of these  appeals  (which
    involve two children).

16. I appreciate what Mr Doyle says about the first  Appellant's  financial
    difficulties, but that is not  a  matter  which  can  have  a  material
    bearing upon how I dispose with these appeals.  One would hope that the
    Respondent  has  in  place  procedures  for  applications  to  be  made
    notwithstanding financial difficulties, particularly  where  there  are
    children involved. Article 8 rights need to  have  the  opportunity  of
    being ventilated and properly considered.

17. In light of the above, I re-make  the  decision  in  these  appeals  by
    dismissing them both under the Regulations. I have no  jurisdiction  to
    consider the Article 8 issues.

Anonymity

18. Like the First-tier Tribunal, I make no  direction  in  these  appeals.
    Although the second Appellant is a minor, there is no  good  reason  to
    make a direction, having regard to the Presidential  Guidance  Note  of
    2013.

Notice of Decision

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by  dismissing  the  appeals  under  the  Immigration
(European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

No anonymity direction.


Signed   Date: 28 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award


Signed   Date: 28 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

