
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/23070/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 31 August 2017                         |On 4 September 2017              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                               ubaid ali khan
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr S Chelvan, of Counsel, instructed by J J Law
Chambers.
For the Respondent:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant challenges the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Hanes dismissing his appeal against the respondent's  refusal
         to  grant  further  leave  to  remain.    The   determination   was
         promulgated on 23 December 2016 following a hearing at Taylor House
         on 3 December 2016.


      2. The appellant is a Pakistani national born on 7 November  1985.  He
         entered the UK as a student in March 2005.  On 13  March  2015,  he
         made an application for indefinite leave to remain on the basis  of
         10 years' continuous and lawful stay but this  was  refused  on  10
         June 2015. The respondent considered that  the  appellant's  lawful
         residence was broken between 9 December 2009 and  13  January  2011
         and discretion was not exercised in his favour because he had  been
         here with 3C leave since 2013 and exhausted his  appeal  rights  in
         March 2015. Furthermore,  he  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
         Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE(1) and there  were  no  significant
         obstacles to his reintegration into Pakistani life and insufficient
         evidence of exceptional circumstances which would warrant  a  grant
         of discretionary leave.



      3.  The  appellant  obtained  permission  to  appeal  from  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Lambert on 5 July 2017. The matter then came  before
         me on 31 August 2017 when I heard submissions from the  parties.  I
         now give my decision.



         Discussion and Conclusions




      4. The appellant attacks  the  determination  of  the  judge  both  in
         respect of her conclusions under paragraph 276B and on article 8.


      5. On the first matter,  it  is  argued  that  the  judge  misdirected
         herself as to paragraph  276B,  that  there  are  no  gaps  in  his
         residence and that  the  judge  failed  to  determine  whether  the
         respondent had discharged the burden  on  her  to  prove  that  the
         application made in October 2009 was invalid. It is maintained that
         in  the  absence  of  any  evidence  to  support  the  respondent's
         assertion as to the invalidity of the  application,  the  appellant
         was entitled to succeed in his appeal.


      6. The second matter focuses on the judge's approach to article 8  and
         her assessment of the evidence. It is  pointed  out,  both  in  the
         grounds and in Mr Chelvan's  submissions,  that  whilst  the  judge
         found there were inconsistencies in the evidence (at paragraph  16,
         she  failed  to   identify   what   those   inconsistencies   were.
         Additionally, it is maintained that she  criticized  the  appellant
         for failing to put forward  any  evidence  as  to  how  any  future
         children would be raised, given that the appellant was a Muslim and
         his girlfriend an atheist, but had failed to put this matter to the
         parties at the hearing. It is argued that  the  judge  reached  her
         findings on this and other highlighted  matters  on  the  basis  of
         suspicion rather than the evidence.  It  is  pointed  out  that  no
         findings were made as to the  evidence  given  by  the  appellant's
         girlfriend. Finally, it is maintained that the judge wrongly relied
         on s.117B (4) when assessing article 8 because at paragraph 22  she
         wrongly self-directed herself on  the  weight  to  be  given  to  a
         relationship established when a  person's  immigration  status  was
         precarious whereas that subsection refers to unlawful status.


      7. Dealing with the second matter first, I do not find  any  merit  in
         the complaint that the judge did not identify  the  inconsistencies
         in the evidence which she referred to in her paragraph 16.  Several
         are listed  in  that  paragraph  itself  and  relate  to  when  the
         relationship became serious, how they spent time together, when she
         began to stay over and  why  documentary  evidence  bore  different
         addresses for the appellant's girlfriend including the  appellant's
         residence at a time when she did not live there.



      8. Further inconsistencies arise in paragraph 17  with  the  appellant
         maintaining that they spend a few days a week together as he was in
         shared  accommodation  whereas  in  the  previous   paragraph   his
         girlfriend was recorded as saying she had moved  in  with  him.  At
         paragraph 18, the girlfriend's sister's evidence  raises  yet  more
         inconsistencies relating to when  the  relationship  commenced.  At
         paragraph 20, the judge notes that the appellant made no  reference
         to his girlfriend in his application of March 2015 even  though  he
         was supposed to have been in a relationship with her at that  time.
         It  is,  therefore,  plain  that  the  judge  identified   numerous
         inconsistencies in the evidence. The fact that these  are  all  not
         listed  in  the  paragraph  where  she  referred  to  there   being
         discrepancies  is  irrelevant.   The   judge   found   there   were
         inconsistencies and then proceeded to set them out. To suggest that
         they were not identified is to misrepresent the determination.



      9. The complaint that the judge failed to put her  concerns  over  the
         proposed faith of the appellant's future children  to  him  at  the
         hearing would have been an error had the judge relied on that issue
         to make adverse credibility findings. It can be seen from paragraph
         20 that the judge's rhetorical question played little, if any, part
         in her findings. It is  but  one  of  many  points  raised  on  the
         reliability of the relationship and is referred to towards the  end
         of her assessment. Even if the judge was wrong not to have put that
         point to the parties at the hearing, there are ample other  reasons
         given for her finding that the relationship did not engage  article
         8.



     10. The grounds also complain that the  judge  based  her  decision  on
         suspicions rather than evidence. Reference is made to  the  finding
         that the joint bank account was opened to bolster  the  appellant's
         claim. Contrary to what is argued, however,  the  judge  had  every
         reason to reach this conclusion. At paragraph 16, the  judge  noted
         that although the couple did not  claim  to  cohabit  until  August
         2016, the bank account was opened well before  that  and  used  the
         appellant's address for both parties even  though  the  appellant's
         girlfriend did not reside there at the time.



     11. The last point made on the article  8  issue  concerns  the  weight
         given to the claim by the judge. It is argued that  the  judge  was
         under the mistaken impression that little weight could be  ascribed
         to family life where a person's status was precarious. However,  by
         this stage of the determination, the judge  had  already  made  her
         findings on family life and had not discussed the issue  of  weight
         at  all  in  arriving  at  her  conclusions.   In  any  event,  the
         establishment of a relationship during a precarious period of  stay
         is a relevant matter for an article 8 assessment (Rajendran (s.117B-
          family life) [2016] UKUT 00562). At the  offending  paragraph  22,
         the judge considers private life, her conclusions  on  family  life
         already having been reached and section 114B(4)  is  applicable  to
         that assessment.


     12. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the judge undertook a proper
         and full assessment of the article 8 claim. I find no errors of law
         with respect to the findings and conclusions on article 8  and  the
         decision in that respect stands.



     13. I turn now to the first part of the appellant's complaint which  is
         that the respondent has the burden of proving that the  appellant's
         2009 application was invalid and that having failed to  do  so  the
         appellant  should  succeed  in  his  appeal  because  he   has   an
         outstanding application and hence no break in his period of stay.



     14. At the start of the hearing, Mr Whitwell produced a copy of  a  CID
         print out from the  respondent's  file  which  confirmed  that  the
         appellant's 2009 application had been rejected because payment by a
         credit card had been declined. Mr Chelvan submitted that the burden
         was on the respondent to show that  the  application  was  invalid,
         that "on its face" it had not been shown that the  application  was
         insufficiently completed and that there should be disclosure by the
         respondent of the application form so as to  establish  whether  or
         not it was properly  completed.  He  submitted  that  the  evidence
         should have been made available to the First-tier Tribunal and that
         the appellant needed an opportunity to respond to it.  Mr  Whitwell
         submitted that there would not be any other  information  available
         apart from what had been adduced.



     15. Both parties referred to past authorities  in  their  arguments.  I
         have considered these. In Basnet (invalidity of application) [2012]
         UKUT 113 (IAC) the Tribunal held that the question  of  whether  an
         application was valid depended not upon  whether  the  payment  was
         successfully processed but whether the application was  accompanied
         by a fee which it would be if accompanied by such authorisation  as
         would enable the respondent  to  receive  the  entire  fee  without
         further recourse to  the  payer.  In  Mitchell  (Basnet  revisited)
         [2015] UKUT 00562 (IAC) the Tribunal held that there was no  burden
         of proof on the respondent where the application was  on  its  face
         insufficiently completed  and  that  as  payment  pages  were  only
         retained for 18 months, any question of the reason for  failure  to
         obtain payment could only be investigated during that time.


     16. The  difficulty  I  have  with  Mr  Chelvan's  submissions  and  Mr
         Nicholson's grounds is that the issue  of  the  invalidity  of  the
         application made in October 2009 is only being raised  now,  almost
         eight years after it was rejected for non-payment  of  the  fee.  I
         accept that there was an obligation on the Secretary  of  State  as
         per Basnet but only if that decision had  been  challenged.  If  it
         had, the Secretary of State would have been obliged to provide  the
         evidence that has now been lost by the passage of  time.  As  there
         was no challenge, either by  way  of  representations  or  judicial
         review (and no  explanation  for  the  appellant's  inaction),  the
         decision  stands  and  it  is  inappropriate  to  launch  what   is
         effectively a public law attack against it all these years later.



     17. I accept that the respondent's CID note was not  previously  before
         the appellant but even without it he was  aware  that  payment  had
         been declined in 2009 as is plain from his witness statement. Given
         that he did not seek to adduce evidence in support of any claim  he
         had that his application was valid, it is difficult to see  how  he
         can do so now or why he should be permitted to. Further, his  claim
         in his witness statement that he had had sufficient  money  in  his
         bank to cover the fee (and  the  reliance  of  that  claim  in  the
         skeleton argument) is contradicted  by  the  respondent's  evidence
         that the appellant sought to pay by credit card rather than through
         his bank.



     18. I have regard to Mitchell where a similar  scenario  occurred.  The
         appellant in that case also sought to remain on the  basis  of  ten
         years' residence and challenged the respondent's assertion that she
         had been without leave for some nine months four years earlier,  on
         the basis that she had  made  a  valid  application.  The  Tribunal
         pointed to the long delay in the raising of the  challenge  to  the
         respondent's decision to reject an earlier application as invalid.



     19. In the present case, the delay is even  lengthier;  indeed,  it  is
         more than twice as long. As the Tribunal found in Mitchell, had the
         appellant wanted to  assert  that  the  respondent's  decision  was
         wrong, he should have done so at the time. Regard was also  had  to
         the material adduced by the respondent relating to  the  processing
         of information and data. The Tribunal noted that payment pages  are
         stored for just eighteen months for security reasons and that after
         that period they are destroyed. The appellant could, if  he  wished
         to raise a challenge about payment of the fee, have done so  at  an
         earlier stage. What he cannot do is to bring a challenge against  a
         decision made in 2009 through the medium of these proceedings.   It
         is simply far too late to do so.



     20. It follows that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  entitled  to
         conclude that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  show  that  he  had
         completed ten years of lawful and continuous residence.




     21. Decision


     22. The First-tier Tribunal made no errors of law and the  decision  to
         dismiss the appellant's appeal stands.



     23. Anonymity



     24. No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal. I  was  not
         asked to make one and, in any event, see no reason to do so.

    Signed





       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 1 September 2017










