
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/23786/2014
                                                               ia/23793/2014
                                                               ia/23796/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31st July 2015                    |On 10th November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                             (1) mrs Aisha Abdi
                            (2) mr abid Siddique
                           (3) miss Fajar Siddique
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr I Ali (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Stokes, promulgated on 31st March 2015, following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 13th February 2015.  In the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeals of Mrs Aisha Abdi (the  principal  Appellant),  and
    her husband, Mr Abid Siddique, and their daughter Miss Fajar  Siddique.
    The Respondent, Secretary of State, subsequently applied for,  and  was
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, she was born on 2nd May  1981.
    The second Appellant, her husband, is also a national of Pakistan,  and
    was born on 31st December 1975.  The third Appellant, also  a  national
    of Pakistan, was born on 1st March  2011.   On  31st  March  2014,  the
    principal Appellant made an application for leave to remain as a Tier 4
    (General) Student Migrant, and the remaining two Appellants applied  as
    her dependants.  By a decision dated 15th May  2014,  the  applications
    were dismissed.

The Principal Appellant's Claim

 3. The principal Appellant's claim is that she arrived in the UK  on  17th
    September 2005 with a student visa valid until 31st October 2008.   She
    had been granted further leave to remain in  the  same  category  until
    31st December 2010.  She had a further grant until 31st December  2011.
    However, she then fell pregnant,  and  "having  a  medically  difficult
    pregnancy so had to give up studying for a time".

 4. She maintained that in order to remain in the UK  she  applied  as  the
    second Appellant's dependant.  This was initially refused but  she  won
    her claim after a successful appeal.  She  then  had  leave  to  remain
    until 15th March 2014.  She claimed her intention had  always  been  to
    continue with her studies.  Therefore, after having recovered from  her
    previous medical conditions, she applied to the college  for  a  course
    starting in March 2014.

 5. She paid the full course fees.  She started the course.   However,  her
    claim then was that,

         "She  was  now  pregnant  again  and  suffering   from   the   same
         complications  as  before.   These  prevented  her  from  currently
         continuing with her course.  The college had  been  informed.   She
         would return to her studies as soon as her health permitted as  she
         had done after her first pregnancy" (paragraph 11).

The Judge's Findings

 6. The judge recorded how the Appellant could not meet the requirements of
    paragraph 245ZX as she was last granted leave to remain as  the  second
    Appellant's dependant and was not within the category that allowed  her
    to switch to a Tier 4 Student status.

 7.  Therefore,  the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State's  decision  was  in
    accordance with the law and the applicable Immigration Rules.   If  the
    principal Appellant's appeal failed, then the dependant appeals of  the
    two remaining Appellants also failed.

 8. However, the decision with respect to Article 8 ECHR rights was  rather
    different.  The judge applied the Razgar principles (see paragraph  21)
    and then proceeded to look at the Section 117B considerations under the
    Immigration Act 2014 (see  paragraph  22).   In  so  doing,  the  judge
    observed that both Appellants spoke English.

 9. Both are willing to work and support their family, both are unlikely to
    be a burden on  the  state,  both  have  contributed  to  the  economic
    wellbeing of the country, the second Appellant pays taxes and the first
    Appellant pays college fees, and that "the first Appellant's failure to
    meet  the  Immigration  Rules  was  for  a  technical  rather  than   a
    substantive reason and she  met  all  the  other  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules" (paragraph 23).  The judge also observed that,  "she
    has submitted evidence of her notifying  the  college  of  her  current
    inability to attend classes" (paragraph 23).

10. On the basis of these considerations,  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    first Appellant if removed,

         "Would  have  to  restart  a  similar  course  in  Pakistan.    The
         Respondent has produced no evidence that  such  courses  exist.   I
         accept that an English qualification  may  be  regarded  with  more
         prestige in Pakistan.  The first Appellant came to study which  she
         has  done,  interrupted  only  by   medical   circumstances   ...."
         (paragraph 26).

    In the end, the judge allowed the appeal on the basis of the  case  law
    in CDS (Brazil)  [2010]  UKUT  000305.   This  was  because  the  first
    Appellant's removal would be disproportionate (see paragraph 27).

Grounds of Application

11. The grounds of application state that the judge had misapplied the case
    of CDS (Brazil) [2010] UKUT 000305 because the cessation of studies  in
    this case has arisen due to  medical  conditions,  on  account  of  the
    Appellant having become pregnant, whereas in the CDS case the cessation
    of studies had occurred because of the  transitory  provisions  in  the
    Rules.  Second, the judge also erred at paragraph  26  in  placing  the
    weight on the Respondent to produce evidence that similar courses would
    not be available in Pakistan.  On 28th May 2015, permission  to  appeal
    was granted.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me on 31st July 2015,  Mr  Walker,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State relied upon the Grounds  of
    Appeal.  He submitted that the judge had misapplied  the  case  of  CDS
    (Brazil).  The judge had accepted that the Appellant could not  satisfy
    the Rules and so to allow the appeal under Article 8  was  misconceived
    on grounds that the Secretary of State had failed to  demonstrate  that
    similar courses would be available for the Appellant in Pakistan.

13. For his part, Mr Ali, appearing on behalf of the Appellants,  submitted
    that the distinction is made about CDS  (Brazil)  that  the  particular
    feature there was the cessation of studies on account of the transitory
    provisions, whereas in this case it is on account of medical condition,
    was not a viable distinction to make.  The judge himself did  not  make
    that distinction.  The general point in CDS (Brazil)  is  that  someone
    who has been admitted to undertake a course may  lawfully  build  up  a
    private life outside the grant of leave on the basis of the Rules.

14. Second, the judge clearly does have CDS (Brazil) in his mind  and  does
    apply it accurately.

15. Third, the judge has regard to the factors in favour of  the  Appellant
    at paragraph 25 pointing out that the adults have contributed  to  this
    country and that they are not a charge on public  funds  and  that  the
    Appellant has informed her college that she could not attend because of
    a medical condition.  At the same time, the judge has had regard to the
    adverse factors at paragraph 25 and 26.

16. Mr Ali also drew my attention to his  very  helpful  and  comprehensive
    skeleton argument which refers to the recent Court of  Appeal  judgment
    in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387, containing the statement that,

         "However, it cannot be said that the fact that a  case  involves  a
         'near miss' in relation to the requirements set out in the Rules is
         wholly irrelevant to the balancing exercise required under  Article
         8.  If an applicant can show that there are individual interests at
         stake covered by Article 8 which give rise to a strong  claim  that
         compelling circumstances may exist to  justify  the  grant  of  LTE
         outside the Rules, the fact that their case is also a  'near  miss'
         case may be a relevant consideration which tips the  balance  under
         Article 8 in their favour.  In such a case, the applicant would  be
         able to say that the detrimental impact on the public  interest  in
         issue if LTE is granted in their favour will be somewhat less  than
         in a case where the gap between the applicant's  position  and  the
         requirements of the Rules is great, and the risk that they may  end
         up having recourse to  public  funds  and  resources  is  therefore
         greater." (See paragraph 56).

17. It was, submitted Mr Ali, in this  respect  that  Article  8  could  be
    invoked in relation to the Appellant only  having  just  missed  coming
    under the  Immigration  Rules,  and  the  judge  was  correct  to  draw
    attention to this at paragraph 23 of the  determination.   Furthermore,
    on 13th March 2014, the Appellant was not pregnant when the application
    was made.  At the date of the refusal letter  on  15th  May  2014,  the
    Appellant was still not pregnant.  The second daughter was born only on
    22nd March 2015.  On this basis, the  principal  Appellant  would  have
    been pregnant round about June 2014 (and  not  in  May  2014  when  the
    refusal letter was issued).  After that date, the college was aware  of
    the Appellant's medical condition and her  inability  to  attend.   The
    Appellant could not be punished for falling pregnant.

18. There was no reply by Mr Walker.

No Error of Law

19. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  First,  it  is  plain  that  the
    function of this Tribunal is a supervisory function.  This Tribunal can
    only intervene if, as Brooke LJ stated in R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982,
    there was a "perversity" in the decision of the judge below.  As Brooke
    LJ stated this "represents a very high hurdle (see paragraph 11).   His
    Lordship also went on to explain that, "far too often practitioners use
    the word 'irrational' or 'perverse' when these epithets are  completely
    inappropriate (paragraph 12).

20. This is a case where, the  judge  has  had  regard  to  the  Rules  and
    concluded that the Appellant could not succeed under  the  Rules.   The
    judge is absolutely emphatic in this (see  paragraph  15).   The  judge
    then goes on to consider Article 8,  setting  out  the  case  law  (see
    paragraphs 18 to 21).  Regard is then had to the personal circumstances
    of the  Appellant  under  the  rubric  of  Section  117B  of  the  2014
    Immigration Act.  It is observed that a number of factors fall  in  the
    Appellant's favour (see paragraph 23).  At the same time, the judge has
    regard to the factors that weigh against the Appellant  (see  paragraph
    25).

21. It is against this background that the judge states that she has  "made
    a  careful  assessment  of  the  severity  and  consequences   of   the
    interference to the Appellant's family life which removal would cause "
    (paragraph 26).  All the matters set out in this paragraph are open  to
    the judge to give due regard to.  It is, of course, not the  case  that
    the burden is upon the Secretary of State to show that similar  courses
    would not be available to the Appellant in Pakistan.  The judge errs in
    this respect.

22. However, this is not a material error, in the light of  the  fact  that
    the judge has allowed the appeal really on the basis of the  inevitable
    "disruption to her life" for the first Appellant  (see  paragraph  26).
    The judge also allows the appeal on the basis that, "I accept  that  an
    English qualification may be regarded with more prestige in  Pakistan".
    And this can be taken as a  given  in  the  Indian  subcontinent  as  a
    general rule and the judge is not wrong  to  draw  attention  to  this.
    Another judge may well have taken a different view.

23. However, on the basis of the considerations that  the  judge  did  have
    proper regard to, it was open to the judge, evaluating the evidence  as
    she did, to come to the conclusion that she did.

Notice of Decision

24. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

25. No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    9th November 2015
