
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
IA/23008/2015

                                                   IA/23009/2015

                                                  IA/23010/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |         Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 15 February 2017                   |         On 16 May 2017               |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                 mr Ayodele Peter Joseph (first Respondent)
                miss Eniola Faith Joseph (second Respondent)
              miss Oluwafunmilola Joy Joseph (third Respondent)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Appellants

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Mardner, Counsel
For the Respondents:   Mr T Wilding, Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appealed with permission against the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hanley promulgated on 18 July 2016  in  which
    he allowed the appellants' appeals.  For the  reasons  set  out  in  my
    decision of 5 December 2016 which is annexed to this decision, I  found
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of  an
    error of law, and directed that it  was  to  be  remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal

 2. The appellants are all citizens of Nigeria.  The first appellant is the
    father of the second and third appellants, both  of  whom  are  minors.
    The older of the two was born in 2008.

 3. For the reasons given in my decision, I consider  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's finding that, on the particular (and unusual) facts of  this
    case, the best interests of the second appellant are  that  she  should
    remain in the United Kingdom.

 4. The issue is then whether, as the respondent contends, it is reasonable
    to expect her to leave the United Kingdom; and/or, whether, having  had
    regard to section 117B of the 2002 Act, removal of the appellants would
    be proportionate or not.

 5. The Immigration Rules provide at paragraph 276ADE:
    Requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave  to  remain  on  the
    grounds of private life


     276ADE (1).
     The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain  on  the
      grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of application,
      the applicant:

         (i)  does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in  Section
           S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.5. in Appendix
           FM; and

         (ii) has made a valid  application  for  leave  to  remain  on  the
           grounds of private life in the UK; and


     (iii)    has lived continuously  in  the  UK  for  at  least  20  years
           (discounting any period of imprisonment); or


     (iv)     is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
           UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of imprisonment)
           and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to  leave
           the UK; or


     (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent at least
           half of his life living continuously in the UK  discounting  any
           period of imprisonment); or


     (vi)     subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or  above,  has
           lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting
           any period of imprisonment) but there would be very  significant
           obstacles to the applicant's integration  into  the  country  to
           which he would have to go if required to leave the UK.

    276ADE (2)        Sub-paragraph (1)(vi) does not apply, and may not  be
                  relied upon, in circumstances in which it is  proposed  to
                  return a person to a third country pursuant to Schedule  3
                  to the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,
                  etc) Act 2004.

 6. In addition, close attention must be paid to Section 117A and B of  the
    2002 Act which provides as follows:-
    117A     Application of this Part

    (1)      This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a)      breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and


             (b)      as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.


    (2)  In considering the public interest question, the court or tribunal
         must (in particular) have regard-

         (a)      in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in  section
                  117B, and


         (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,  to
             the considerations listed in section 117C.


    (3)  In subsection  (2),  "the  public  interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).

    117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases


    (1)      The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

    (2)      It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a)      are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)      are better able to integrate into society.

    (3)      It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)      are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)      are better able to integrate into society.

    (4)           Little weight should be given to-

             (a)      a private life, or

             (b)      a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that
                      is established by a person at a time when the  person
                      is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

    (5)      Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

    (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)      the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom.


 7.  It  follows  from  Kaur  (children's  best  interests/public  interest
    interface) [2017] UKUT 14 that  the  assessment  of  the  child's  best
    interests must focus on the child, evaluating the reality of a  child's
    life situation and circumstances.  Factors such as parental information
    must not intrude at this stage (see EV (Philippines)).  Factors such as
    parental misconduct are to be taken into the equation at a later  stage
    of the overall proportionality balancing exercise as they are based  by
    the public interest in the maintenance of immigration control.  See  EV
    (Philippines) at 35 to 37

 8. The issues arising in EV (Philippines) were considered in MA (Pakistan)
    and Others at [46] to [49]:
     1. Even on the approach of the Secretary of State,  the  fact  that  a
        child has been here for  seven  years  must  be  given  significant
        weight when carrying out the proportionality exercise. Indeed,  the
        Secretary of State published guidance in August 2015 in the form of
        Immigration Directorate Instructions entitled "Family  Life  (as  a
        partner or parent) and Private Life: 10 Year Routes" in which it is
        expressly stated that once the seven years'  residence  requirement
        is satisfied, there need to be "strong reasons" for refusing  leave
        (para. 11.2.4). These instructions were not in force when the cases
        now subject to appeal were determined, but in my view  they  merely
        confirm what is implicit in adopting a policy of this nature. After
        such a period of time the  child  will  have  put  down  roots  and
        developed social, cultural and educational links  in  the  UK  such
        that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the child is  required
        to leave the UK. That may be less so when  the  children  are  very
        young because the focus of their lives will be on  their  families,
        but  the  disruption  becomes  more  serious  as  they  get  older.
        Moreover, in these cases there must be a  very  strong  expectation
        that the child's best interests will be to remain in  the  UK  with
        his parents as part of a family unit,  and  that  must  rank  as  a
        primary consideration in the proportionality assessment.

     2. Even if we were applying the narrow reasonableness test  where  the
        focus is on the child alone, it would not in my  view  follow  that
        leave must be granted whenever the child's best  interests  are  in
        favour of remaining. I reject Mr Gill's submission  that  the  best
        interests  assessment  automatically  resolves  the  reasonableness
        question. If Parliament had wanted the child's  best  interests  to
        dictate the outcome of the leave application, it  would  have  said
        so. The concept of "best interests" is after all a well established
        one. Even where the child's best interests  are  to  stay,  it  may
        still be not unreasonable to require the child to leave. That  will
        depend upon a careful analysis of the  nature  and  extent  of  the
        links in the UK and in the country where it is proposed  he  should
        return. What could not be considered, however, would be the conduct
        and immigration history of the parents.

     3. In EV (Philippines) Lord Justice Christopher Clarke explained how a
        tribunal should apply the proportionality test where  wider  public
        interest considerations are in play,  in  circumstances  where  the
        best interests of the child dictate that he should remain in the UK
        (paras. 34-37):
            "34.    In determining whether or not, in a  case  such  as  the
                  present, the need for immigration  control  outweighs  the
                  best  interests  of  the  children,  it  is  necessary  to
                  determine the relative strength of the factors which  make
                  it in their best interests to remain  here;  and  also  to
                  take account of any factors that point the other way.
            35.   A decision as  to  what  is  in  the  best  interests  of
                  children will depend on a number of factors  such  as  (a)
                  their age; (b) the length of  time  that  they  have  been
                  here; (c) how long they have been in education;  (c)  what
                  stage their education has reached; (d) to what extent they
                  have become distanced from the  country  to  which  it  is
                  proposed  that  they  return;  (e)  how  renewable   their
                  connection with it may be; (f) to what  extent  they  will
                  have linguistic, medical or other difficulties in adapting
                  to life in that country; and (g) the extent to  which  the
                  course proposed will interfere with their family  life  or
                  their rights (if they have any) as British citizens.
            36.    In a sense the tribunal is concerned with  how  emphatic
                  an answer falls to be given to the question: is it in  the
                  best interests of the child  to  remain?  The  longer  the
                  child has been here, the more advanced (or  critical)  the
                  stage of his education,  the  looser  his  ties  with  the
                  country  in  question,  and  the  more   deleterious   the
                  consequences of his return, the greater  the  weight  that
                  falls into one side of the scales. If it is overwhelmingly
                  in the child's best interests that he should  not  return,
                  the need to maintain immigration control may well not  tip
                  the balance. By contrast if it  is  in  the  child's  best
                  interests to  remain,  but  only  on  balance  (with  some
                  factors pointing the other way), the  result  may  be  the
                  opposite.
            37.    In the balance on the other side there falls to be taken
                  into account the strong weight to be given to the need  to
                  maintain immigration control in pursuit  of  the  economic
                  well-being of the country and the fact that, ex hypothesi,
                  the  applicants  have  no  entitlement  to   remain.   The
                  immigration history of the parents may  also  be  relevant
                  e.g. if they are overstayers, or have acted deceitfully."

     4. Although this was not in fact a  seven  year  case,  on  the  wider
        construction of section 117B(6), the same principles would apply in
        such a case. However, the fact that the child has been  in  the  UK
        for seven years would need to be given significant  weight  in  the
        proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first, because of
        its relevance to determining the nature and strength of the child's
        best interests; and second, because it establishes  as  a  starting
        point that leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful
        reasons to the contrary.

 9. With regards to the children's situation I note what  was  held  in  MA
    (Pakistan) at [103], per Elias LJ:

         In my judgment, the observation of the judge  to  the  effect  that
         people who come on a temporary  basis  can  be  expected  to  leave
         cannot be true of the child. The purpose underlying the seven  year
         rule is that this kind of reasoning ought  not  to  be  adopted  in
         their case. They are not to be  blamed  for  the  fact  that  their
         parents overstayed illegally, and the starting point is that  their
         status should be legitimized unless there is good reason not to  do
         so. I accept that the position might have  been  otherwise  without
         the seven years' residence, but that is a factor which  must  weigh
         heavily in this case. The fact that the parents are overstayers and
         have no right to remain  in  their  own  right  can  thereafter  be
         weighed in the proportionality balance against allowing  the  child
         to remain, but that is after a recognition that the  child's  seven
         years of residence is a significant factor pointing the other  way.



10. As Mr Wilding submitted, this is a case in which  the  third  appellant
    cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The  extent  to
    which the first appellant can do is,  even  on  the  appellants'  case,
    dependant on the position of  the  second  appellant.  Further,  as  Mr
    Wilding submitted, in this case there would be  no  separation  of  the
    current family unit.  He submitted also that in this  case  there  were
    significant countervailing factors, given that none of  the  appellants
    had ever had leave to remain, and the first appellant had overstayed as
    an adult.

11. I bear in mind also the submission that section 117B (5) applies to the
    children as well as the first appellant, following Miah  (section  117B
    NIAA 2002 - children) [2016] UKUT 131 (IAC).

12. In assessing the public interest, I consider  that  significant  weight
    attaches thereto in this case, given  the  strong  public  interest  in
    maintaining immigration control. That is particularly so in the case of
    the first appellant who has deliberately remained in the United Kingdom
    without leave.  While I accept that he and the children  speak  English
    that neither diminishes the public interest in their removal, nor  acts
    as a factor in their favour.  There is no proper indication  that  they
    are financially independent, and again that increases the weight to  be
    attached to the public interest in removal.

13. With regard to the appellant's respective private lives, the  issue  is
    more complex. I readily accept that little weight can  be  attached  to
    the first appellant's private life, given that has been developed while
    he had had no basis to remain here.

14. The position of the second and third  appellants  is  different.  While
    they have not had leave to remain, they have been under the control  of
    their parents, latterly only their father. They could not at their  age
    be held to be responsible for their overstaying.  As is noted in Kaur,

         The "little weight" provisions in Part 5A of the 2002  Act  do  not
         entail an absolute, rigid measurement or concept;  "little  weight"
         involves a spectrum which, within  its  self-contained  boundaries,
         will result in the measurement of the quantum of weight  considered
         appropriate in the fact sensitive context of every case.

15. In addition, at 28 and 29, the Upper Tribunal held
    28.   The Court then turned its attentions to the " little weight"
    provisions in section 117B. Sales LJ categorised these " normative
    statements" which are " less definitive" than those found in other
    provisions and continued at [53]:
         " Although a Court or Tribunal should have regard to the
         consideration that little weight should be given to private life
         established in such circumstances, it is possible without violence
         to the language to say that such generalised normative guidance may
         be overridden in an exceptional case by particularly strong
         features of the private life in question, where it is not
         appropriate in Article 8 terms to attach only little weight to
         private life. That is to say for a case falling within section
         117B(5) little weight should be given to private life established
         in the circumstances specified, but that approach may be overridden
         where the private life in question has a special and compelling
         character. Such an interpretation is also necessary to prevent
         section 117B(5) being applied in a manner which would produce
         results in some cases which would be incompatible with Article 8,
         ie is necessary to give proper effect to Parliament's intention in
         Part 5A; and a similar interpretation of section 117B(4) is
         required, for the same reasons."
    It is necessary also to consider the following passage, in [54]:
         " In my view, reading section 117A(2) and section 117B(5) together
         in this way, as is appropriate, means that considerable weight
         should be given to Parliament's statement in section 117B(5)
         regarding the approach which should normally be adopted."
    The critical word, I venture to suggest, is " normally". The passage
continues:
         " In order to identify an exceptional case in which a departure
         from that approach would be justified, compelling reasons would
         have to be shown why it was not appropriate."
    Finally, Sales LJ, pointedly, distinguished the test of " compelling
    circumstances" from that of " very compelling circumstances",
    applicable in relation to foreign criminals.
    29.          The effect of the analysis which I have developed in [25]
    above, considered in tandem with the decision in Rhuppiah, is that,
    through the medium of permissible judicial statutory construction,
    there is some flexibility in the " little weight" legislative
    instructions contained in section 117B (4) and (5) of the 2002 Act.
    Tribunals must be alert to this in their conduct of proportionality
    balancing exercises, in particular in considering whether the factors
    on the public interest side of the scales outweigh those on the other
    side, especially where the tribunal's assessment of a child's best
    interests points to a course other than the removal or deportation of
    the person or persons concerned.

16. In addition, regard must be had to Akinyemi v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ  236
    at [50]

   5.  There was some discussion before us about whether,  even  if  section
      117B (4) did not apply, section 117B (5) did - in other words, whether
      the  Appellant's  immigration  status  was  at  all   material   times
      "precarious". My answer to that question  follows  from  what  I  have
      already said about sub-section (4). A person's immigration  status  is
      precarious when they understand, or should in any event  be  taken  to
      have understood, "that  their  time  in  the  host  country  would  be
      comparatively short or would be liable to termination": see   Rhuppiah
      v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  803,
      [2016] 1 WLR 4203, per Sales LJ at para. 34 (p. 4213  C-D).  That  was
      plainly not the Appellant's position, at least up to 2006, though  not
      necessarily even after then.

17. The issue of "precariousness" was addressed also in Agyarko &  Ikuga  v
    SSHD [2017] UKSC 11 at [49] - [53].  Of particular  note  is  what  was
    held at [53]:

    53.  Finally,  in  relation  to  this  matter,  the  reference  in  the
    instruction to "full knowledge that their  stay  here  is  unlawful  or
    precarious" is also consistent with the case law of the European court,
    which refers to the persons concerned being aware that the  persistence
    of family life in the host state would be precarious  from  the  outset
    (as  in  Jeunesse,  para  108).  One   can,   for   example,   envisage
    circumstances  in  which   people   might   be   under   a   reasonable
    misapprehension as to their ability to maintain a family  life  in  the
    UK,  and  in  which  a  less  stringent  approach  might  therefore  be
    appropriate.

18. There is, I consider, no reason why these principles should  not  apply
    to private life. What is notable is that there has to be some knowledge
    or understanding of the individual's position  for  the  status  to  be
    precarious. It is difficult to see that could  apply  in  the  case  of
    children who, as here, are under 10 years of age.

19. Applying these principles to the second  and  third  appellants,  given
    their ages and the fact that they are under 10  years  old,  I  am  not
    satisfied that their private life  has  been  established  while  their
    status was precarious. That, however, cannot be said in the case of the
    first appellant

20. On the facts of this case, I find that section 117B (6) applies in  the
    case of the second appellant. It does not yet apply in the case of  the
    third appellant, although that will be so in a matter of  days.   I  am
    satisfied therefore that there is a strong indicator  that  the  second
    appellant should, given the assessment of her interests,  be  permitted
    to stay.  There is, therefore, I find that significant weight is to  be
    attached to the interests of the second appellant.

21. I bear in mind that the second and third appellants are separated  from
    their mother. There would be significant disruption in their lives.   I
    accept also that there is a significant public  interest  both  in  the
    maintenance of Immigration Control,  and  in  removing  overstayers.  I
    find, however, that although that public  interest  weighs  heavily  in
    favour of the respondent, I am satisfied that on the  particular  facts
    of this case, and bearing in mind the  best  interests  of  the  second
    appellant in particular, that the interests of the appellants  outweigh
    the  public  interest  and   that   thus   their   removal   would   be
    disproportionate.  I am satisfied also that, in all the  circumstances,
    the second appellant's removal would be unreasonable.

22. I therefore allow the appeals on human rights grounds in respect of the
    all three appellants, and under the Immigration Rules in respect of the
    second appellant alone.



 SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the  second  appellant's  appeal  by  allowing  it  under  the
    Immigration Rules

 3. I remake the decision by allowing the appeals on human  rights  grounds
    in respect of all three appellants.


Signed                                  Date:   11 May 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul





































                        ANNEX - error of law decision


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Numbers: IA/23008/2015

                                                            IA/23009/2015

                                                            IA/23010/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 December 2016                            |                              |
|Extempore                                     |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 mr Ayodele Peter Joseph (first Respondent)
                miss Eniola Faith Joseph (second Respondent)
              miss Oluwafunmilola Joy Joseph (third Respondent)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms S Mardner, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hanley promulgated on 18 July 2016  in  which
    he allowed the appeals of Mr Ayodele Peter Joseph, Eniola Faith  Joseph
    his daughter and the other child Oluwafunmilola Joy Joseph.

 2. The appellants before the First-tier Tribunal to whom I  refer  as  the
    claimants are all citizens of Nigeria.  Materially the two younger ones
    are minors, the older child being born on 25 January 2008.

 3. The immigration decision in this case was made  on  9  June  2015,  the
    application being to refuse them leave to remain in the United Kingdom,
    it being considered that none of the claimants met the requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules.  Given firstly it  was  not  accepted  that  the
    first applicant  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  as  it  was  not  accepted  that  there  were  very
    significant obstacles to his integration into Nigeria.  Second  it  was
    considered that although the second claimant had  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for more than seven years it was not considered unreasonable to
    expect her to leave the United Kingdom with her father  and  presumably
    her younger sister as part of the family unit and thus she did not meet
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE (4).  The third claimant  did  not
    meet the requirements of the Rules  given  her  age  at  the  time  and
    therefore did not fall for consideration under the Rules.

 4. The respondent was unrepresented at the hearing before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The judge heard oral evidence and had before him a number of
    documents relating to the children in particular and their progress  at
    school.  There was it appears some significant inconsistencies  in  the
    evidence as to the exact relationship between the  first  claimant  and
    the mother of the two children, it being unclear whether there  was  in
    fact any contact with them.

 5. The judge found materially that it would not be  reasonable  to  expect
    the second claimant to leave the United Kingdom and that she  therefore
    met the requirements of the Immigration Rules, paragraph  276ADE.   The
    judge also found that it would not be reasonable to  separately  remove
    the children without their father even though it was not  clear  as  to
    what the mother's status was, although it was clear  that  she  was  an
    unlawful but that she appeared still to be in the  United  Kingdom  and
    that the third claimant could not succeed under the Rules  because  she
    was under 7 at the date of the application, that the first claimant did
    meet the requirement of paragraph 276ADE as he found that  there  would
    be very significant obstacles  to  integration  into  Nigerian  society
    because it would be reasonable for the second claimant to  be  returned
    there and because any separate return of the father involving a  family
    separation would in  itself  constitute  a  significant  obstacle  into
    integration into Nigerian society.

 6. Having found that the claimants met the requirements of the Immigration
    Rules the judge then went on to consider Article 8 outside  the  Rules,
    considering having  directed  himself  in  line  with  Razgar  and  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in Treebhawon that on the facts of  this
    case that it would be disproportionate to remove the claimants from the
    United Kingdom notwithstanding the father's poor  immigration  history.



 7. The grounds of appeal  put  forward  by  the  Secretary  of  State  are
    condensed in fact to  what Mr Jarvis submits is a narrow  point,  which
    is that the judge failed in the light of the decision  in  MA  Pakistan
    [2016] EWCA Civ  705 to assess the issue of reasonableness both  within
    the Immigration Rules and outside the Immigration Rules  to  take  into
    account factors over and above the best interests of the children.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on
    8 November 2016.

 9. Before me Mr Jarvis focused primarily on the decision in MA  submitting
    that this was directly relevant albeit that it  is  in  this  case  the
    situation a child has been here for seven years although that  was  not
    the case in MA, it does however appear to  have  been  the  case  in  a
    subsequent decision of the Court of Appeal in Rhuppiah.  In essence the
    submission is that the judge  did  not  make  any  reference  to  other
    factors, nor was there any indication as to what weight was attached to
    factors other than the situation of the children.

10. For the claimants Ms Mardner submitted that although the judge may  not
    have expressly referred to any other factors,  this  was  not  material
    given that when  viewing  the  determination  as  a  whole  there  were
    sufficient findings with regard to  the  strength  of  the  factors  in
    favour of the claimants  that  any  error  was  not  capable  of  being
    material.

11. I consider that in this case the judge did properly address the  family
    situation as a whole following the decision in PD.  It does not however
    appear that he took into account what was said in MA  although  he  can
    hardly be blamed for that, given that  MA  appears  not  to  have  been
    reported before his decision was signed.

12. There are a number of passages in the decision in MA which  bear  close
    analysis, specifically paragraphs 45 and in this case 47 and  also  49.
    49 is of particular relevance because of what is said about the  weight
    to  be  given  to  the  interests  of  children  where  the  seven-year
    qualification is met.

13. The Court of Appeal held that the fact that the child has been  in  the
    United Kingdom for seven years  would  need  to  be  given  significant
    weight in the proportionality exercise for two related reasons.   First
    because of its relevance to determining the nature and strength of  the
    child's best  interests  and  second  because  it  establishes  as  the
    starting point that leave should be granted unless there  are  powerful
    interests to the contrary.

14. I consider that it is evident from this and also the  decision  in  the
    Court of Appeal that whilst the child's best interests are in the  case
    where a child has established  seven  years'  residence  a  significant
    starting point and significant weight must be attached to that; it does
    not however mean that there are no  other  factors  to  be  taken  into
    account.

15. I consider that in this case there is insufficient  indication  in  the
    decision of the judge that he  turned  his  mind  specifically  to  any
    countervailing factors to be weighed against the best interests of  the
    children or rather specifically the second claimant who is a qualifying
    child.  There are however some indicaitons of countervailng factors  on
    the facts of  this  case.  The  judge  did  comment  adversely  on  the
    immigration history of  the  father.   He  also  appears  not  to  have
    considered some of the evidence of the father reliable, specifically at
    [38].

16. Whilst there is  some  more  detail  given  on  other  factors  in  the
    consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules, there does not appear  to
    have been any detailed consideration of the public interest and  whilst
    all the circumstances are said to be weighed in the round at  [60]  and
    that account is taken of the poor immigration history  of  the  father,
    nothing is said of the other factors which would need to be taken  into
    account with respect to paragraph 117B, specifically sub-paragraphs  1,
    2 and 3.  There is no indication that in  reaching  the  conclusion  at
    paragraph [60] that the judge addressed those factors nor is  there  an
    indication of what weight he attached thereto.

17. Taking these factors into account I am satisfied that in this case  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of an  error
    of law, as in assessing the question of reasonableness within the terms
    of the Immigration Rules and also looking  at  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules,  the  judge  does  not  appear  to  have  given  any
    consideration to weight to be attached  to  countervailing  factors  or
    properly to have had to identify the countervailing  factors  which  it
    was incumbent upon him to reflect and to take into account in analysing
    the decisions and for those reasons I set the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal aside for it to be remade in the Upper Tribunal

18. Given that more than six months have passed since the  First-tier  gave
    its decision it is appropriate to hear further evidence  regarding  the
    children in particular. I therefore make the following directions: -

    DIRECTIONS

 1. Any new material on which the appellant or respondent  wishes  to  rely
    must be served at least 14 days before the next hearing.

 2. The appellant must provide a skeleton argument to be served at least  5
    working days before the next hearing.


Signed                                  Date:  23 December 2016
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


