
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Numbers:
IA/23162/2015

                                                    IA/23163/2015

                                                    IA/23164/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                  |            Decision & Reasons       |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 4 July 2017                        |            On 4 July 2017           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     MS
                                     MP
                                     BS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hawkin (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellants.

 1. I have made an anonymity order because  this  decision  refers  to  the
    circumstances of a minor child, the  third  appellant.  The  first  and
    second appellants are the father and mother of the third appellant,  N.
    N was born in 2005 and is now 12.  She came to the UK in 2005 when  she
    was a young baby.  The appellants are all citizens of Mauritius.


 2. The appellants have appealed  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dated 6 July 2016 in which it dismissed an appeal against  the
    decision of the respondent dated 5 June 2015 refusing leave on  Article
    8 grounds. The First-tier Tribunal  was  satisfied  that  it  would  be
    reasonable for N to leave the UK with her  parents  and  dismissed  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules and Article 8.

 3. In grounds of appeal the appellants challenged the failure to grant  an
    adjournment and the alleged failure to  consider  N's  best  interests.
    Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal  and  Upper
    Tribunal.  This was challenged in  the  High  Court,  and  following  a
    decision from Collins J, the decision refusing permission  was  quashed
    on 12 April 2017. Permission to appeal was then granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in a decision dated 9 May 2017.

Hearing

 4. Mr McVeety submitted that the First-tier Tribunal may not have used the
    correct terminology but was clearly aware of N's  length  of  residence
    and the assessment of reasonableness was made in  light  of  this.   Mr
    Hawkin submitted that the First-tier Tribunal failed to  direct  itself
    that significant weight must be attached to N's residence of over seven
    years and the respondent's policy to the  effect  that  strong  reasons
    will be required to refuse such a case.   Mr Hawkin did not pursue  the
    challenge  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision   to   refuse   an
    adjournment.  He was correct  to  do  so.   Collins  J  considered  the
    challenge to be unarguable.


 5. After hearing  from  both  representatives,  I  indicated  that  I  was
    satisfied that the decision contains an error of law, for the reasons I
    set out in more detail below.  Both parties agreed that I should remake
    the decision myself.  It was also not in dispute that N is a qualifying
    child, but that in remaking the decision I am restricted to considering
    human rights and not the immigration rules.  Mr McVeety invited  me  to
    dismiss the appeal when  all  the  circumstances  are  considered.   Mr
    Hawkin submitted the opposite and  referred  me  to  all  the  relevant
    factors  supporting  his  submission  that  to  remove   N   would   be
    unreasonable.


 6. At the end of the hearing I indicated that  I  would  be  allowing  the
    appeal for reasons which I now provide.





Error of law discussion

Approach to length of residence

 7. The correct approach to the reasonableness test in 276ADE  and  section
    117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  has  been
    considered in MA (Pakistan) V SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705 (7  July  2016).
    The Court of Appeal found that the significance of section  117B(6)  is
    that where the child has been in the UK for  seven  years,  this  is  a
    factor of some weight leaning  in  favour  of  leave  to  remain  being
    granted [45].  Elias LJ said this:


           "46.  Even on the approach of the Secretary of State,  the  fact
           that a child has  been  here  for  seven  years  must  be  given
           significant  weight  when  carrying  out   the   proportionality
           exercise. Indeed, the Secretary of State published  guidance  in
           August 2015 in the form of Immigration Directorate  Instructions
           entitled "Family Life (as a partner or parent) and Private Life:
           10 Year Routes" in which it is expressly stated  that  once  the
           seven years' residence requirement is satisfied, there  need  to
           be "strong reasons" for refusing  leave  (para.  11.2.4).  These
           instructions were not in force when the  cases  now  subject  to
           appeal were determined, but in my view they merely confirm  what
           is implicit in adopting a policy of this nature.  After  such  a
           period of time the child will have put down roots and  developed
           social, cultural and educational links in the UK such that it is
           likely to be highly disruptive if the child is required to leave
           the UK. That may be less so when the  children  are  very  young
           because the focus of their lives will be on their families,  but
           the disruption becomes more serious as they get older. Moreover,
           in these cases there must be a very strong expectation that  the
           child's best interests will be to remain  in  the  UK  with  his
           parents as part of a family  unit,  and  that  must  rank  as  a
           primary consideration in the proportionality assessment.
           ...
           49...However, the fact that the child has been  in  the  UK  for
           seven years would need to be given  significant  weight  in  the
           proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first, because
           of its relevance to determining the nature and strength  of  the
           child's best interests; and second, because it establishes as  a
           starting point that leave should be  granted  unless  there  are
           powerful reasons to the contrary."


 8. When the First-tier Tribunal decision is read as a whole, there  is  no
    clear indication that it attached significant weight to the N's  length
    of residence when considering the reasonableness test or  carrying  out
    the proportionality exercise.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  was  clearly
    mindful of N's length of residence and  that  lengthy  residence  is  a
    relevant factor but that is different to attaching  significant  weight
    to it.  The First-tier Tribunal also failed to take  into  account  the
    full ambit of the  relevant  respondent's  policy  in  the  Immigration
    Directorate instructions ('IDI') and failed to  acknowledge  that  this
    provides that once the seven years' residence requirement is satisfied,
    there need to be "strong reasons" for refusing leave.  In adopting  the
    approach it did, the First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the  decision
    needs to be remade.
Remaking the decision

Approach to evidence

 9. Both representatives agreed that I should consider all the evidence for
    myself in making the relevant Article 8 assessment.  In any event  very
    little evidence was disputed by the respondent.

Best interests


10. I conclude that the best interests of N, viewed  through  the  lens  of
    Article 8 private life, would be overwhelmingly served by remaining  in
    the UK. There are six dominant factors:


              i) She has spent nearly 12 years residence in the UK.
             ii) She came to the UK as a baby and has spent some of her most
                 formative years (4 to 12) and almost the  entirety  of  her
                 life in the UK.
            iii) N's ties to Mauritius are limited although I accept she has
                 links through her parents, ethnicity and regular  telephone
                 contact with both sets of grandparents, and probably has  a
                 clear understanding of Mauritian culture.  However, she was
                 just a young baby when she  left  and  I  accept  she  sees
                 himself as thoroughly British with  an  identity  based  on
                 British multi-cultural society.
             iv) Her  integration  into  UK  society  can  be  described  as
                 complete.
              v) N will find it very difficult to  return  to  Mauritius  at
                 this particular stage of her education and childhood.   She
                 has  begun  secondary  school  in  September  2016   at   [
                              School].  She  will  have  undergone  rigorous
                 preparation and testing in order  to  do  so.   Indeed,  Mr
                 McVeety acknowledged this to be the case.   She  does  very
                 well at school and to remove her from the school  that  she
                 has been working toward for many years after just one  year
                 will be difficult for her to accept and understand.    Even
                 if there is a suitable school for N in Mauritius (and there
                 is every reason to believe that one can be found given  the
                 Mauritian education system and the fact that  with  time  N
                 can overcome any initial language barriers), there  remains
                 the real concern that N will be very anxious about  leaving
                 her new school.  It is noteworthy that when this matter was
                 before the First-tier  Tribunal,  N  had  not  yet  started
                 secondary school - see [47].
             vi) N was diagnosed with vitiligo when she was 5 and  has  been
                 under specialist care in the UK.  She  needs  to  wear  sun
                 protection all year round and will probably  have  to  wear
                 long  sleeve  clothing  and  be  much  more   vigilant   in
                 Mauritius, given its climate.  There is no indication  that
                 if the appropriate preventative measures are taken that N's
                 vitiligo  will  deteriorate  in  Mauritius.   However,  N's
                 vitiligo is likely to increase the prospect that  she  will
                 "stand out" and not "fit in", and increase her anxiety  and
                 distress about leaving the UK.

Proportionality

11. I am mindful that the best interests assessment is not determinative of
    the question posed section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, namely  whether  it
    would be reasonable to expect N to leave the UK.  As Elias LJ noted  in
    MA (Pakistan) at  [47] even where the child's  best  interests  are  to
    stay, it may still be not unreasonable to require the child  to  leave.
    That will depend upon a careful analysis of the nature  and  extent  of
    the links in the UK and Mauritius, as well as any other relevant  wider
    considerations - see [45] of MA (Pakistan), EV (Philippines) v SSHD  at
    [34-37] and PD and Others (Article 8 -  conjoined  family  claims)  Sri
    Lanka [2016] UKUT 108 (IAC).

12. This question cannot  be  answered  without  considering  the  parents'
    appeals, to which I now turn.  Their Article 8  claims  cannot  succeed
    under the Rules. They do not come close to doing so. They  can  succeed
    only outside the Rules.  The dismissal of the  parents'  appeals  would
    interfere with their right to respect for their  private  lives.  Since
    the impugned decisions are in  accordance  with  the  law  and  are  in
    furtherance of a legitimate aim, namely the maintenance of  immigration
    control, the  next  question  to  be  addressed  is  whether  they  are
    proportionate.  It  is  important  to   acknowledge   that   they   are
    longstanding unlawful overstayers since 2007.  Although  they  are  law
    abiding, they have spent most  of  their  lives  in  their  country  of
    origin, Mauritius and significant weight  must  be  attached  to  their
    flagrant breach of immigration controls in the UK.


13. Proportionality is the "public interest question" within the meaning of
    Part 5A of the 2002 Act. By section 117A(2) I am obliged to have regard
    to the considerations listed in section 117B.  I consider that  section
    117B applies to these appeals in the following way:


    (a) The public interest in the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    controls is engaged.  Whilst the first appellant initially  arrived  in
    the UK in 2005 as a work permit holder and the  other  appellants  were
    his dependents, their leave  expired  in  June  2007  and  they  became
    overstayers.  The first  applicant  has  explained  that  he  continued
    working to  2012  because  he  was  led  to  believe  that  he  had  an
    application to extend his leave pending.  In any event it became  clear
    in 2012 that there was no  pending  application  and  they  has  become
    overstayers, and as such an application outside the Rules was submitted
    in November 2012 and refused in June 2013.  A further  application  was
    made in 2015 at a time when the first and second appellants  knew  that
    they had become unlawful overstayers.


    (b) There is no infringement of the "English speaking" public  interest
    as all the appellants speak English.


    (c) The economic interest must be engaged because N has been, and  will
    continue to be, educated at public expense and if the appellants remain
    in the UK they will have the capacity to access other  publicly  funded
    services and benefits.  The first appellant is a  qualified  accountant
    and the second appellant is a nurse.   They  both  have  experience  of
    employment in Mauritius and in the UK.  The first appellant has  worked
    in the UK as an accountant from 2005 to 2012 and the  second  appellant
    has worked as a care worker.


    (d) The private lives established by the parents during the entirety of
    their time in the UK qualifies for the  attribution  of  little  weight
    only.

14. This brings me back to section 117B(6), which provides:


           "In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
           public interest does not require the person's removal where -
           (a)  the  person  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
           relationship with a qualifying child; and
           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
           United Kingdom."


15. It is not disputed that N is a "qualifying  child"  by  virtue  of  her
    length of residence in the UK and she  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationships with the first and  second  appellants.   In  my
    consideration of N's best interests above I  have  already  highlighted
    the salient facts and factors.  I must balance these with  the  outcome
    of the forecast, which must necessarily be  undertaken,  based  on  the
    premise of the entire family returning to Mauritius - see  PD  (supra).
    On the one hand, this would  be  hugely  disruptive  for  N  and  would
    decimate the friendships, relationships and activities  that  form  the
    core of her private life. It would also obstruct her education,  though
    I accept not irredeemably so. Importantly it would involve her transfer
    to a society  whose  culture,  values,  norms  and  language  are  less
    familiar to her. Emotionally, it would  undoubtedly  be  stressful  and
    damaging. In addition, she would have to cope with the greater physical
    challenges she will face in Mauritius as a result of her vitiligo, than
    she has become accustomed to dealing with in the UK.  Furthermore, this
    fundamental transformation of her life and lifestyle would occur at  an
    age and stage of critical importance to her development.


16. On the other hand, taking into account N's age and  the  support  of  a
    stable family unit, she would, foreseeably, adapt over time.  Both  her
    parents were born and raised in Mauritius  and  maintain  close  family
    links there.  They both have a good  employment  record  and  with  the
    assistance  of  family  support  should  be  able  to  re-settle   into
    Mauritius.   There  is  no  suggestion  that  N's   health   would   be
    detrimentally affected, albeit it may present more challenges.


17. The test to be applied is that of reasonableness.  The  application  of
    the reasonableness test involves a balance of all  material  facts  and
    considerations - see MA (Pakistan) (supra).  The  application  of  this
    test will invariably be intensely fact sensitive,  see  EB  (Kosovo)  v
    SSHD [2008] UKHL 41, at  [7]  -  [12],  per  Lord  Bingham.   I  attach
    significant weight to N's length  of  residence  in  the  UK  (some  12
    years).  Other factors of particular strength are: her time in  the  UK
    spanned nearly the entirety of her life;  her  deep  immersion  in  all
    aspects of life in this country; the critical stage of her personal and
    educational development which has been reached; and the likelihood that
    she will make a useful contribution to UK society.


18. Furthermore, I must weigh N's best interests which have the status of a
    primary consideration. The main countervailing factor is that the first
    and second appellants have no legal right to remain in  the  UK.   They
    have become unlawful  overstayers.  This  is  a  factor  of  undeniable
    weight. However, it has been frequently  stated  that  a  child's  best
    interests should not be compromised on account of the misdemeanours  of
    its parents - see Baroness Hale in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC  4,
    at [20]-[21] and [35], and MA (Pakistan) at [52 and 53] and  per  Elias
    LJ at [102]:

           "In my judgment, the observation of the judge to the effect that
           people who come on a temporary basis can be  expected  to  leave
           cannot be true of the child. The purpose  underlying  the  seven
           year rule is that this kind of reasoning ought not to be adopted
           in their case. They are not to be blamed for the fact that their
           parents overstayed illegally, and the  starting  point  is  that
           their status should be legitimised unless there is  good  reason
           not to do so.  I  accept  that  the  position  might  have  been
           otherwise without the seven years'  residence,  but  that  is  a
           factor which must weigh heavily in this case. The fact that  the
           parents are overstayers and have no right to remain in their own
           right can thereafter be weighed in the  proportionality  balance
           against allowing the child  to  remain,  but  that  is  after  a
           recognition that the child's  seven  years  of  residence  is  a
           significant factor pointing the other way.

19. I consider that there are strong factors supporting the conclusion that
    it would not be reasonable to expect N to leave the UK.  There  are  no
    strong reasons that bear upon her  personally  pointing  in  the  other
    direction.  I have taken into account the fact  that  her  parents  are
    overstayers and have weighed that in the proportionality balance but in
    my judgment this does not outweigh  the  preponderance  of  factors  in
    support of N remaining in the UK, as outlined above.  Accordingly,  her
    appeal succeeds under Article 8.



Parents

20. Having thus concluded, the effect of section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act is
    that the public interest does not require the removal of either parent.
     The effect of dismissing the two parents' appeals would be to stultify
    the decision that N qualifies for leave - see PD (supra).  In short, it
    would  be  unreasonable  and  disproportionate  (notwithstanding  their
    immigration  history)  to  remove  the  parents  because   this   would
    inevitably mean that N would have to leave with them.   The  first  and
    second appellants' appeals therefore succeed under Article 8.

Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.


22. I remake the decision by allowing the appeals of all the appellants  on
    Article 8 of the ECHR grounds.


Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 4 July 2017
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
