
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23057/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 11th April 2014                            |On 11th April 2014           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                         MANOJ KUMAR VISHRAM RATHOD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: No appearance.
For the Respondent: Mr Smart - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




     1. This is  an  appeal  against  a  determination  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge NMK Lawrence promulgated on the 10th  January  2014,
        following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 3rd January 2014,  in  which
        he dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  under  both  the  Immigration
        Rules and on human rights grounds.









Background


     2. The Appellant is a national of Kenya born on 16th  June  1972.   On
        21st October 2012 he was granted leave to enter the United  Kingdom
        as a visitor with leave valid until 21st April 2013.  On 5th  March
        2013 he applied for leave to remain outside the  Immigration  Rules
        claiming he needed to remain in the  UK  to  care  for  his  infirm
        mother. That application was refused by the Secretary of  State  on
        the basis that appropriate care for his mother, a British  citizen,
        is available on the NHS.


     3. There are some non-material errors of law in the determination such
        as (i) the statement in paragraph 5 that the  Appellant  bears  the
        legal burden of proof "from start to finish" whereas  if  the  case
        involved an assessment of proportionality under Article 8  (2)  the
        burden passes to the  Respondent,  (ii)  in  paragraph  10  of  the
        determination the Judge states he has been provided with  a  letter
        from the GP which asserts that the Appellant  came  to  the  United
        Kingdom to care for his mother. Having read the letter from the  GP
        no such statement is made. The GP states is "I note  that  her  son
        has come over from abroad who is taking  care  of  her  and  has  a
        visitor's visa to 1 April 2013", and  (iii)  in  paragraph  11  the
        Judge states "I have considered the material put before  me.  I  am
        satisfied that the appellant has demonstrated that he meets any  of
        the Immigration Rules".  This statement lacks  clarity  but  it  is
        clearly a typographical error or lack of  attention  to  detail  in
        proof reading the determination  for  in  paragraph  14  the  Judge
        states that the appeal under the Immigration Rules is dismissed.


     4. Notwithstanding this being the  Appellant's  appeal  he  failed  to
        attend the hearing, despite valid service of the notice of hearing.
         The Tribunal have received further correspondence  from  Community
        Logg Sewa,  a  group  providing  assistance  to  the  Appellant  in
        relation  to  the  determination.  The  group  have  also  provided
        evidence of developments since the date of the hearing but that  is
        not relevant to the question  of  whether  Judge  Lawrence  made  a
        material error of law  based  upon  information  he  was  asked  to
        consider.



Discussion



     5. The Appellant enter the United Kingdom as  a  visitor  which  is  a
        temporary status after which he is expected  to  leave.  He  states
        that was his intention and that his mother's  deteriorating  health
        was an event that occurred after he arrived.  I have seen a copy of
        the visa application in which he states that he is married and that
        the purpose of the visit is to visit his sick mother.   If  he  was
        claiming to be married in the visa application this appears  to  be
        an incorrect statement in light of the Decree Absolute  of  divorce
        that has been provided by his lawyers in  Kenya  dated  18th  March
        2011.  If he was claiming that he was coming to the United  Kingdom
        to visit his sick mother his claim that her  condition  only  arose
        after he entered the United Kingdom is  not  correct  although  his
        statement that her condition deteriorated may be.


     6.  The  Judge  found  the  Appellant  could  not  succeed  under  the
        Immigration Rules and indeed  the  application  was  for  leave  to
        remain outside the Rules. The Judge considered a number of  letters
        from the community group providing assistance and medical  evidence
        confirming that the Appellant's mother is  elderly  and  frail  and
        suffers from a number of conditions  for  which  she  is  receiving
        treatment.


     7.  The  finding  the  Appellant  was  unable  to  succeed  under  the
        Immigration Rules has not been shown to  be  susceptible  to  legal
        challenge.  In relation to the human rights element of  the  claim,
        it was necessary for the Judge to consider this in accordance  with
        the approach set out by the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria)  [2013]
        EWCA Civ 1192, the High Court in Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin)  and
        by the Upper Tribunal in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640, as  confirmed  by
        Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate aim) [2014]  UKUT  00085  (IAC).   These
        judgments have made it clear that the question  of  proportionality
        must be looked at in the context of the Immigration Rules  with  no
        need to go on to a specific assessment under Article  8  if  it  is
        clear from the facts that there are  no  particular  compelling  or
        exceptional circumstances requiring that course to be  taken.  That
        approach is consistent with what the Court of  Appeal  said  in  MF
        (Nigeria) and with the approach of the House of Lords, particularly
        in cases such as Huang [2007] UKHL 11 and Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. In
        Shahzad it was found that where an area of the Rules does not  have
        an express mechanism such as that found in the provisions  relating
        to  deportation  appeals,  the  approach  in  Nagre  ([29]-[31]  in
        particular) and Gulshan should be followed: i.e. after applying the
        requirements of the rules, only  if  there  may  be  arguably  good
        grounds for granting leave to remain outside them is  it  necessary
        for Article 8 purposes to go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are
        compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them.


     8. As the Appellant was not able to satisfy  the  Rules  the  question
        arises whether the decision would lead to a breach of Article 8 but
        in the context of whether there are  factors  not  covered  by  the
        Rules which give rise to the need to consider Article 8 further. It
        has not been shown that there is a  provision  of  the  Rules  that
        would enable an individual who entered as a visitor to switch  into
        and to be granted leave to remain as a carer.  The Article  8  case
        is based upon a claim that family life exists in the United Kingdom
        between the Appellant and his mother that her needs, based upon her
        medical   condition,   make   the   decision    to    remove    him
        disproportionate.


     9. In paragraph  13  of  the  determination  it  was  found  that  the
        Appellant had not demonstrated any dependency beyond that which may
        exist between a mother and son. This is, in effect, a finding  that
        the Appellant has failed to discharge the burden of proof upon  him
        to the required standard to show that  family  life  recognised  by
        Article 8 exists.  It is accepted that  family  life  may  continue
        between a parent and child even after the child  has  attained  his
        majority.   Cases such as  AA  v  United  Kingdom  (application  no
        8000/08) found that a significant factor will be whether or not the
        adult child has founded a family of his or her own.  In  this  case
        the Appellants mother lives in the United Kingdom and the Appellant
        in Kenya where he married and had children of his own  and  clearly
        formed an independent family unit.


    10. There is however no limitation on when a period of  dependency  can
        arise and any assessment under Article 8 (1) is fact sensitive.  On
        the  facts  of  this  case  the  Appellant's  mother   was   living
        independently in the United Kingdom and he was living independently
        in Kenya.  There was no evidence they continued to live together in
        a close-knit family relationship in the same household and enjoying
        each other's company on a daily basis.  There  is  no  evidence  of
        financial dependency  but  it  is  now  alleged  that  a  need  for
        practical and emotional support and  guidance  has  arisen  as  the
        mother is now dependent  upon  the  Appellant  as  her  only  child
        present in her home.


    11. The Secretary of State's  response  in  the  refusal  is  that  the
        Appellants presence is not required as other support  services  are
        available.  It must be remembered that the key finding of the Judge
        is that the Appellant has not discharged the burden of  proof  upon
        him to the required standard to show that Article  8  was  engaged.
        To assess whether this is the case it is necessary  to  follow  the
        guidance provided  in  the  case  of  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27,  at
        paragraph 17, which poses five questions which are:
        (1) Will the proposed  removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
        authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for
        his private or (as the case may be) family life?
        (2) If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity
        as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?
               (3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
        (4) If so, is such interference necessary in a  democratic  society
        in the  interests  of  national  security,  public  safety  or  the
        economic well- being of the country, for the prevention of disorder
        or crime, for the protection  of  health  or  morals,  or  for  the
        protection of the rights and freedoms of others?
        (5) If so, is such interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate
        public    end sought to be achieved?


    12. It is said that the dependency that exists is  such  as  to  create
        ties between the Appellant and his mother based upon  the  need  to
        meet her individual needs. If it is arguable that such needs can be
        met elsewhere any interference with a right to respect  for  family
        private life will not result in consequences  of  such  gravity  as
        potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.


    13. I accept that even if it was not proved that  family  life  exists,
        the relationship between the Appellant and  his  mother  will  form
        part of his private life and so in any  event  the  second  of  the
        Razgar questions needs to be considered. In relation to his private
        life, the private life he previously enjoyed with his mother was by
        way of indirect contact and visits. There is no evidence that could
        not continue in the future. In relation to the family life  aspects
        there is no copy of any official needs assessment relating  to  the
        Appellant's mother identifying a need that requires his presence in
        the United Kingdom or that cannot  be  met  by  the  NHS  or  other
        statutory services.  There is a statement in  letters  that  Social
        Services have been called to the property and have  indicated  that
        only limited assistance may be available but this is not  supported
        by any official reply or formal assessment.  If, as is now claimed,
        the  Appellant's  mother  has  been  diagnosed  as  suffering  from
        dementia it may be that what she requires is assistance and care in
        a residential home environment in any event.


    14. The Appellant's mother is a British citizen and as such as a  right
        to receive support and assistance from the NHS and Social Services.
        There was insufficient evidence before the  Judge  to  support  the
        claim that such services are not available  or  that  his  mother's
        needs will not be met. She clearly has the support  and  assistance
        of her GP.  Whilst it may be thought to be preferable for a  family
        member to provide such care and that  to  deny  the  Appellant  the
        ability to do so will  place  an  additional  burden  upon  already
        stretched resources of  the  health  professionals  in  the  United
        Kingdom that is a matter for the Secretary of State.  As it is  not
        been proved that appropriate resources are not  available  to  meet
        the Appellant's mother's needs, the finding the Appellant  has  not
        discharged the burden of proof upon him to the required standard to
        show that he can satisfy the second  of  the  Razgar  questions  to
        prove that Article 8 is engaged is a finding within  the  range  of
        those the Judge was entitled to make on the evidence.


    15. Even, in the alternative, if it was found that the issue was one of
        proportionality the availability of care and support in the  United
        Kingdom and the fact the Appellant entered as a family visitor with
        no legitimate expectation that he will  been  entitled  to  remain,
        adds considerable weight to the Secretary of State's position  that
        the decision is proportionate in any event.  On the  basis  of  the
        material the Judge was asked to consider it has not  been  arguably
        made out that the decision will result in compelling  circumstances
        giving rise to unjustifiably harsh consequences for  the  Applicant
        or any family member, such as to establish an arguable case at this
        time.  The evidence does not establish that the effect  of  loosing
        the Applicant as a carer will result in such  adverse  consequences
        or that alternative sources of care are not available to  meet  the
        Applicant's mothers needs, if required.


    16. I find no error of law material to decision to dismiss  the  appeal
        established on the evidence.


Decision

    17. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    18. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make no such order as there is no application for anonymity
        which is not justified on the facts of this appeal in any event.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 11 April 2014












