
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/23916/2015 &
                                                               IA/23917/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 January 2017                   |On 26 January 2017                   |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     IA
                                     MB
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Claimants


Representation:
For the Claimants:     Ms C Charlton, instructed by Bhogal Partners
Solicitors
For the appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wyman  promulgated  2.9.16,  allowing  the
    claimants' linked appeals against the decisions  of  the  Secretary  of
    State, dated 18.6.15, to refuse their applications made on 26.7.14  for
    leave to remain in the UK.

 2. The Judge heard the appeal on 10.8.16.

 3. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Murray  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    22.12.16.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 20.1.16 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision of Judge Wyman should be set aside.

 6. Judge Wyman allowed the claimants' appeals for leave to remain  in  the
    UK under articles 3 & 8  ECHR,  based  on  the  health  of  the  second
    claimant.

 7. The Secretary  of  State's  grounds  assert  that  although  the  judge
    referred to the cases of D v UK and N v UK,  he  failed  to  apply  the
    principles of the cases when making the decision in the appeal.

 8. It was clear from the facts of the case  and  the  decision,  that  the
    claimants could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  for
    leave to remain. In granting permission to appeal, Judge  Murray  noted
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge referred to healthcare  in  Pakistan
    at [81] to [85] of the decision. Although reference was made to D v  UK
    and N v UK, it  was  arguable  that  the  judge  failed  to  apply  the
    threshold, although at [130]  the  judge  stated  that  if  the  second
    claimant's treatment were to stop, she would die within a few weeks.

 9. However, it is clear  from  the  evidence  that  medical  treatment  is
    available in Pakistan. In GS (India) & Ors v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ  40,
    the Court of Appeal reviewed the now well-known authorities to  see  if
    there was any basis to depart from  the  general  principle  that  only
    'deathbed' cases can succeed on article 3  health  grounds.  The  Court
    found that there was no basis to depart and that all of the  appellants
    they were dealing with, 5 of whom suffered from the same kidney disease
    (ESKD) with which the second claimant is afflicted. The second claimant
    may be seriously ill, and the consequences of  failure  to  treat  that
    illness may eventually result in her demise, but she is not  terminally
    ill and at such a critical stage in a fatal  illness  as  to  meet  the
    threshold test.

10. Very recently the ECHR in Paposhvili v Belgium  (Applcn  No.  41738/10,
    13.12.16) has decided that it is not only  'deathbed'  cases  that  can
    succeed under article 3, the threshold for health grounds remains  very
    high:

         "The Court considers that the "other very exceptional cases" within
         the meaning of the judgment in N which may  raise  an  issue  under
         Article 3 should be understood to refer to situations involving the
         removal of a seriously ill person in which substantial grounds have
         been shown for believing that he or she, although not  at  imminent
         risk of dying, would face a real risk, on account of the absence of
         appropriate treatment in the  receiving  country  or  the  lack  of
         access to such treatment, of being exposed to a serious, rapid and
         irreversible decline in his or her state of  health  resulting  in
         intense suffering or to a significant reduction in life expectancy.
         The court points out that these situations  correspond  to  a  high
         threshold for the application of Article 3." [183]

11. However, even applying this amended test to the  facts  of  this  case,
    appropriate treatment is available in Pakistan, the difficulty  was  in
    making arrangements for it be provided.

12. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    misapplied the law and thus made a material error of law in the  making
    of the decision such that the decision cannot stand  and  must  be  set
    aside to be remade.

Remittal

13. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. Where the facts are  unclear  on  a
    crucial issue at the heart of an appeal, as  they  are  in  this  case,
    effectively there has not been a valid determination of those issues.

14. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of
    the error has been to deprive the parties of a fair  hearing  and  that
    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary
    for the decision in the appeal to  be  re-made  is  such  that,  having
    regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal with cases  fairly
    and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, I find  that  it  is
    appropriate  to  remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal afresh.

Conclusions:

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

                    I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal of each claimant to be decided afresh
                    in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  accordance  with  the
                    attached directions.


                    [pic]
                    Signed


                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated

Consequential Directions

16. The linked appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting  at
    Hatton Cross;

17. The appeals are to be relisted at the first available date;

18. The appeals  are  to  be  decided  afresh  with  no  findings  of  fact
    preserved;

19. The ELH is 2 hours. There are likely to be 4 witnesses;

20. A Punjabi interpreter will be required;

21. The appeals may be listed before any First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  with
    the exception of Judge Wyman;

22. The claimants are to ensure that  all  evidence  to  be  relied  on  is
    contained within a single consolidated, indexed and paginated bundle of
    all objective and  subjective  material,  together  with  any  skeleton
    argument and copies of all  case  authorities  to  be  relied  on.  The
    Tribunal will  not  accept  materials  submitted  on  the  day  of  the
    forthcoming appeal hearing;

23. The First-tier Tribunal may give such further or alternative directions
    as are deemed appropriate.

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
Rules 2014.

Given the circumstances, I make continue the anonymity order.

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The outcome of the appeal remains to be decided.


                    [pic]
                    Signed


                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated
