
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/23407/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 25th August 2015                  |On 9th September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     SH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. Z Nasim; Counsel instructed by Chris Raja
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D Clarke;  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under  Regulation  26
    of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 against the decision  of  the
    Secretary of State of 13th May 2014 to refuse  to  issue  a  Derivative
    Residence Card as confirmation of a right of residence  under  European
    Community law, as the primary carer of a British  Citizen  residing  in
    the UK. First-tier Tribunal Judge Sanderson dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal and she now appeals, with permission, to this Tribunal.

 2. The appellant advances three grounds of appeal;

          i) The First-tier Tribunal Judge has erred in law as he failed to
             make any findings in relation to whether the appellant's child
             would accompany the appellant if she is required to leave  the
             UK,  and  sending  the  matter  for  reconsideration  to   the
             respondent;

         ii) The First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  provided  with  sufficient
             evidence as specified to  show  that  if  the  appellant  were
             required to leave the UK, her child would also be required  to
             leave the UK;

        iii) The Judge has failed to consider the evidence before  him,  in
             particular that the appellant is the  person  caring  for  her
             child primarily  and  therefore  if  she  were  to  return  to
             Jamaica, so will her child.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ransley
    on 18th May 2015.  In doing so he stated;

         "The ground has little merit. The judge  found  [at  62]  that  the
         appellant has provided no direct or  other  evidence  to  show  her
         child would be unable to reside in the UK or another EEA  State  if
         she were required to leave the UK. [3]

         However, the Judge's decision to allow the  appeal  to  the  extent
         that the decision of the respondent was not in accordance with  the
         law on the  basis  that  the  respondent  had  not  considered  the
         appellants Article 8 rights involves an arguable error of  law  for
         the following reasons. First,  the  respondent  has  not  made  any
         removal direction after refusing the appellants application  for  a
         derivative  residence  right  card  under  the   EEA   regulations.
         Secondly, as the appellant has raised ECHR Article 8 in the grounds
         of appeal [para 13] it was incumbent upon the judge  to  deal  with
         the Article 8 appeal in her decision instead of remitting the  case
         to the respondent for the purposes of considering article 8."

 4. The matter comes before me to consider whether or not the determination
    by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sanderson  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law, and if so, to remake the decision.

Background

 5. The appellant is a Jamaican national who entered the UK accompanied  by
    her father on 28th June 1997.  After failing to secure indefinite leave
    to remain in the UK as a dependent child, on 8th March 2011,  she  made
    an Article 8 application.  On 8th April 2011, the appellant was granted
    discretionary leave to remain in the UK until 8th April 2014.   On  3rd
    April 2014 the appellant applied for a derivative residence  card.   At
    the time of the application she was the mother of AB, a child that is a
    British citizen by birth, by virtue of her father's status as a British
    citizen.

 6. As at the date of the  appellant's  application  and  the  respondent's
    decision, the requirements to be met by the appellant under  regulation
    15A of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  were
    as follows.

         "15A. Derivative right of residence

         (1) A person ("P") who is not an exempt person  and  who  satisfies
         the criteria in paragraph (2),  (3),  (4),  (4A)  or  (5)  of  this
         regulation is entitled to a  derivative  right  to  reside  in  the
         United Kingdom for as long as P satisfies the relevant criteria.

         ...

         (4A) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

             (a) P is the primary carer of a British citizen ("the relevant
             British citizen");

             (b) the relevant British citizen is  residing  in  the  United
             Kingdom; and

             (c) the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside  in
             the UK or in another EEA State if P were required to leave.

         ...

         (7) P is to be regarded as a "primary carer" of another person if

             (a) P is a direct relative or a legal guardian of that person;
             and

             (b) P-

                  (i) is the person who has primary responsibility for  that
                  person's care; or

                  (ii) shares equally the responsibility for  that  person's
                  care with one other person who is not an exempt person.

         (7A) Where P is to be regarded as a primary carer of another person
         by virtue  of  paragraph  (7)(b)(ii)  the  criteria  in  paragraphs
         (2)(b)(iii), (4)(b) and (4A)(c) shall be considered  on  the  basis
         that both P and the person with whom care responsibility is  shared
         would be required to leave the United Kingdom.

         (7B) Paragraph (7A) does not apply if the  person  with  whom  care
         responsibility is shared acquired a derivative right to  reside  in
         the United Kingdom as a  result  of  this  regulation  prior  to  P
         assuming equal care responsibility.

         (8) P will not be regarded as having responsibility for a  person's
         care for the purpose of paragraph  (7)  on  the  sole  basis  of  a
         financial contribution towards that person's care.

         ...."

 7. The material paragraphs of the respondents' decision  of  13th  of  May
    2014 are as follows:

         "You have failed to submit  any  proof  of  care  in  the  form  of
         original official documents from the NHS, schools, dental  surgery,
         local authority etc nor have you provided any proof of  income  and
         expenditure regarding the child.

         The letter from London Metropolitan University  dated  21  November
         2013 states that you will be returning to  your  degree  course  in
         2014/2015. This casts doubt on the amount of  time  that  you  will
         have free to care for your sponsor and the level of care  that  you
         will be able to provide.

         You have also failed to provide any/sufficient evidence  that  your
         British citizen child sponsor is resident in  the  United  Kingdom.
         This is a requirement under Regulation 15A (4A) (b).

         The letter from your Representative dated 03 April 2014 states that
         the child's father is only 22 years old  and  continues  to  reside
         with his own mother and is indeed  a  dependent  of  his  parents.'
         Notwithstanding  this  information,  it   does   not   negate   his
         responsibility for his child.

         Furthermore, it should be noted that any  unwillingness  to  assume
         care responsibility is not by itself, sufficient  for  the  claimed
         primary carer to assert that another direct relative or guardian is
         unable to care for the British citizen.

         Therefore, you have failed to provide sufficient evidence  to  show
         that the British Citizen child, [AB] would be unable to  remain  in
         the United Kingdom/EEA if you  were  forced  to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom in accordance with Regulation 15A (4A) (c)."

 8. In her decision of 16th May 2014 the respondent did not accept that the
    appellant was  the  primary  carer  of  AB.   The  respondent  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant met the  requirements  of  Regulation  15A
    (4A)(a).   Neither did she  accept  that  the  appellant  had  provided
    sufficient evidence that her British citizen child is resident  in  the
    UK as required  under  Regulation  15A  (4A)(b).   In  light  of  those
    conclusions, the respondent considered that the appellant had failed to
    provide sufficient evidence to show  that  the  British  Citizen  child
    would be unable to remain in the UK if the  appellant  were  forced  to
    leave the UK in accordance with Regulation 15A (4A)(c).

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set out at  paragraphs  [61]
    to [64] of the decision and reasons promulgated on 9th  February  2015.
    In so far as is material to  this  appeal,  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Sanderson states;

         "[61]    The appellant has given evidence that her British  citizen
         child [AB] is living with her and she has a second child,  born  on
         [date], namely [AH] from the relationship with [AB]'s father.   She
         has produced documentary evidence that her child [AB] is  attending
         school and has done so since September of last  year.  The  tenancy
         agreement  includes  the  name  of  her  daughter  [AB]   and   the
         appellant's mother has given evidence that while her daughter is at
         university on a part-time course she looks after the two  children.
         This is on Tuesday and Wednesday each week. There have  been  court
         proceedings concerning [AB] and the contact arrangements have  been
         specified. There is therefore clear and  incontrovertible  evidence
         that [AB] is in the United Kingdom and is being looked after by her
         mother for the majority of the time. There has been no contact with
         [AB]'s father since October 2014 even though he is able to exercise
         his right of contact with his daughter. I accept that he has  shown
         little interest in both his children and  has  moved  on  to  other
         relationships, one of which has produced another child. It  appears
         also that he has been incarcerated for a period of 7  to  8  months
         for a serious criminal offence. Clearly during that time  he  would
         have been unable to play any part as a carer for his daughter.

         [62]     I accept, given the circumstances that  the  appellant  is
         the primary carer of her  child  [AB]  in  that  she  is  a  direct
         relative, namely the mother of [AB] and has primary  responsibility
         for her daughter's care. However, the  appellant  has  provided  no
         direct or other evidence that her child would be unable  to  reside
         in the United Kingdom or another EEA State if the she were required
         to leave.

         [63]     It may well be that the appellant would have difficulty in
         satisfying Regulation 15A (4A)(c) i.e. the relevant British citizen
         would be unable to reside in the UK or in another EEA State if  the
         appellant were required to leave but I  make  no  finding  on  this
         aspect of  the  appellant's  case  as  there  has  been  no  active
         consideration by the respondent of the appellant's Article 8 rights
         to family and private life under the Immigration Rules  or  outside
         the Rules.

         [64]     I conclude, therefore, that the decision by the respondent
         is not in accordance with the law and  that  the  decision  remains
         with the Secretary of State."

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

10. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Nasim submitted  that  having  found  at
    [62], that the appellant is the primary carer of  her  child,  and  has
    primary responsibility for  her  daughters  care,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Sanderson should have gone on to make a finding as to whether  or
    not, the Tribunal accepted that AB, a British citizen, would be  unable
    to reside in the UK if  the  Appellant  were  required  to  leave.   He
    submitted that there is sufficient from the evidence that is recited at
    paragraph [61] to establish that the child would be unable to reside in
    the UK or another EEA State, if the appellant were required to leave.

11. On behalf of the respondent, Mr. Clarke was prepared to accept that the
    respondent in her decision of 13th May 2014 had proceeded on the  basis
    that the appellant was not the  primary  carer  of  a  British  Citizen
    child.   The respondent's conclusions as to the remaining  requirements
    under regulation 15 (4A) flowed from that conclusion. He submitted that
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Sanderson has found that the appellant is the
    primary  carer  of  her  child  AB,  and  that  there  is   clear   and
    incontrovertible evidence that AB is in the UK.  In  the  circumstances
    it was entirely appropriate for  the  matter  to  be  remitted  to  the
    respondent so  that  the  remaining  requirement  under  regulation  15
    (4A)(c) can be considered by the respondent against a  correct  factual
    matrix. He submitted that it  does  not  necessarily  follow  from  the
    matters set out in paragraph [61] of the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, that the evidence establishes that the child would be  unable
    to reside in the UK, if  the  appellant  were  required  to  leave.  He
    submits that to the contrary, what is said at paragraphs [62] and  [63]
    of the decision, suggests that the Judge was  not  satisfied  that  the
    requirements of Regulation 15A (4A)(c) are, or can be met.

Decision

12. At paragraph [62] of the decision the Judge states "the  appellant  has
    provided no direct or other evidence that her child would be unable  to
    reside in the United Kingdom or another EEA state if she were  required
    to leave."  At paragraph [63] of the decision the Judge states "it  may
    well  be  that  the  appellant  would  have  difficulty  in  satisfying
    regulation 15A (4A)(c) i.e.  the  relevant  British  citizen  would  be
    unable to reside in the UK or in another EEA  state  if  the  appellant
    were required to leave but I make no finding  on  this  aspect  of  the
    appellant's case as there has  been  no  active  consideration  by  the
    respondent of the appellant's Article 8 rights...."

13. To the extent that it was necessary to make a finding as to whether the
    requirements of regulation 15 (4A)(c) were met, the  judge's  reasoning
    at paragraphs [61] and [62] appears to be inconsistent.   Read  on  its
    own, paragraph [62] could be read as a finding that the  appellant  has
    failed to provide evidence and therefore establish that her child would
    be unable to reside in the UK or another EEA State if she were required
    to leave. Such a finding might be set aside as an error of law  on  the
    grounds of perversity, if it  is  irrational  or  unreasonable  in  the
    Wednesbury sense, or one that is wholly unsupported  by  the  evidence.
    If that were a finding at paragraph [62], it was one that was  open  to
    the Tribunal.  No part of the reasoning has  been  undermined  in  this
    appeal.  However, at paragraph [63] the Judge  states  that  she  makes
    "... no finding on this aspect of the appellant's case...."

14.  The initial difficulty  that  confronted  the  Tribunal  is  that  the
    respondent had not carried out the Regulation 15A (4A)(c)  examination.
    That is because in the refusal letter the  respondent  did  not  accept
    that the appellant was the primary carer of the child or that the child
    was present in the UK. That much is clear from the  use  of  the  words
    "Therefore you have failed to provide sufficient evidence to show  that
    the British Citizen child... would be unable to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom/EEA if you were forced to leave the United Kingdom..."  in  the
    respondent's reasons  for  refusal  letter.  The  respondent's  cursory
    examination  of  the  requirement  under  Regulation  15A  (4A)(c)  was
    premised upon what the First-tier Tribunal has found  to  be  a  flawed
    conclusion as to the requirements under Regulation 15A (4A)(a) and (b).



15. It was open to the Tribunal to conclude at [64] that  the  decision  of
    the respondent is not in accordance with the law and that the  decision
    remains with the respondent.  Remittal to the  respondent  will  enable
    the respondent to carry out the Regulation 15A (4A)(c)  examination  in
    light of the findings made by the First-tier Tribunal.

16.  The  reasons  provided  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sanderson  at
    paragraph [63] suggest that no finding  was  made  as  to  whether  the
    appellant satisfied the requirements of Regulation 15 (4A)(c) as  there
    has been no active consideration by the respondent of  the  appellant's
    Article 8 rights under the immigration rules or outside the rules.  The
    application that was  before  the  respondent  was  not  an  Article  8
    application, but an application for a derivative residence  card.    As
    is set out in the  respondents  decision  of  13th  May  2014,  if  the
    appellant wishes  the  respondent  to  consider  an  application  under
    appendix FM and or paragraph 276 ADE of the immigration rules, she must
    make a separate charge  application  using  the  appropriate  specified
    application form.

17. I should also add that in granting  permission  to  appeal,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ransley stated that "as the appellant  has  raised  ECHR
    Article 8 in the grounds of appeal, it was incumbent on  the  Judge  to
    deal with the Article 8 appeal in her decision,  instead  of  remitting
    the case to the respondent for the purposes of considering Article 8.".
     That was not a matter relied upon in the appellant's grounds of appeal
    and at the hearing before me, Mr Nasim did not pursue that  matter.  He
    was right not to do so in light of the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal
    in Amirteymour and others (EEA appeals; human rights) [2015] UKUT 00466
    (IAC), referred to by Mr Clarke on behalf of the Respondent.  The Upper
    Tribunal, comprising of  a  panel  including  the  President  and  Vice
    President confirmed that where no notice under section 120 of the  2002
    Act has been served and where no EEA decision to remove has been  made,
    an appellant cannot in an appeal under  the  EEA  Regulations  bring  a
    Human Rights challenge to removal.

18. Insofar as the appeal  before  me  is  concerned,  the  making  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  an
    error of law affecting the outcome of the decision.

19. The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed. The decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal, that the appeal is allowed  to  the  extent
    that the decision of the respondent was not in accordance with the  law
    and the decision remains with the respondent, shall stand.

20. No application for an anonymity direction is made and I do not make  an
    anonymity order.


Signed:     Date:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

