
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23461/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13th June 2016                        |On 8th July 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     upper tribunal DEPUTY judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                      eo
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hussain (Counsel)

Anonymity

I  have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction.  No anonymity direction was made previously and  it  is
correct that none  was  sought  before  me.   However  since  much  of  this
decision concerns a child 4 years of  age,  I  consider  it  appropriate  to
grant anonymity in  this  appeal,  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal,  but
    for the sake of clarity, the parties are referred to as  they  were  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Henderson) promulgated on 27th November 2015
    in which it allowed  EO's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision of 10th June 2015 refusing him leave to remain in the  UK  and
    making removal directions.

Background

 3. The Appellant EO is a citizen of Nigeria (born 16th  April  1986).   He
    entered the UK on 10th April 2009 with leave, as a student, valid until
    16th August 2012.  He has remained  unlawfully  in  the  UK  since  the
    expiry of that leave.  In November 2009 the  Appellant  met  KC,  after
    chatting online.  Although it is said they started a relationship,  the
    Appellant remained resident in London whilst  KC was in Rotherham where
    she lives.

 4. On 9th March 2011 KC gave  birth  to  a  daughter  K.   K's  birth  was
    registered at the time of her birth without any father being  named  on
    the birth certificate. Although the Appellant and KC were said to be in
    some relationship at the time of K's birth they were not getting  along
    and the Appellant did not see K  for  the  first  nine  months  of  her
    babyhood. It also appears that KC was in another  relationship  with  a
    man whom it subsequently transpired is the biological father of K.

 5. When K was around 9 months of age, the Appellant relocated to the South
    Yorkshire/North Derbyshire  area.   When  he  specifically  did  so  is
    unclear and it is unclear as to where  he  was  living  at  that  time.
    However K's birth certificate was changed  on  17th  October  2012,  to
    record the Appellant as her father.

 6. In November 2013 the Appellant formed a new relationship with AL  after
    meeting her online.  He moved in with AL in March 2014  and  they  have
    been cohabiting since that time.

 7. On 17th March 2015 the Appellant made a twofold application  for  leave
    to remain on the basis of his family/private life.

       . as the partner of AL, a British citizen; and

       . as the father of K, the child of his relationship with KC.

 8. The Respondent did not accept the Appellant's claimed relationship with
    K. DNA testing obtained on 2nd June 2015 revealed the Appellant was not
    the biological father of K.

 9. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application for leave to remain,
    with reference to Appendix FM of paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  It was not accepted that the Appellant had been living with  AL
    in a relationship akin to marriage for at least two years.  So  far  as
    the second limb of his  application  was  concerned,  DNA  testing  had
    revealed that the  Appellant  was  not  the  biological  father  of  K,
    therefore he could not fulfil the Immigration Rules with regard to  the
    "parent" route.

10. The Appellant appealed the refusal and his appeal came before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

The First-tier Tribunal Hearing

11. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from the Appellant, from KC (K's
    mother) and AL, his current partner.  The findings made by the FtT  are
    not seriously challenged in so far they go.  In  summary  it  has  been
    accepted that the Appellant  was  aware  that  after  August  2012  his
    immigration status was precarious because he was an overstayer.  It was
    accepted that the Appellant is currently in  a  relationship  with  AL,
    that relationship having started around about November  2013  and  that
    the Appellant and AL had been cohabiting since March 2014.

12. It is also accepted that the Appellant believed that K was his  natural
    child, albeit that he did not see the child for the first  nine  months
    of her life.  It is accepted that K visits the Appellant and  AL  on  a
    regular basis.  They assist K's mother by looking after K at  weekends.
    K according to the parties believes that the Appellant is  her  father.
    The Appellant is currently financially dependent upon AL. Any financial
    support which the Appellant gives to K's mother, effectively comes from
    AL. There is of course no legal obligation to provide this assistance.

13. When considering the matter, the  FtT  correctly  identified  that  the
    Appellant cannot meet  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  judge  therefore
    directed herself to a consideration of Article 8  ECHR.   She  set  out
    that  the  Appellant  argued  that  his  case  admitted  of  compelling
    circumstances.   The   compelling   circumstances   relied   upon   his
    relationship with K, who it is said regards him as a  parent;  and  his
    relationship with AL, whom he regards as his partner.

14. At [48] the judge noted:

         "I am asked to consider that it would be disproportionate  for  the
         Appellant to have to return  and  seek  entry  clearance  primarily
         because of the child with whom he has a relationship  although  the
         application itself would be  for  entry  clearance  to  rejoin  the
         British citizen with whom he has been living."

15. At [49] the judge said this:

         "The Appellant cannot seek entry clearance  under  the  Immigration
         Rules to have contact with K.  He does not fit into the  qualifying
         provisions as a parent.  Any entry clearance application  would  be
         made as the partner of (AL).  This is an unusual case in  that  the
         Appellant has formed a close relationship with a child he  regarded
         as his own.  Like many children in this country she has  a  settled
         but complicated family life which involves a parental  relationship
         in two family units - that of her biological mother and that of the
         man she regards as her father and his partner."

16. The judge then followed this at [50]:

         "The Appellant's relationship with a British citizen is not  solely
         a factor which weighs heavily in  his  favour  since  there  is  an
         alternative to the couple living in this country and  there  is  an
         alternative in the form of entry clearance.  It  is  an  additional
         factor however in the consideration of the stability of the child's
         life.  (AL) as I have stated has now established  her  position  as
         another carer and provided a home environment for (K)  as  well  as
         providing  financial  support  to  the  Appellant   and   therefore
         indirectly to (K)."

17. Finally the judge concluded by saying at [51]:

         "There  are  insurmountable  obstacles  in  this   unusual   family
         situation which mean that it would not be possible for  the  family
         units to relocate to Nigeria.  I  conclude  that  the  decision  to
         remove the Appellant is disproportionate".

         She then allowed the appeal.

Permission to Appeal

18. The Respondent sought  and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal.   The
    grounds seeking permission cited one reason  namely  "failing  to  give
    adequate reasons for findings on a material  matter".   In  particular,
    for the purposes of this decision I am drawn  to  paragraph  3  of  the
    grounds, which is reproduced here.

         "In the alternative, it is submitted that the Tribunal's  readiness
         to accept the Appellant's relationship with a child who is not  his
         daughter, was subject to inadequate  investigation.   The  Tribunal
         quite  properly  considered  the  best  interests  of  the   child.
         However,  it  did  not  make  any  assessment   of   whether   this
         relationship had been subject to any welfare scrutiny or whether it
         had been subject to any assessment by a social worker.  Given  that
         the issue is the welfare of the child, it is respectfully submitted
         that this should have been a key factor in any  consideration.   It
         is therefore submitted that this key  finding  was  not  adequately
         reasoned."

The UT Hearing

19. Before me, the Appellant was in attendance but  not  required  to  give
    evidence.  Mrs Pettersen appeared for the Secretary  of  State  and  Mr
    Hussain for the Appellant.

20. Mrs Pettersen  expanded  upon  the  grounds  seeking  permission.   She
    submitted that this was a pure Article 8 ECHR case.  The main plank  of
    the Appellant's argument, centred around his claimed relationship  with
    K.  K was a child with whom he had no legal standing.  So  far  as  the
    best interests of K are concerned, the Appellant can only benefit  from
    Article  8  if  he  can  show  that  there  are  compelling/exceptional
    circumstances surrounding the relationship and that those circumstances
    would amount to insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing  in
    Nigeria. The first point of reference is that there is no  family  life
    as such within the confines of Article 8 ECHR.

21. She submitted further that the judge had failed to carry out  a  proper
    analysis because  she  had  conflated  the  issue  of  the  Appellant's
    relationship with his current partner AL, with that of his relationship
    with K.

22. The judge appeared to be saying that because the  Appellant  could  not
    meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  with  regard  to  K
    (because there is none available to an Appellant who is not the  parent
    of a child) that in  itself  amounted  to  compelling  and  exceptional
    circumstances such as to allow a consideration under  Article  8.   She
    submitted in any event that even  a  consideration  of  Article  8  was
    admitted because of the relationship with K, the issue of  the  "  best
    interest of the child" would require greater  consideration  than  that
    given by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.   There  was  no  family  life
    within Article 8, because the Appellant is not K's parent.   There  was
    no evidence to show for example that he could be regarded as a de facto
    parent.  His relationship with K amounted to no  more  than  him  being
    allowed to look after her at the behest of KC. This was a  choice  made
    entirely by K's mother.

23. Mr Hussain on behalf of the Appellant said  that  the  decision  should
    stand.  The judge had properly found that the Appellant could not bring
    himself within the Immigration Rules as a parent, but on the  facts  of
    this case, the Appellant was in a relationship with K, which  was  akin
    to him having parental responsibility for K.

24. He submitted that the facts in  this  appeal  were  unusual  enough  to
    constitute exceptional circumstances.  The rights of the child must  be
    respected and the Appellant had formed  a  close  relationship  with  a
    child he regarded as his own.  He further submitted that the  Appellant
    has not got the option of seeking entry clearance on the basis  of  his
    relationship with K.

25. Finally in response to a question by me, Mr Hussain confirmed  that  in
    the event I should find an error of law in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision, there was no further evidence to put before me.

Consideration and Findings

26. As Mr Hussain correctly pointed out, the Appellant's case  hinges  upon
    his claim that his relationship with K is such, that it would not be in
    K's best interest for the  Appellant  to  be  removed  and  those  best
    interests amount to  an  insurmountable  obstacle  to  maintaining  his
    family life with K.  Mr Hussain submitted that the rights of the  child
    must be respected.  With that last sentence, at least, I agree.

27. However what I find difficult to accept is that the evidence before the
    FtT was sufficient to enable it to conclude  that  K's  best  interests
    were served by the Appellant being allowed to remain in the UK and that
    it would be disproportionate to remove him.

28.  What  is  of  particular  significance  in  considering  the   judge's
    assessment of the impact on the question of "insurmountable  obstacles"
    of K's best interests, is the evidence that had actually been  produced
    before her in order for  her  to  conduct  such  an  assessment.   That
    evidence was conspicuously limited; a matter impressed upon me  by  the
    grounds seeking permission.

29. Obviously there was no direct evidence from K - she is of tender  years
    and it is hardly to be expected.  K's side of the story  was  given  by
    the oral evidence of the witnesses.

30. K's mother gave evidence as did the Appellant. The judge  reported  she
    was cautious about accepting their credibility.

31. She did accept the evidence of AL whom she found to  be  credible,  but
    AL's evidence in reality is limited. AL has only figured  in  K's  life
    since 2014 when the Appellant moved in with  her.   Whilst  AL  was  at
    pains  to  say  that  she  and  the  Appellant  will   continue   their
    relationship with K her evidence does  not  amount  to  an  independent
    assessment of K's best interests.  I need  hardly  remind  the  parties
    that when dealing with the best interests of a 4 year old child, a full
    and careful analysis  of  evidence  from  the  child's  perspective  is
    required.

32. From the evidence before the FtT what was  in  place  was  an  informal
    arrangement whereby K's mother allowed K to see the Appellant  and  his
    partner at weekends.  K's mother may well depend upon the Appellant and
    his partner for weekend childminding and for some financial  help,  but
    the reality is that this is no more than  an  informal  arrangement  at
    best, as the Appellant has no legal standing concerning K.

33. In  addition  there  was  no  evidence  to  show  why  the  Appellant's
    relationship with K could not continue by  other  means  should  he  be
    removed.  I note that it was said that  he  and  K  Skype  one  another
    during the week.

34. Finally so far as the Appellant's relationship  with  AL  is  concerned
    there was no evidence to show why a return to Nigeria to make an  entry
    clearance application as a partner would  result  in  an  unduly  harsh
    outcome.  Given the FtT's findings on the relationship  with  AL,  this
    would be a viable option.

35. For the forgoing reasons therefore I find that the FtT erred in law  by
    giving  inadequate  reasons  for  concluding  as  it   did   that   the
    Respondent's  decision  to  remove   the   Appellant   amounts   to   a
    disproportionate one under Article 8 ECHR and the decision is therefore
    set aside.

36. No further evidence was placed before me. As I indicated so far as  the
    evidence goes it was not  seriously  challenged.  I  find  I  am  in  a
    position to remake the decision. The  circumstances  of  this  case  as
    outlined above, fall far below that required to show  that  exceptional
    or  compelling  circumstances  exist  sufficient   to   amount   to   a
    disproportionate  interference   with   the   Appellant's   Article   8
    family/private life.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.  The decision of the  First-tier
Tribunal is set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.  EO's appeal  against
the Secretary of State's decision of 10th June 2015 refusing  him  leave  to
remain and to remove him, is dismissed.



Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     07 July 2016

Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts

