

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23274/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 27th February 2014                         |On 08th April 2014           |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                            NAGAPANDIAN KUMARAIYA
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Mahmood instructed by Immigration Aid.
For the Respondent: Mr Richards - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination of Designated  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Phillips promulgated on 24th October 2013  in  which
        he dismissed the appeal against the refusal  of  the  Secretary  of
        State to vary the Appellants leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
        as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant. The date of refusal is the  3rd
        July 2013.  The application was refused by reference  to  paragraph
        245DD and Appendix A paragraphs 41-SD and  46-SD  322  (1)  of  the
        Immigration Rules.



Background



     2. The Appellant was born on 25th May 1988 and is a citizen of  India.
        There was no appearance before Judge Phillips by the Appellant or a
        representative.  The day before the  hearing,  16th  October  2013,
        Judge Philips refused a written adjournment application made by  SZ
        Solicitors.   There  was  no  written  or  oral  renewal   of   the
        application and in light of the failure to  attend  the  Presenting
        Officer agreed that Judge Phillips should determine the  matter  on
        the basis of the information available within the papers.


     3. Judge Phillips sets out his findings between paragraphs 6 to 14  of
        the determination.  It is noted that  despite  the  filing  of  the
        notice of appeal in July  2013  the  Appellant  had  not  submitted
        evidence to the court either prior to the hearing or at the hearing
        and had failed to attend to give oral evidence [9].  It  was  found
        the matters raised by the Respondent in the refusal had  foundation
        as despite three letters from the United Bank  Limited  of  Karachi
        having been filed, two dated 9th May 2013 and one  10th  May  2013,
        none mentioned the Appellant or his team partner, none showed  that
        the bank is regulated by the appropriate authority, and  none  gave
        full contact details or confirmed that funds could  be  transferred
        to the United Kingdom [10].  The Judge  also  found  a  third-party
        declaration did not contain the signatures of the Appellant or  his
        partner or confirm the amount of funds available and so the  letter
        provided by his legal representative Sheikh Ali was held not to  be
        valid. The letter from the legal representative  did  not  validate
        the signatures  on  the  declaration  and  the  names  of  the  two
        individuals whose signatures appear on the  application  [11].  The
        Judge found the company  bank  account  submitted  is  not  a  bank
        account at all but rather a MasterCard debit card account statement
        in which the card setup fee is the only recorded transaction  [12].
        The contracts submitted with the application  only  show  that  the
        Appellant's company is to provide quarterly payroll processing  and
        did not therefore demonstrate that the Appellant's job title of  IT
        Manager is the  nature  of  the  services  being  provided  to  the
        businesses.


     4. In paragraph 14 of his determination Judge  Phillips  concludes  by
        stating "The only conclusion that it is possible to draw  from  the
        above is that the application did not meet the requirements of  the
        Immigration Rules for the reasons stated by  the  Respondent.  This
        appeal must therefore be dismissed."


     5. The Grounds on which permission to appeal was sought confirms  that
        the Appellant initially lodged his appeal and thereafter instructed
        solicitors who were the subject of an intervention by the SRA as  a
        result of which he instructed SZ Solicitors to represent him in his
        case.  They only agreed to represent him if he was able  to  obtain
        an  adjournment.  The  Grounds  acknowledge  that  an   adjournment
        application was refused and claim they sent an  application  for  a
        renewal of the request by fax to the  Tribunal.   It  is  therefore
        alleged that the Judge had erred in not taking  into  consideration
        the request and in proceeding with the hearing.


     6. On behalf of the Appellant Mr Mahmood submitted that  the  material
        error of law being relied upon was the fact the Judge proceeded  in
        absence which he stated was "inherently unjust" especially as there
        was evidence the Judge needed to consider.


     7. It was submitted that had the Judge granted the adjournment request
        the Appellant could have appeared and  documents  that  are  to  be
        found in a bundle that  has  now  been  provided  could  have  been
        considered.  Mr Mahmood also sought  to  rely  upon  an  evidential
        flexibility policy which he submitted was to be found in  the  case
        of Rodriguez, and argued that paragraph 245AA  of  the  Immigration
        Rules created a legally binding obligation upon  the  Secretary  of
        State on the facts to seek further information from  the  Appellant
        to allow him to correct the errors in the papers that he submitted.
        It was  submitted  that  all  the  relevant  information  had  been
        provided albeit in the wrong format.



Error of law finding - Discussion



     8. The papers within  the  Tribunal  file  show  that  an  adjournment
        request was made and refused by Judge  Phillips  but  there  is  no
        evidence this was renewed as alleged  after  the  initial  refusal.
        Notice of the hearing on the 17th October 2013 was sent  by  second
        class post to the Appellant on 18th September 2013.  The  Appellant
        had no representative and it was not until 16th October  2013  when
        the fax was sent to the Tribunal at Columbus House in Newport by SZ
        Solicitors, indicating they had been instructed  to  represent  the
        Appellant, that anyone was aware that he was seeking legal  advice.
        The application was refused as it was said there was nothing in the
        application and appeal, or the appeal itself, to suggest  that  the
        Appellant had ever been represented by Consillium Chambers, who  it
        is alleged were his previous representatives.


     9. The Appellant clearly had a considerable period of time in which to
        arrange for representation and it is correct to say that  there  is
        no record  of  him  ever  having  been  represented  by  Consillium
        Chambers. The fact SZ Solicitors may have accepted instructions the
        day before the hearing does not entitle the Appellant to secure the
        adjournment. The fact SZ Solicitors only appear to have  agreed  to
        act  if  an  adjournment  could  be  secured  suggests  it  was   a
        conditional acceptance of instructions and, as the adjournment  was
        refused, they were  not  the  Appellants  representatives  for  the
        purposes of the appeal hearing. It is also correct to say that  the
        refusal to adjourn did  not  prevent  the  Appellant  attending  in
        person to present his case and his failure to do so  has  not  been
        explained.


    10. In the adjournment request it was also claimed that  the  Appellant
        had not received the Respondent's  bundle.  When  dealing  with  an
        adjournment request, in addition to considering the requirements of
        the Procedure Rules, it is necessary for a Judge to  bear  in  mind
        the  overriding  principle  of  fairness.   The  refusal   of   the
        adjournment request does not deal with the statement that no bundle
        had been received and it may be arguable that it was  therefore  an
        incomplete refusal and unfair to proceed on the basis on which  the
        application was actually refused. Although, even  if  this  is  the
        case, it is  necessary  to  consider  whether  any  such  error  is
        material.   I  accept  that  in  cases  of  this  nature  where  an
        individual is entitled to have a hearing before the Tribunal and to
        present evidence that they wish the Tribunal  to  consider,  it  is
        only if it can be found that the Judge's decision is one that would
        have been arrived at in any event that  such  error  would  not  be
        found to be material.


    11. In proving the materiality Mr Mahmood  relied  upon  the  documents
        provided by SZ Solicitors in their letter dated 24th February 2014.
        These include a witness statement from the Appellant,  the  refusal
        letter from the Secretary of State, additional evidence in  support
        of the Appellant's appeal,  evidence  where  the  Home  Office  has
        requested further information in relation to other applicants,  and
        a copy of a determination promulgated  on  15th  November  2013  in
        relation to the Appellants Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) team member.


    12. The witness statement, examples of where the Home Office has sought
        information in other cases,  and  the  determination  of  the  team
        member do  not  assist  the  Appellant.  The  additional  documents
        provided in support of the appeal do not assist in proving that the
        Judge has made a material error as  that  information  has  clearly
        been prepared to correct faults in the  application  identified  in
        the refusal and upheld by the Judge. It is noted for example that a
        lot of  those  documents  postdate  the  date  of  application  and
        decision.


    13. I find no merit  in  the  "evidential  flexibility"  argument.  The
        policy  for  applications  under  the  points  based   system   was
        incorporated into the Rules at paragraph  245AA  on  6th  September
        2012.  A 'specified' document which is in the wrong format (e.g.  a
        letter is not on headed notepaper, as  specified),  or  is  a  copy
        rather than the original, or does not  contain  all  the  specified
        information, can trigger a request for the correct version  of  the
        document.  A 'missing' document can only be requested if it is  one
        of a sequence, e.g. one bank  statement  from  a  series  has  been
        omitted, but not if it  is  the  sole  "specified"  document.   One
        condition of that policy was an instruction to decision makers that
        before they seek further information from the applicant  they  must
        have established that the evidence exists or have sufficient reason
        to believe the information exists.


    14. The case of Rodriguez (Flexibility Policy) [2013] UKUT 00042  (IAC)
        was overturned by the Court of  Appeal  in  SSHD  v  Rodriguez  and
        Others [2014] EWCA Civ 2 in which it was held that the Secretary of
        State for the Home Department had not been under any obligation  to
        afford applicants for leave to remain as Tier 4  (General)  Student
        Migrants in the United Kingdom any opportunity to remedy defects in
        their applications in relation to maintenance funding  requirements
        under her evidential flexibility policy. The evidential flexibility
        policy was not designed to give an applicant the opportunity  first
        to remedy any defect or inadequacy in an application or  supporting
        documentation so as to save  the  application  from  refusal  after
        consideration (my emphasis).


    15. In R(on the application of Kaur) v SSHD [2013]  EWHC  1538  it  was
        held that  where  the  procedure  involved  the  submission  by  an
        appellant  of  documents  for  whose  selection  he  or   she   was
        responsible, the respondent was not required to communicate  doubts
        about a document to the appellant or  give  the  appellant  further
        opportunity to supply documentation or explanations.


    16. In light of the above I find it  not  proved  that  there  was  any
        legally binding obligation upon the Secretary of State to refer  to
        the Appellant to invite him to remedy defects in documents that  he
        had submitted and that he has sought to rely upon.  The  common-law
        principle of fairness does not impose such an obligation and nor do
        the specific provisions of 245AA of the  Immigration  Rules.  As  a
        result it is  arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  who
        allowed the appeal of the fellow team member on the  basis  it  was
        'not in accordance with the law'  as  a  result  of  an  evidential
        flexibility argument, has also legally erred.


    17. At the date  of  the  application  or  decision  it  has  not  been
        established that the Appellant was able to meet the requirements of
        the Immigration Rules and later documents prepared specifically for
        the purpose of correcting the errors that were made in the claim do
        not enable him to succeed. As a result I find this is one of  those
        comparatively rare cases in  which,  notwithstanding  any  argument
        relating to the fairness or otherwise of the  refusal  to  adjourn,
        and even if it was found Judge Phillips had erred in law, it  would
        make no material difference to the outcome. On  the  basis  of  the
        admissible evidence there was only  one  outcome,  which  was  that
        reached by Judge Phillips.


Decision

    18. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    19. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make no such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 7th April 2014












