

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/23941/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 May 2014                                |On 19 June 2014              |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     IK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Fenney of NLS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order as  the  appeal  includes
      consideration of the circumstances  of  a  child.   Unless  the  Upper
      Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings
      shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellant.   This  direction
      applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and a  failure  to
      comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to   Contempt   of   Court
      proceedings.

Background

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Morocco who was born on 21  March  1989.
      He arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  14  October  2009  with  entry
      clearance as a Tier 4 Student valid until  30  September  2010.   That
      leave was extended thereafter until 5  October  2011.   The  appellant
      ceased his studies before  his  leave  ran  out  and  he,  thereafter,
      overstayed.

   3. In August 2011, he 'met'  on  an  internet  dating/friendship  website
      "ZD".  ZD is a British citizen who was born  on  15  July  1989.   The
      appellant and ZD  developed  a  relationship  over  the  internet  and
      shortly before Christmas 2011 they met in person for the first time.

   4. The appellant was  living  in  Cardiff.    In  October  2011,  he  had
      obtained a false French ID card and he used that to obtain  employment
      in a Cardiff restaurant.  On 4 April 2012, the appellant was  arrested
      at that restaurant on the basis that he was working illegally. At that
      time, he said that he was in a relationship with a woman who lived  in
      Blackburn but he was unable to give her address  or  telephone  number
      even though he had said that he had seen her the previous Sunday.   It
      is now accepted by the appellant that that was an entirely  fabricated
      account.

   5. Following his arrest, the appellant was detained until  1  July  2012.
      During his time in detention, ZD visited the appellant  together  with
      her son "R" who was born on 9 November 2010.   ZD  was,  and  remains,
      married to R's father whom she  married  on  12  July  2010  but  that
      marriage broke down 9 months later at the beginning of 2011.

   6. Following the appellant's release from detention, he went to live with
      ZD and R.  The appellant made  a  number  of  representations  to  the
      respondent, most recently on 3 December 2012 relying upon Article 8 of
      the ECHR based upon the appellant's relationship with ZD and R.

   7. On 28 May  2013,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
      application for leave to remain under Article 8 having concluded  that
      the appellant could not meet the requirements of Appendix FM  or  para
      276ADE of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

   8. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   A  hearing  took
      place  before  Judge  Britton  on  3  February  2014.   The  appellant
      submitted a bundle of documents including a witness statement from the
      appellant (pages 1-4) and ZD (pages 5-10) and a number  of  supporting
      letters (pages 29-42) from the sponsor's sister and parents and others
      who had either worked with the appellant or who work with the sponsor.
       In addition, both the appellant and sponsor gave oral evidence before
      the Judge.

   9. It was not suggested before the Judge that the  appellant  could  meet
      any requirements of the Immigration Rules. He clearly could not do  so
      on the basis of his relationship with ZD or R or on the basis  of  his
      private life under para 276ADE.

  10. Having heard the sponsor  and  appellant  give  oral  evidence,  Judge
      Britton made a number of  factual  findings  at  paras  32-37  of  his
      determination.

  11. First, he noted the appellant's poor immigration history, namely  that
      the appellant had been an overstayer since October 2011 and had worked
      illegally having obtained a forged French ID card.  Upon  arrest,  the
      appellant had also given an account which he now  accepted  was  false
      and "a pack of lies".  Further, the Judge  found  that  the  appellant
      had, in effect, practiced deception upon ZD as he  had  not  told  her
      that he was in the UK illegally, leaving her with the impression  that
      he was here legally, until she  discovered  his  status  when  he  was
      arrested on 4 April 2012.

  12. Secondly, the Judge noted that the appellant  and  ZD  had  not  lived
      together before he was arrested.  They had only done so following  his
      release on 1 July 2012.

  13. Thirdly, the Judge referred to the evidence of ZD that R's  biological
      father did not have much contact with him. The evidence was that R saw
      his father once a month  when  ZD  took  him  to  visit  his  paternal
      grandparents.

  14. Fourthly, the Judge, taking into  account  the  appellant's  deceptive
      behaviour both as regards his immigration history, concluded (at  para
      36) that the appellant had:

           "used this dating system  to  get  in  contact  with  a  British
           national to enable him to stay in this country".

  15. Although the Judge accepted that ZD's intentions were "honourable", he
      did not accept that the appellant's intentions were also.

  16. Finally, at para 57, Judge Britton accepted that it was in  R's  "best
      interests to be with his mother  and  have  a  relationship  with  his
      father".   The Judge accepted that it was not practical for ZD  and  R
      to live in Morocco but that  they  could  keep  in  contact  with  the
      appellant using the modern means of communication  and  with  possible
      visits.

  17.  Judge  Britton  concluded  that  the  respondent's  decision  was   a
      proportionate interference with the  appellant's  private  and  family
      life.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

  18. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
      essentially on the basis that the Judge had  failed  to  consider  the
      impact of the appellant's removal upon R and ZD.  In addition, it  was
      argued that  the  Judge  had  made  a  finding  "clearly  against  the
      evidence" that R had a relationship (akin to father and son) with  his
      biological father.  Finally, it was argued that the Judge  had  failed
      to consider the appellant's relationship with ZD as  at  the  date  of
      hearing.

  19. On 10 March 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (DJ J M Lewis)  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  At  para  5  of
      his reasons, DJ Lewis stated that it was arguable that the  Judge  had
      failed properly to consider Article 8 of the ECHR.  He said this:

           "...It was not sufficient to find, in  paragraph  36,  that  the
           relationship with [ZD] was one which the Appellant was using  to
           remain in the UK; in paragraph 37 that the Appellant in  Morocco
           could remain in contact  with  [ZD]  and  [R]  in  the  UK;  and
           therefore  at  paragraph  38  that  any  interference  with  the
           Appellant's private and  family  life  was  proportionate.   The
           judge should have reached findings on the existence, or not,  of
           both private and family life and, if he found them to exist,  on
           the effect not only upon the Appellant but also  upon  [ZD]  and
           [R].  He had to consider both  the  Immigration  Rules  and,  if
           finding against the Appellant under them,  Article  8.   He  had
           also to consider paragraph 353B."

The submissions

  20. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Fenney submitted  that  the  Judge  had
      failed to consider Article 8 properly.

  21. Relying on her grounds, she submitted that the  Judge  had  failed  to
      have regard to the effect upon ZD and R if the appellant had to  leave
      the UK.  The Judge had failed to take into account  the  circumstances
      of the relationship between R and his father which was that R's father
      failed to see him on a number of arranged occasions.  She referred  me
      to a text message at page 43 of the bundle where R's father had failed
      for a second time to meet R.  It was wrong to see  their  relationship
      as one 'akin to father and son'.  Ms  Fenney  submitted  there  was  a
      strong relationship between R and the appellant.  She referred  me  to
      the evidence in the  appellant's  bundle  which  demonstrated  that  R
      perceived the appellant to be his father.   He  had  referred  to  the
      appellant as "daddy" during the hearing.  Ms Fenney submitted  that  R
      had already lost one father and  it  was  not  proportionate  that  he
      should lose another if the appellant were removed.

  22. Further, she submitted that the  Judge  had  failed  to  consider  the
      impact upon ZD if she was left to look after R  alone,  in  particular
      there were childcare costs and she would not  be  able  to  work.   Ms
      Fenney also reminded me that the  evidence  was  that  the  biological
      father of R owed a substantial amount of CSA payments and the evidence
      that he sometimes paid and sometimes did not.

  23. Mr Richards, on behalf of the respondent submitted that the Judge  had
      made a number of clear findings, in particular in  paras  33-36.   The
      Judge had accepted at paragraph 37 that it was in R's best interest to
      be with his mother and to have a relationship with "his father" -  the
      latter was clearly a reference to R's biological father.  There was no
      confusion, Mr Richards submitted, as suggested in the grounds that the
      Judge was here really referring to the relationship between R and  the
      appellant.   Mr Richards submitted that  given  the  Judge's  findings
      about the appellant's immigration history and that he had fostered the
      relationship with ZD in order to remain in the  UK,  it  was  hard  to
      envisage the Judge coming  to  any  other  conclusion  than  that  the
      appellant's removal was proportionate.   Mr Richards accepted that the
      Judge  had  not  considered  whether  there  were   "exceptional"   or
      "compelling" circumstances in order to  justify  the  grant  of  leave
      outside the new Article 8 Immigration Rules.   However,  he  submitted
      that there could be no doubt on the facts  as  found  that  there  was
      nothing compelling or exceptional about the circumstances  to  justify
      such a grant of leave.

  24. In response, Ms Fenney submitted that if, indeed, the Judge had  meant
      in paragraph 37 to  refer  to  the  relationship  between  R  and  his
      biological father as being in R's best interest, that only  emphasised
      that the Judge had failed to consider the relationship between  R  and
      the appellant and  whether  the  latter's  removal  was  in  R's  best
      interest.

  25. At the conclusion of the submissions in relation to error  of  law,  I
      invited both Ms Fenney and Mr Richards to make  any  submissions  they
      wished in relation to how I should remake the decision if I  concluded
      that there was an error of law.  I set those out below.

Discussion

      Error of Law

  26. In applying Article 8 of the ECHR, the  Judge  was  required  to  make
      factual findings about the nature of the relationships between ZD  and
      the appellant and R and the appellant.  In particular, the  Judge  was
      required to find whether "family life" was established and, if it was,
      whether the appellant's removal amounted to an interference with  that
      family life. In addition, if the Judge's findings led him to  conclude
      in the appellant's favour that Article 8.1 was engaged, in considering
      Article 8.2 the Judge had to determine whether it was established that
      the appellant's removal would  be  proportionate.   As  part  of  that
      assessment, it was  necessary  for  the  Judge  to  make  findings  in
      relation to R's 'best  interests'.   Those  'best  interests'  were  a
      'primary consideration' (see ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011]  UKSC  4  and
      s.55 of the Borders, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2009).   R's  best
      interest could, however,  be  outweighed  by  other  factors  (see  ZH
      (Tanzania) per Baroness Hale at [33] and Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74
      at [10]).  It was also incumbent upon the Judge to take  into  account
      the impact, if any, upon the rights of  ZD  (see  Beoku-Betts  v  SSHD
      [2008] UKHL 39).

  27. At paragraph 30, Judge Britton set out Article 8 and at  paragraph  31
      he set out the  well  known  five-stage  test  from  Lord  Bingham  of
      Cornhill's speech in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 at [17].  I have
      already noted that the Judge made his factual findings at paras 32-37.
       It is possible that the Judge accepted that  there  was  family  life
      between the  appellant  and  ZD  and  between  the  appellant  and  R.
      However, he does not make any express finding in  that  regard.   But,
      even if such a finding were implicit, in my judgement, the Judge  fell
      into error in two respects.

  28. First, the Judge only referred to R's best interests at para 37 of his
      determination.  There, he considers R's best interests to be:

           "with his mother and have a relationship with his father."

  29. It is clear to me that the reference to R's "father" is a reference to
      his biological father.  So, two sentences later in  paragraph  37  the
      Judge refers to "the appellant" and the maintenance of contact between
      the appellant and ZD and R if the appellant were removed  to  Morocco.
      There was evidence before the Judge, and I will return to it  shortly,
      concerning the relationship between R and the appellant.  That was set
      out in both the witness statement of the appellant and ZD and also  in
      their oral evidence, in particular at paras 23 and 26 respectively.  I
      accept Ms Fenney's submission that the Judge  has  not  made  adequate
      findings I respect of R's best interests.  In his findings, the  Judge
      did not grapple with that evidence and reach any finding on whether it
      is in R's best interest that the appellant  should  continue  to  live
      with him and ZD in the UK.

  30. Secondly, there was evidence before the Judge, and again I will return
      to this shortly, concerning the potential impact upon ZD in  terms  of
      her work and finances if the appellant were removed and unable to look
      after R.  Again, in his findings at  para  32-37,  the  Judge  neither
      grappled with this evidence nor made any explicit finding in  relation
      to it.  The failure to do so amounted, in my judgement, to an error of
      law.

  31. I do not accept Mr Richards' submission that any error was necessarily
      immaterial as the Judge was bound to reach the same conclusion.  It is
      wholly unclear to me what view the Judge  would  have  formed  had  he
      taken into account R's best interest and  the  impact  on  ZD  if  the
      appellant were removed.  Consequently, for these reasons  the  Judge's
      decision to dismiss the appeal under Article 8 involved the making  of
      an error of law and cannot stand.  That decision is set aside.

  32. I must, therefore, remake the decision.

      Remaking the Decision

  33. I heard submissions on this issue from both representatives.

  34. Ms Fenney relied upon the evidence concerning what, she submitted, was
      a strong relationship between R and the appellant.   She  relied  upon
      the supporting evidence for that and also that R's  biological  father
      lacked interest in him and she referred me to a text message  at  page
      43 of the bundle where R's father had failed for a second time to meet
      R.  Ms Fenney submitted that R had already lost one father and it  was
      not proportionate that he should lose another if  the  appellant  were
      removed.

  35. Mr Richards submitted that there was no independent evidence as to the
      likely impact upon R of the appellant's removal.  He accepted that  it
      might well be right that it was in R's short  term  best  interest  to
      have the  appellant  present.   However,  given  the  Judge's  adverse
      findings in respect of the relationship between ZD and the  appellant,
      he submitted that it was difficult to conclude that it was in R's best
      interests in the longer term.  In any  event,  Mr  Richards  submitted
      that the best interests of R, whilst a 'primary  consideration',  were
      not determinative.  Against those best interests had  to  be  set  the
      negative facts referred to by the Judge namely  the  appellant's  poor
      immigration history, his deception  of  ZD  and  his  fostering  of  a
      relationship with ZD in order  to  remain  in  the  UK.   Mr  Richards
      submitted that there were no "compelling" circumstances which  merited
      the grant of leave outside the Immigration Rules under Article 8.

  36. As  I  have  already  indicated,  the  evidence  is  set  out  in  the
      appellant's bundle, in particular in the appellant's witness statement
      and ZD's witness statement together with the  supporting  letters  (at
      pages 1-4; 5-10 and 29-42 respectively).  In  addition  there  is  the
      oral evidence given by the appellant and sponsor which is recorded  in
      Judge Britton's determination.

  37. The appellant relied upon Article 8 of the ECHR.  The correct approach
      to applying Article 8 is set out in Lord Bingham's speech in Razgar at
      [17] as follows:

           1) Will the proposed removal be  an  interference  by  a  public
              authority with the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
              respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?

           2) If so, will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
              gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

           3) If so, is such interference in accordance with law?

           4) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic society
              in the interests of national security, public safety  or  the
              economic well-being of the country,  for  the  prevention  of
              disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or
              for the protection of the rights of freedoms of others?

           5) If so, is such interference proportion ate to the  legitimate
              public end sought to be achieved?"

  38. The burden of proof is upon the appellant to  establish  that  Article
      8.1 is engaged, namely that he has private and family life in  the  UK
      and that the decision interferes with that  private  and  family  life
      sufficiently to engage Article 8. Thereafter, it is for the  Secretary
      of State to establish any such interference is justified as  being  in
      accordance with the law and for a legitimate aim set  out  in  Article
      8.2 and, if so, that any interference is proportionate.

  39. In relation to the issue of  proportionality,  that  as  Lord  Bingham
      pointed out in Razgar at [20]:

           "involve(s) the striking of a fair balance between the rights of
           the individual and the  interests  of  the  community  which  is
           inherent in the whole  of  the  Convention.   The  severity  and
           consequences  of  the  interference  will  call  for  a  careful
           assessment at this stage. "

  40. In assessing proportionality, the "best interests" of any child are  a
      primary   consideration   although   countervailing   factors    maybe
      sufficiently strong to  outweigh  a  child's  best  interest  (see  ZH
      (Tanzania) and Zoumbas).

  41. It is not suggested that the appellant can succeed  under  the  family
      life provisions in the Immigration Rules (Appendix FM) or on the basis
      of his private life (para 276ADE).  Those rules represent a  statement
      of the public interest endorsed by Parliament and proper  weight  must
      be given to that in assessing proportionality.  It  will  only  be  if
      there are "exceptional" or "compelling" circumstances that a grant  of
      leave under Article 8 outside the Rules  will  be  justified  (see  MF
      (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192; R (Nagre) v  SSHD  [2012]  EWHC
      720 (Admin); Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]
      UKUT 00640 (IAC)).

  42. The first issue concerns the nature of the  relationship  between  the
      appellant and ZD and between the appellant  and  R.   As  regards  the
      former, the evidence before the Judge (which I did not  understand  to
      be disputed) was that the appellant and ZD met on an internet site  in
      August 2011; a relationship developed and they physically met  shortly
      before Christmas in 2011.  At that time, they did not  live  together.
      However, the evidence of both the appellant  and  ZD  was  that  their
      relationship was developing.  When the appellant  was  arrested  on  4
      April 2012, the evidence of ZD was that she visited him with R and the
      appellant said that she brought him  clothes  and  money  to  purchase
      extra necessities  and  they  talked  over  the  telephone  each  day.
      Following the appellant's release on 1 July 2012, the appellant and ZD
      had lived together at the same address with R, ZD's son.  Although the
      Judge  found,  at  paragraph  36  of  his  determination,  that   ZD's
      intentions were "honourable", he went on to find  that  the  appellant
      was using the relationship in order to remain in the  UK.   The  Judge
      made no finding, however, as  to  whether  the  relationship  actually
      amounted to family life.  It does not seem  to  me  that  the  Judge's
      finding is necessarily inconsistent with a  finding  of  family  life.
      His finding was rather that the appellant's  relationship  served  his
      immigration purpose of seeking to remain in  the  UK;  a  relationship
      which  could  exist  and  have  substance  despite  it   suiting   the
      appellant's immigration  objectives.   In  my  judgement,  it  is  not
      possible to form a  view  on  the  relationship  between  ZD  and  the
      appellant without  also  looking  at  their  whole  circumstances,  in
      particular how the appellant has, if at all, integrated  into  a  unit
      consisting of ZD and R.  The Judge, of course, did  not  consider,  at
      least in his findings, the evidence about the appellant's relationship
      with R.

  43. That latter evidence is, in my judgement, clear.   The  appellant  has
      become a father figure for R.  He provides ZD with  practical  support
      by looking after R whilst ZD is at work.  At least,  he  does  so  for
      some of the time. In her oral evidence, ZD explained that  she  worked
      between 12 and 24 hours per week.  R went to nursery between 1 pm  and
      3 pm every day but that  the  appellant  looked  after  him  otherwise
      whilst she was at work.  The evidence was that R called the  appellant
      "daddy".

  44. By contrast, R's biological father appears to have little to  do  with
      R.  He and ZD split up shortly after R was born and, at best, he  sees
      R once a month when ZD takes R to his paternal grandparents.  I accept
      ZD's evidence concerning  the  difficulties  she  has  encountered  in
      making R's biological father meet his financial obligations to R, I am
      less impressed with the suggestion that the evidence  shows  that  R's
      biological father wants little to do with R.  It  would  be  wrong  to
      extrapolate from the one text exchange  showing  that  R's  biological
      father missed two possible meetings with R so as to conclude that  R's
      father is not interested in R in the future.  His is clearly an absent
      parent and, perhaps, a less that enthusiastic absent  parent  but  the
      evidence goes no further than that in my view.

  45. That said, I am  satisfied  on  the  evidence  that  the  relationship
      between ZD, R and the appellant is that of a de facto family unit.   I
      accept, therefore, that there is family life between the appellant and
      ZD and between the appellant and R.

  46. The Judge found that it was not practical for ZD  and  R  to  live  in
      Morocco. That is a finding that is  not  challenged.   It  is  clearly
      correct and I agree with it.  It would not be reasonable to expect  ZD
      to relocate to Morocco.  She is a British citizen  and  R  is  also  a
      British citizen.  Any relocation by R would  necessarily  disrupt  his
      future relationship with is biological father in the UK.

  47. For these reasons, I am satisfied that Article 8.1 is engaged.

  48. The respondent's decision  is  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  in
      furtherance of a legitimate aim namely the economic well-being of  the
      country.  The crucial issue is whether the decision is proportionate.

  49. As I have already indicated, I accept that  there  is  a  family  unit
      consisting of ZD, R and the appellant.  The Judge found that it was in
      R's best interests to be with his mother  and  to  have  a  continuing
      relationship with his biological father.  I entirely agree  with  that
      finding.  Mr Richards also acknowledged, albeit tentatively,  that  it
      might be in R's short term best interest to continue to live with  the
      appellant.  That, in my judgement, is also correct.  I accept that the
      appellant has become a father figure for R at least since  he  started
      to live with ZD and R from 1 July 2012.  I  accept  that  R  sees  the
      appellant as fulfilling the role of a  father.    I  accept  that  the
      appellant and R have formed a strong bond together.  I accept that the
      appellant's removal would have some impact upon R who would  lose  the
      appellant as a father figure.  The only means of  maintaining  contact
      would be through electronic means such as Skype.   Whilst  that  would
      provide  some  contact  it  could  not  be  the  substitute  for   the
      involvement that the appellant currently has in R's life.  That  said,
      I also accept Mr Richards'  submission,  that  there  is  no  specific
      evidence of any  impact,  particularly  in  terms  of  its  nature  or
      severity upon R if the appellant is removed.  But,  as  I  say,  I  do
      accept that there will be some impact upon R given the role  that  the
      appellant currently plays in his life  and  that  R's  best  interests
      would be best served by the appellant's continued involvement  in  his
      life.

  50. Ms Fenney relied upon the evidence which demonstrated the impact,  she
      submitted, upon ZD (and through  her  on  R)  if  the  appellant  were
      removed.  ZD works.  The impact upon ZD's ability to work is, however,
      not entirely clear.  In her witness statement ZD states  that  if  the
      appellant is removed:

           "I would never be able to work and would be a full  time  mother
           to [R]."

  51. In her oral evidence, ZD said that before the appellant came  to  live
      with her she worked part time (15 hours) working two  days  per  week.
      She had a childminder for one day and her mother looked  after  R  for
      the other day.  She said that she now worked more hours between 16 and
      24.  R went to a nursery between 1 pm and 3 pm every day and  went  to
      his maternal grandmother on a Saturday.  In her witness statement,  ZD
      says that she has a tax credit which she uses in order to pay for R to
      go to the playgroup.  ZD lived next door to her sister and,  it  would
      appear from their addresses, in the same  area  as  her  parents.   In
      their letter of support (at page 38),  ZD's  parents  note  that  ZD's
      working tax credit was reduced as a result of the appellant moving  in
      with her and  she  has  had  to  increase  her  working  in  order  to
      compensate for that loss of income.  They state that they all work and
      only look after R on Sundays.  It appears, therefore, that before  the
      appellant moved  in  with  ZD  she  was  able  to  work,  employing  a
      childminder for one day and having her mother look  after  R  for  the
      other day.  She has only  increased  her  working  time  in  order  to
      compensate for the loss of working tax credits because  the  appellant
      now lives with her.  If he did not live with her, in my judgement, the
      evidence does not show that she would be unable to continue  to  work,
      at least on the part time basis that  she  did  before  the  appellant
      moved in with her, and organised necessary childcare for R remembering
      always that now (as opposed to then) he attends nursery between  1  pm
      and 3 pm.  ZD managed before the appellant moved in and I am satisfied
      that  she  would  manage  again   financially   and   with   childcare
      arrangements if the appellant were removed.

  52. Of course, ZD would lose the appellant  as  her  partner  if  he  were
      removed to Morocco.  Again, modern forms of communication would not be
      a substitute for  the  relationship  that  she  now  enjoys  with  the
      appellant.

  53. The appellant's relationship with R has been relatively short and R is
      now only 3 � years old.   In  the  absence  of  any  evidence  to  the
      contrary, I see no basis for finding that R  will  necessarily  suffer
      irreparably if he is brought up by  his  mother.   ZD's  family  lives
      nearby and R, it is said, has a close relationship with  his  maternal
      grandparents.  He also visits his paternal grandparents once  a  month
      and,  despite  his  dilatoriness,  R's  biological  father  also   has
      continuing contact with R.  There is, therefore, a family  environment
      in which ZD and R exist and in which R will continue to be brought up.



  54. That said, in this case the public interest  is  strong.   First,  the
      appellant cannot meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
      Secondly, he has been in the UK illegally since October 2011.  He,  at
      least, formed a relationship with ZD and R in full knowledge  that  he
      had no legal basis for being in the UK and, as  the  Judge  found,  in
      order (despite its genuineness) to facilitate his continued  residence
      in the UK.  Thirdly, the appellant has  practiced  deception  both  in
      obtaining work by purchasing and using a false French ID card and also
      in deceiving ZD about his immigration status until it necessarily came
      out when he was arrested in April 2012.

  55. I must, therefore, balance the public interest against  the  impact  I
      have identified for ZD and that R's best interests, at  least  in  the
      short term, would be to have the appellant in the UK.  Bearing in mind
      the family circumstances of ZD and R in the UK and the  strong  public
      interest  flowing  from  the  appellant's  inability   to   meet   the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules and his own immigration history,
      I am  satisfied  that  the  appellant's  removal  is  a  proportionate
      interference with the family life of the appellant, ZD and R.   In  my
      judgement, the strength of the  public  interest  outweighs  R's  best
      interests in this appeal.  The circumstances are not 'exceptional'  or
      'compelling' so as to justify the grant of leave under  Article  8  of
      the ECHR outside the Immigration Rules.

Decision

  56. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
      appeal under Article 8 involved the making of an error of  law.   That
      decision is set aside.

  57. I remake the decision dismissing the appellant's appeal under  Article
      8 of the ECHR.



                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:


To the Respondent
Fee Award

As the appellant has not succeeded in his appeal, I make no fee award.






                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:







