
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23458/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 March 2016                              |On 12 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mr Raja Imran Ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Chohan, Counsel, instructed by Immigration
Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan  born  on  16  July  1979.   He
    appeals to the Upper Tribunal with permission from Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (FTT) Ford against the decision of  Judge  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Cooper (the Immigration Judge) to allow the appeal under  "the
    Regulations". Judge Ford considered that there was an arguable error of
    law in that the Immigration Judge had appeared to be persuaded that, at
    the date of the hearing, that the  sponsor  was  employed  as  claimed.
    However, the Immigration Judge had not apparently  mentioned  the  fact
    that appellant appeared to have been employed by the  same  person  who
    provided evidence  as  her  accountant;  thus  rendering  the  evidence
    potentially unreliable.

2.   Ms Sreeraman explained that the decision appeared to have contained  an
    inconsistency between a finding at paragraph  26  (that  the  documents
    showing that the appellant was employed  by  a  company  called  Evolve
    caused the judge to be taken aback because they appeared to be the same
    format and typeface as those produced by  the  appellant's  accountant)
    and paragraph 27  (where  there  was  an  apparent  acceptance  of  the
    sponsor's employment  by  that  employer).   The  two  appeared  to  be
    inconsistent.

3.   Very fairly, Mr Chohan, who represented the appellant in  the  FTT  and
    the Upper Tribunal, acknowledged that the hearing before the FTT was  a
    float hearing and that  the  Immigration  Judge  had  limited  time  to
    consider the file before commencing the hearing. Indeed,  I  note  from
    paragraph 26 of the decision that the  appellant's  only  attempted  to
    serve the documents  in  support  of  the  appellant's  appeal  on  the
    respondent two or three days before the hearing and that Mr  Bose,  who
    represented the respondent at that hearing, had no  proper  opportunity
    to consider them.  Ms  Sreeraman  also  accepted  that  the  Presenting
    Officer, who has provided her with a note which she has handed in to me
    and which I shall attach to the file, had to prepare the  case  without
    any opportunity to read the papers.  It seems that there was a  missing
    file, as sometimes occurs in these cases.

4.   Therefore, it seems that only Mr Chohan was ready for the  hearing  and
    given that evidence in the FTT was probably served  on  the  respondent
    far too late (the normal rule being that it has to be served  at  least
    seven days before a hearing) that the respondent did not have a  proper
    opportunity to put its case at the hearing. Mr Bose cross-examined  the
    appellant and sponsor at the hearing, and I have read out a note of the
    cross-examination  as  recorded  by  the  Immigration  Judge.  However,
    unfortunately, the Immigration Judge did not consider all the documents
    handed in as fully as he should have done before reaching his decision.
    This probably would have  occurred  if  the  respondent  had  a  proper
    opportunity  to  consider  them.  Had  those  documents  been  properly
    considered the FTT may well have come to a different conclusion.

5.   There seems to be a degree of acceptance, reluctantly on  the  part  of
    the appellant but less reluctantly on the part of the respondent,  that
    the appropriate thing to  do  is  to  allow  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Cooper to consider the matter further both in the light of the
    documents that were handed in at the hearing if they are  still  relied
    upon and any  updated  documents  relating  to  the  sponsor's  alleged
    employment. The reliability of the documents adduced on the appellant's
    behalf needs to be carefully considered by Judge Cooper.

6.   There does need to be  a  clear  reasoned  decision  as  to  the  issue
    identified by Ms Sreeraman whether the sponsor, as  a  Czech  national,
    has been exercising Treaty rights in the UK under the  EEA  Regulations
    2006.  It is quite a straightforward point, but it does  need  properly
    determining.

7.   Reluctantly, therefore, I am going to remit  the  matter  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal  to  be  listed  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Cooper.  Specific directions for the filing  of  evidence  and
    for an oral hearing are to be sent  out  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    preferably sitting at Taylor House, where both  parties  will  have  an
    opportunity to be heard before Judge  Cooper.  Judge  Cooper  can  then
    reconsider the documents produced before him at  the  last  hearing  as
    well as any updating documents going to  the  issue  of  the  sponsor's
    employment. Judge Cooper can then make fresh findings on the  issue  of
    the extent to which the sponsor has been exercising EEA  Treaty  rights
    in the UK.

8.   As a postscript, there is no appeal  against  the  Immigration  Judge's
    decision that Article 8 of the European Convention  did  not  apply  in
    these circumstances. In any event, it is highly debatable that  article
    8 needs to be considered in an EEA case.

9.   I therefore find a material error of law and remit the matter  back  to
    the FTT.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is to the extent that the Upper Tribunal finds a  material  error
of law in the decision of the FTT and remits the matter back to be heard  by
Judge Cooper in that tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The decision by the FTT to make no fee award stands.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
