
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/23396/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 December 2016                  |On 15 December 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                         MOHAMED SAMROOS ABDUL SAMAD
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr A Chohan, Solicitor
For the Respondent:     Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on  7  May  1989.  He
         entered the UK as a student and when his leave  was  curtailed,  he
         applied for a residence card as the unmarried  partner  of  an  EEA
         national.

      2. The appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ghani by  way
         of a determination promulgated on 25 May 2016.

      3. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins on
         16 November 2016 but alerting the parties  to  the  effect  of  the
         decision in Sala (EFMs: right of appeal) [2016]  UKUT  00411  (IAC)
         where it had held by the Tribunal that there was no statutory right
         of appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to  refuse
         to issue a residence card to an extended family member  of  an  EEA
         national.

      4. At the hearing before me both parties were agreed that there was no
         valid appeal. Mr  Chohan  explained  that  the  appellant  had  now
         married  his  partner  in  a  religious  ceremony  and  required  a
         certified copy of his identity documents in order to have  a  civil
         marriage.

      5. At the conclusion of the hearing I indicated that I concurred  with
         the submissions and that my determination would follow.

      6. As the unmarried partner of the sponsor at the date of the  hearing
         before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, the appellant was an extended
         family member. He, therefore, falls within the category of  persons
         that the Tribunal dealt with in Sala.  On  the  reasoning  of  that
         appeal, the First-tier Tribunal had no  jurisdiction  to  hear  the
         appeal against the refusal to  document  him  as  the  EFM  of  the
         sponsor. It does not matter that Sala  was  promulgated  after  the
         appellant's determination as the judgment sets out the  law  as  it
         should have been applied regardless of when the appeal  was  heard.
         It follows that the determination is rendered void.

      7. Decision

      8. There was no appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal  to  determine.
         The determination is  set  aside  and  the  appellant's  appeal  is
         dismissed for want of jurisdiction.



    Signed





       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 14 December 2016




