
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23400/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 October 2013                            |On 27 November 2013          |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                                   Between

                           Shimataver Anthony Waya

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Cantor, Counsel, instructed by A & A Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Andonian sitting at Taylor House on 13 August 2013  in  which  he
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary
    of State to give directions for the removal of the appellant  from  the
    United Kingdom pursuant to the rejection of the  appellant's  claim  in
    respect of the Immigration Rules and Article 8 of the ECHR.

2.   The challenge advanced is one of procedural fairness.  The judge  noted
    that two potential witnesses, namely the mother and grandmother of  the
    asserted partner of the appellant, had provided witness statements  but
    did not attend the hearing.  What the judge, I am  satisfied,  did  not
    record is that there had been a specific application made by Counsel to
    the judge at the hearing for an adjournment on the basis that  both  of
    the witnesses were unwell.   The  partner's  mother,  having  undergone
    cancer treatment had a hospital appointment  and  the  grandmother  was
    said to be unwell for other reasons.  Nowhere in the determination does
    the judge record the adjournment application or his response to it.  It
    is therefore not possible to ascertain on what basis, if any, the judge
    decided to proceed notwithstanding the application.

3.   Lest it be thought that the matter  is  immaterial,  I  agree  with  Ms
    Cantor's  submissions  to  me  that  there  is,  plainly,  evidence  as
    disclosed in the appellant's bundle comprising the witness statement of
    the grandmother and a letter from the mother which arguably go  to  the
    issue of whether it would be  proportionate  in  the  circumstances  to
    require the appellant to leave the United Kingdom  and  make  an  entry
    clearance application to return here from abroad.

4.   The judge has also erred, I find, in failing  to  have  any  regard  to
    those documents in reaching his conclusions on the appeal.   For  those
    reasons I find that there are material errors in the  determination  of
    the judge.  I set his decision aside.

5.   In all the circumstances, and having heard submissions to  this  effect
    from the parties, I consider that it is appropriate for this case to be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard in its entirety by  a
    judge other than Judge Andonian.  My reasons for  so  saying  are  that
    this is a case which comes within the purview of the relevant  Practice
    Statement.  The effect of the error has been in effect to  deprive  the
    appellant of a fair hearing.  He therefore ought to have  that  hearing
    at the appropriate level, which is the First-tier Tribunal.

6.    Arrangements  have  been  made  this  morning  for  documentation   in
    possession of Ms Cantor relating to the  respective  illnesses  of  the
    witnesses to be supplied to Ms Kiss who  represents  the  Secretary  of
    State.





                               Signed                                  Date




                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane

