

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/23298/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 2 October 2013                             |on 3 October 2013            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before
                      Mr C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                ARIF HUSSAIN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mr D Brown, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. The appellant appeals against a determination by First-tier Tribunal
       Judge Agnew, dismissing  his  appeal  against  refusal  to  issue  a
       residence card as confirmation of a right of residence as the family
       member of an EEA national.


    2. Mr Brown made three submissions:

       (1) The judge erred (paragraph 13) by identifying and giving adverse
       significance to a discrepancy over whether  the  appellant  and  his
       wife resided at no 92 or at no 97 Main Street.  She said that no  97
       was the address on the marriage certificate, but in fact it says  no
       92, consistently with other evidence.

       (2) The judge dealt inadequately with a number of items of  evidence
       showing that the appellant and his wife shared the same address.

       (3) The judge gave too much weight to the lack of cohabitation after
       the marriage.  She made no clear finding  over  whether  the  couple
       resided at either of the addresses where  there  was  evidence  that
       they lived together, and dwelt on the evidence that the spouses were
       no longer living together, when the real question was  whether  this
       was a marriage of convenience at the time it took place.  There  was
       considerable evidence of cohabitation before and for a period  after
       the time  of  the  marriage.   The  appellant's  wife  had  given  a
       statement and attended twice to give evidence in his  support.   The
       judge  was  distracted  by  the  evidence  that  the  couple  became
       distanced from each other at a later date.


    3. On submission (3), Mr Mullen accepted  that  the  judge  missed  the
       point that the question was  not  whether  the  parties  were  later
       estranged.  The determination would have been sound if the  question
       was whether the marriage relationship had broken down, but he  could
       not say that the determination laid a proper foundation for  finding
       that this had been a marriage of  convenience  at  the  outset.   He
       could not resist the conclusion that there had been error of law.

    4. We indicated that the decision would be  remade  in  favour  of  the
       appellant.

    5. On submission (1), we do not think that the judge did attribute  any
       adverse significance.  She did  not  say  there  was  any,  and  the
       addresses of the two parties on the certificate are  the  same.   We
       think this was noted as a small point in the appellant's favour, and
       that "97" in determination is a typographical or narrative error.

    6. On submission (2), we  found  in  course  of  submissions  that  the
       council tax bill (paragraph 14 of  the  determination)  was  in  the
       terms which to be expected, if the chronology of the  couple's  life
       together was as claimed.  The judge misunderstood the  letters  from
       the electoral registration office (paragraph 15) which did show that
       the parties were already registered voters at the address  to  which
       the letters were sent.   Those  points  assisted  the  appellant  in
       reaching a fresh decision.

    7. The evidence was that although difficulties arose after the date  of
       the  marriage,  there  was  earlier  cohabitation  and   a   genuine
       relationship.  The appellant discharged the  onus  of  showing  that
       this was not entered into as a marriage of convenience only.


    8. The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.   The
       appeal, as brought by the appellant to the First-tier  Tribunal,  is
       allowed.

    9. No order for anonymity has been requested or made.  No fee award has
       been requested or made.


                               [pic]
                                2 October 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal


