
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/23089/2014
                                                               IA/23094/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 September 2015                  |On 16 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     AO
                                     MO
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R Khosla, Solicitor from D J Webb and Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Officer Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication  thereof  shall  directly  or   indirectly   identify   the
    Appellants. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt  of
    court proceedings. This direction has been made in order to protect the
    Appellants from serious harm, having regard to the interests of justice
    and the principle of proportionality.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge R L Walker (Judge Walker), promulgated  on  10  February
    2015, in which he dismissed the Appellants' appeals. The  appeals  were
    against the Respondent's decisions of 9 May 2014 to  remove  them  from
    the United Kingdom by way of directions under paragraphs 8  to  10A  of
    Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971 (in respect of AO)  and  as  the
    family member of such an illegal entrant (in respect of MO).

 3. The Appellants are citizens of Nigeria. AO is the mother  of  MO.  They
    were born on 7 September 1972 and 13 March 2006 respectively.  After  a
    somewhat protracted history  of  human  rights  applications  from  the
    Appellants and refusals by the Respondent, the latter finally issued an
    appealable decision on 14 May 2014. The  accompanying  decision  letter
    considered the applications under Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.
    Ultimately, it was concluded that it would not be unreasonable  for  MO
    to go to Nigeria, and that his mother could  accompany  him  there.  In
    respect of Paragraph 267ADE, it was again said that MO could reasonably
    be expected to live in Nigeria.  AO  retained  ties  to  that  country.
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009  was
    considered, as were the existence of exceptional  circumstance  outside
    of the Rules. The applications were rejected.

The decision of Judge Walker

 4. The appeals came before Judge Walker on 4 February 2015. He found  that
    MO has mild language disorder and received therapy through a  programme
    delivered by a Teaching Assistant at his school (paragraphs 30 and 37).
    Direct access with a speech therapist was not required  and  assistance
    could be obtained in Nigeria (paragraph 38). He accepted  that  removal
    to Nigeria would cause some disruption,  but  that  MO  was  not  at  a
    critical stage of his education (paragraph 36). There  was  nothing  to
    suggest that MO could not have an education in Nigeria  (paragraphs  36
    and 40). AO had close family ties in Nigeria, having her older daughter
    and other relatives there (paragraph 33). All told, Judge Walker  found
    that it would be reasonable for MO to go to Nigeria and that  AO  could
    not satisfy  Paragraph  276ADE  herself.  The  appeals  were  therefore
    dismissed under the  Rules.  Section  55  of  the  2009  Act  was  also
    considered.

 5. Judge Walker considered the claims outside of the Rules. He found  that
    there was no family life as between  the  Appellants  and  nephews  and
    nieces of AO who  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  (paragraph  44).  He
    concluded that the Appellants' private lives would  not  be  interfered
    with so as to engage Article 8 (paragraph 44). Finally, he stated  that
    in the event that proportionality were to be  assessed,  removal  would
    not breach Article 8 (paragraph 47).



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. The grounds were four-fold. Ground 1 asserts that Judge  Walker  failed
    to give reasons for credibility points about how AO  supported  herself
    financially. Ground 2 asserts that "sweeping general  statements"  were
    made in respect of MO's ability to adapt to life in Nigeria.  Ground  3
    is based on a lack of reasons for the finding that there was no  family
    life with the nephews and nieces in the United Kingdom. Ground 5  takes
    issue with the alleged failure to conduct  a  full  balancing  exercise
    outside of the Rules.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Brunnen
    on 10 April 2015. He did not limit his grant, but commented  that  only
    ground 3 appeared to have any merit.

The hearing before me

 8. Mr Khosla relied on the grounds. Starting with ground 3,  he  submitted
    that there were no reasons from Judge Walker as to why family life  did
    not exist. I directed him to the statements of AO and her niece, SW, in
    the Appellant's bundle which was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Mr
    Khosla submitted that this evidence was capable of amounting to  family
    life (he was unable to assist with what had been said by  way  of  oral
    evidence and I found  the  record  of  proceedings  very  difficult  to
    decipher). Removal would have constituted an interference  and  a  full
    balancing exercise could have made a difference to the outcome  of  the
    appeal. The unusual feature of the case was that the nephew and niece's
    mother (AO's sister) had died in 2011. Since then,  despite  living  in
    different  parts  of  the  country,  AO  and  MO  had  had  a   special
    relationship with them, with AO acting as a surrogate mother.

 9. On ground 2 and the best interests of MO, Mr Khosla sought to widen the
    scope of the argument as stated in the original grounds.  It  was  said
    that Judge Walker had misinterpreted  the  evidence  on  MO's  language
    therapy by concluding that no "direct" assistance  from  the  therapist
    was necessary. Thus, a proper assessment of the best interests and  the
    reasonableness of going to Nigeria had not been  carried  out.  It  was
    submitted that whilst the decision in Azimi-Moayed  and  Others  [2013]
    UKUT 00197 (IAC) had been cited by Judge Walker, he had not applied it.
    For example, MO's shyness in social settings  had  not  been  accounted
    for.

10. Finally, it was submitted that Judge Walker was wrong to have concluded
    that no interference was present in respect of Article 8 outside of the
    Rules. Mr Khosla had nothing to add in  terms  of  the  proportionality
    conclusion in paragraph 47.

11. Mr Whitwell relied on the rule 24 notice. There was no error in respect
    of the finding that no family life existed with the nephews and nieces.
    The evidence before the judge was thin. If there was an error,  it  was
    immaterial given the evidence as a whole  and  the  high  threshold  in
    Article 8 cases outside of the Rules: SS (Congo) [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387
    was relied on in this regard. As to  the  best  interests  of  MO,  the
    grounds said nothing about the findings on  the  therapy  issue.  Judge
    Walker had properly directed himself in law and the Appellants were now
    just disagreeing. Outside of the Rules, the Razgar  approach  had  been
    applied.

My decision on error of law

12. I find that there are no material errors of  law  in  the  decision  of
    Judge Walker.

13. Taking the grounds and submissions in  order,  I  find  that  there  is
    nothing of substance in ground  1  and  the  challenge  to  credibility
    findings. In paragraph 29 all Judge Walker  was  saying  is  that  AO's
    evidence on financial support  was  vague  and  "did  not  assist"  her
    credibility. I do not see this as even being  an  adverse  finding,  as
    opposed to a neutral factor. Even if it is and even if  it  was  poorly
    reasoned, it clearly  had  little  or  no  bearing  on  Judge  Walker's
    decision as a whole. Mr Khosla acknowledged that this was not a  strong
    ground and he was right to do so.

14. Ground 2 is the challenge to Judge Walker's  assessment  of  MO's  best
    interests and, on a fair interpretation of the argument,  the  question
    of the reasonableness of removal to Nigeria. First, the  ground  itself
    was narrowly drafted and based on the assertion of perversity,  a  high
    hurdle to overcome in any appeal. The ground focuses on what are deemed
    to be irrational sweeping statements about a child's ability  to  adapt
    to a new country. In my view the challenge as  framed  in  the  grounds
    fails entirely. Judge Walker was  entitled  to  take  account  of  more
    generalised factors such as the not  uncommon  occurrence  of  families
    having to move home and/or school and make  new  friends,  provided  he
    also had full regard to the specific circumstances of MO as well. Given
    that successful Article 8 claims (within or without the Rules)  are  by
    their nature rare instances, matters that  are  relatively  commonplace
    will be relevant to the overall assessment. In respect of the  specific
    circumstances of MO, Judge Walker dealt with these more than adequately
    elsewhere in his decision (see below).

15. Mr Khosla sought to expand the scope of ground 2 at  the  hearing.  The
    proposed expansion was on the subject of the therapy  required  by  MO,
    something that had not even been alluded to in the grounds.  There  has
    been no written application to amend the grounds. Having considered the
    matter carefully, I conclude that Mr Khosla is not entitled  to  expand
    on the grounds in the manner sought.

16. Even if I were wrong to have limited him in this way, Judge Walker  did
    not in fact misinterpret the evidence in any event. The  evidence  from
    Sarah Buckley Therapies Limited clearly states that MO's mild  language
    disorder was being managed by way of "blocks of indirect therapy  under
    the guidance of [...] in combination with indirect advice  and  liaison
    throughout the year." (page 6 of the Appellant's bundle). In  light  of
    the evidence before him, Judge Walker was fully  entitled  to  conclude
    that MO's condition could be adequately managed in Nigeria  by  way  of
    indirect  therapy.  He  was  also  entitled  to  rely  on  the  country
    information cited by the Respondent. There is no  indication  that  the
    Appellants had adduced their own  evidence  to  show  that  appropriate
    therapeutic provision was simply unavailable in Nigeria.  There  is  no
    error in Judge Walker's approach or conclusions.

17. Mr Khosla's points about MO's shyness and the cultural ties established
    during his time in the United Kingdom are also beyond the proper  scope
    of the grounds. Again, even if they were to be entertained,  they  fail
    to disclose errors. Whilst  any  issue  of  shyness  is  not  expressly
    mentioned by Judge Walker, I have been shown  no  evidence  to  suggest
    that this was a particular and very significant problem for  MO.  There
    is no error here, but even of there was, it could not  be  said  to  be
    material. As regards cultural ties, the  judge  was  entitled  to  take
    account of the fact that MO has been brought up by his Nigerian  mother
    (who also has a Nigerian partner). There was no evidence  before  Judge
    Walker to indicate that MO had been raised in an environment devoid  of
    cultural ties to his Nigerian heritage.

18. Turning to ground 3. The finding in paragraph  44  that  there  was  no
    family life between the  Appellants  and  the  nephews  and  nieces  is
    reasoned only by way of the conclusion that the  bonds,  though  close,
    were not beyond normal emotional ties. I am prepared to find that  this
    was insufficient insofar as adequate reasoning is concerned.  There  is
    no indication that Judge Walker found the evidence before him  on  this
    issue to be unreliable and more was required when making this  finding.
    The real question is whether the error is material.

19. I conclude that  although  the  evidence  was  just  about  capable  of
    establishing family life and/or more  particularly  an  aspect  of  the
    Appellants'  private  lives,  the  error  identified  in  the  previous
    paragraph is not material to the outcome of the decision on the Article
    8 claims within or without the Rules. I find this to be so because  the
    actual evidence before Judge Walker was,  to  say  the  least,  sparse.
    There is a single, brief paragraph in AO's witness statement at page  2
    of the Appellant's bundle. The evidence contained therein  is  in  very
    general terms and certainly does not, on any rational view, in  and  of
    itself disclose the existence of ties so strong as to amount to  either
    a significant factor against the reasonableness of MO being removed  to
    Nigeria, or a "compelling circumstance"  (adopting  the  words  of  the
    Court of Appeal at paragraph 33 of  SS  (Congo)  in  respect  of  cases
    considered outside of  the  Rules).  The  niece,  SW,  describes  being
    "pretty close" to AO (page 3 of the bundle),  but  that  is  all.  This
    added very little to what AO had said. In light of this and the  accept
    facts that the Appellant's stopped living with the nieces  and  nephews
    in 2008, that they lived many miles apart, and that all bar one of  the
    other relations were adults at the time of the hearing,  there  was  no
    basis upon which Judge Walker could have rationally concluded that  the
    relationship between the Appellants and the other family members  would
    have rendered it unreasonable for MO to be removed (in respect  of  the
    requirements of the Rules) or tipped  the  balance  in  favour  of  the
    Appellants as regards their claims outside the Rules.

20. Turning finally to ground 4, although Judge Walker might have expressed
    himself more clearly in paragraph  47,  and  should  have  applied  the
    mandatory factors in section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, he was entitled to be brief, given  his  findings  and
    the  scope  of  the  Rules  as  they  applied  to  each  Appellant.  In
    particular, sub-section 117B(6) would not have assisted the Appellants,
    in light of Judge Walker's sustainable conclusions on Appendix  FM  and
    Paragraph 276ADE. Any error here is clearly not material.

Decision

The Appellants' appeals are dismissed.

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  that
decision stands.


Signed      Date: 15 September 2015

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed      Date: 15 September 2015

Judge H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

