
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA239342015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 May 2017                       |On 28 July 2017                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                 NABIL ZEHRI
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                    Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, of Counsel, instructed by BMAP
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW
Anonymity

  1. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order.  I  have  not
     been invited to make one and see no reason to do so.



Introduction and Background

  2. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-tier
     Tribunal Khawar promulgated on 15 September 2016.

  3. The Appellant is a citizen of Algeria born 4 November 1985 who applied
     on 21 August 2014 for a Residence Card as a family member  of  an  EEA
     national.

  4. The application was made on the basis that the Appellant  was  married
     to, Pantanassa Sofia Karakasi, a Greek national. It was contended that
     the Appellant's spouse, to whom I shall refer as  "the  Sponsor",  was
     exercising Treaty rights in the UK.

  5. The application was refused on 12 June 2015 essentially because it was
     supported by the inclusion of a false document and  the  marriage  was
     considered to be one of convenience.

  6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (IAC).

  7. By the time the appeal came before the Judge the relationship  between
     the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  had  broken  down  and  the  couple  had
     separated. Before the Judge the Respondent was not represented but the
     Appellant  was  represented  by  Mr  Collins.  The  Judge  refused  an
     application to adjourn by Mr  Collins  to  obtain  police  reports  to
     substantiate a claim of domestic violence because it was irrelevant to
     the issues and  there  had  been  ample  opportunity  to  obtain  such
     evidence. The Judge heard oral evidence from the Appellant. A  summary
     of his claim is set out at [9]-[15]. Central to the  Appellant's  case
     was his contention that his marriage was genuine  established  by  the
     fact that they were permitted  to  marry  following  an  interview  by
     Immigration Officers at the Registry Office on the date  of  marriage,
     as well as medical records that supported his  claim  that  he  was  a
     victim of domestic violence with consequent mental health problems.

  8. The Judge found the  Appellant's  appeal  could  not  succeed  as  the
     marriage had ended [18]. The Judge also declined to make any  findings
     in relation to the marriage and the alleged use of false documents and
     indeed the Sponsor's employment. The Judge concluded that he could not
     do  so  in  the  absence  of  cross-examination  from  a  Home  Office
     Presenting Officer and, in consequence, it was inappropriate "for  the
     Tribunal Judge to enter into the arena in order to  cross  examine  an
     Appellant at some length, especially one who  potentially  has  mental
     health issues". In his omnibus conclusion, the Judge  stated  thus  at
     [21]:

    "For the above reasons I do not make findings of fact, in  relation  to
    whether or not the  Appellant's  marriage  is/was  one  of  convenience
    especially in view of the fact that  Immigration  Officers  interviewed
    both  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  immediately  before   their   Civil
    Registration of marriage and allowed the Civil Registration Ceremony to
    continue, having concluded that there were only  "minor  discrepancies"
    between the account of the Appellant and Sponsor and he had established
    a life in United Kingdom. I am  bound  to  note  that  the  Immigration
    Officers conduct in  permitting  the  Civil  Registration  Ceremony  to
    continue tends to suggest that the Appellant's marriage to the  Sponsor
    was genuine. This appears to be further supported  by  the  Appellant's
    medical records. However, as noted  above,  due  to  the  lack  of  any
    adequate cross-examination of the appellant, I am not in a position  to
    make any finding in  his  favour  or  indeed  against  the  Appellant."



  9. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal and  whilst  permission
     was initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal, it  was  granted  by
     the Upper Tribunal on 15 March 2017.

 10. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the Upper
     Tribunal to ascertain whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law
     such that the decision should be set aside.

Decision on Error of Law

 11. The essence of the grounds drafted by Mr Collins  is  that  the  Judge
     failed in his duty to make findings on material issues and that he was
     not  absolved  from  doing  so  in  the  absence  of  a   Respondent's
     representative. In view of those  grounds,  the  Respondent  does  not
     oppose the appeal. She concedes through  Mr  Bramble  that  the  Judge
     materially erred in law in failing to make any findings in relation to
     the core issues  in  dispute  between  the  parties,  leading  to  the
     conclusion that the decision, as a whole, was poor.

 12. I find it has been made out for the reasons set  out  in  the  grounds
     seeking permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and the  positional
     statements by both advocates before this tribunal  that  the  approach
     taken by the Judge is infected by arguable legal error such  that  the
     decision dismissing the appeal  is  unsafe  and  cannot  stand.  I  am
     satisfied that there was a denial of natural justice to the parties by
     the Judge's failure to make any evaluations of material aspects of the
     evidence, particularly, in view of the fact that the  Appellant  faced
     two serious allegations; one of misuse of  rights  and  the  other  of
     fraud.

 13. Whilst it was not for the Judge to conduct the  Respondent's  case  in
     her absence, it is trite that in a case where there is a concern  that
     matters cannot be properly addressed, then the  Judge  should  adjourn
     the case part heard and require the Home Office to  make  available  a
     Presenting Officer at  the  adjourned  hearing  (see:  MNM  (Surendran
     guidelines for Adjudicators) Kenya * [2000] UKIAT 00005).  Such  would
     have been the appropriate course in view of  the  serious  allegations
     faced by the Appellant notwithstanding the inevitable outcome  on  the
     facts presented at the date of hearing.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  It  was  agreed  that
the appropriate way forward, in light of the extent of the  errors,  is  for
the matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard  by  a
judge other than Judge Khawar.


Directions


The Respondent is directed to  file  and  serve  a  copy  of  the  interview
record(s) in respect of the Appellant and Sponsor that took place during  an
enforcement visit at the Registry Office on 4  September  2014,  and/or  any
Immigration Officers' notes relating to it, 14 days prior  to  the  date  of
next hearing to be fixed by the First-tier Tribunal in due course.







Signed      Date 20 July 2017





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral












