
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/23940/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8th May 2014                                 |On 30th May 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

                            Aktarun Nessa Khatun
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Hussain, Maya Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Hague made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 3rd December 2013.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 21st  May  1934.   She
    entered the UK as a visitor with a visa due to expire  on  23rd  August
    2012.

 3. On 14th August 2012 she applied for leave to remain outside the UK  due
    to compelling and compassionate  circumstances.   The  application  was
    refused on 7th June 2013 and it is this decision which was the  subject
    of the appeal before Judge Hague.

 4. The application was refused under paragraphs 322(1) of HC 395 as it was
    one being sought for a purpose not covered by the Immigration Rules and
    under  paragraph  276ADE,  private  life  grounds   and   outside   the
    Immigration Rules on compelling and compassionate grounds with  respect
    to the Appellant's health.

 5. The Appellant's late husband had indefinite leave to remain in  the  UK
    and she came to join him in 1982 as a spouse.  They  then  returned  to
    live in Bangladesh and so, after two years' absence, she lost her right
    to enter.  After her husband died in 1990 she lived  with  her  son  in
    Bangladesh and says that she now wishes to stay in the UK  because  her
    daughter-in-law there was very cruel to her.

 6. The judge heard oral evidence  from  the  Sponsor  who  said  that  his
    brother was no longer willing to look after their  mother  who  suffers
    from a number of  challenging  medical  conditions  including  loss  of
    memory.  He had before him a letter from the Appellant's GP which  says
    that she has diabetes, hypertension, ischaemic  heart  disease  and  is
    taking appropriate medication.

 7. The judge said that he approached the evidence in  particular  that  of
    the Sponsor's son with caution because it appeared to him to be  skewed
    in order to achieve the  desired  objective.   The  evidence  that  his
    mother's health had declined from the time of his  father's  death  was
    not credible because she was widowed 22  years  ago  and  there  was  a
    discrepancy as to the reason why the Appellant was unable to give  oral
    evidence.  The Sponsor said it was because of memory loss and his  wife
    said it was because she was nervous.  The judge noted that she was able
    to go to the solicitors and  make  a  statement  and  he  rejected  the
    Sponsor's description of her.

 8. The Appellant's daughter-in-law also gave oral evidence confirming that
    she thought that the son and daughter-in-law in  Bangladesh  would  not
    accept her back. However the judge  found  it  not  credible  that  the
    Appellant only complained of cruelty after four or five months  in  the
    UK.  As she had been living with her other son for  22  years  and  the
    Sponsor had been visiting her every year or two  since  that  time,  he
    would have known about it far earlier had it been true.  It  was  clear
    to him that the application was not as a result of recent developments.



 9. The evidence of the daughter-in-law made it plain  that  there  was  no
    intention of return when she came to the UK.  He found as a  fact  that
    the visit visa was  obtained  fraudulently,  which  was  probably  done
    because she could not satisfy the requirements of the Rules.

10. The judge found there was no protected family life in this  case.   The
    Appellant's  family  life  was  with  her  family  in  Bangladesh.   He
    recognised that she was elderly but the public interest in her  removal
    derived from the  visit  visa  being  obtained  fraudulently  with  the
    objective of circumventing the Immigration Rules.  ECO's must  be  able
    to rely upon assurances given in visit visa  applications  and  it  was
    very damaging to effective immigration control if  visit  visas  become
    perceived as a means of setting up a fait accompli  in  the  UK.   That
    could only result in greater suspicion of elderly  applicants  and  the
    refusal of many innocent and genuine family visits.

11. The public interest  greatly  outweighed  the  private  rights  of  the
    Appellant and on that basis he dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

12. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to consider the relevant case  law  of  Beoku-Betts  v  SSHD
    [2008] UKHL 29 in that requiring the Appellant to return to  Bangladesh
    to make the correct entry clearance application  was  contrary  to  the
    principles set out in that  case.  Neither  did  the  judge  take  into
    account the Appellant's ill-health and the high standard  of  care  she
    was receiving in the UK, nor the fact that such level  and  quality  of
    care was not available to her if on return to  Bangladesh.   The  judge
    did not give reasons for preferring the evidence of the daughter-in-law
    to that of the son, given that he did not accept her evidence that  the
    family in Bangladesh would not accept her back.  Finally, although  the
    judge stated that  the  daughter-in-law  and  son  from  the  UK  could
    accompany the Appellant back to  Bangladesh  he  failed  to  take  into
    account that they could not reasonably be expected  to  give  up  their
    rights in the UK in order to care for her there.

13. Permission to appeal was granted on 26th March 2014  by  Judge  Osborne
    for the reasons stated in the grounds.

Submissions

14. Mrs Hussain relied on her grounds and  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    failed to take all of the relevant evidence into account, in particular
    the letter from Dr Ahmed dated 8th November 2013 which states that  the
    Appellant is a frail elderly lady who needs help  with  all  her  daily
    activities and 24 hour surveillance from a member of the family due  to
    frailty and short memory  impairment.   She  also  suffers  from  panic
    attacks and acute anxiety.  There was no challenge to the  veracity  of
    the letter.  The judge's failure to consider it  properly  impacted  on
    his assessment of the evidence; his mistake in its assessment  affected
    his assessment of the emotional and dependence on the Sponsor in the UK
    and on his consideration of Article 8.

15. Mrs  Pettersen  defended  the  determination  and  submitted  that  the
    Appellant's representative was  cherry  picking  the  daughter-in-law's
    evidence.  The judge had properly summarised  the  Appellant's  various
    illnesses and was entitled  to  take  into  account  the  contradiction
    between the son and the daughter-in-law as to the reason why the mother
    was not in court.  She noted that the Entry Clearance Officer  had  not
    been informed of any health difficulties.

16. It was open to the judge to find that the situation in  Bangladesh  had
    at best been exaggerated and to conclude that there had been  fraud  in
    the visit visa application which was a strong factor in  the  Secretary
    of State's favour.

17. There was no suggestion that the Sponsor and his  wife  would  have  to
    relocate to Bangladesh simply that they could accompany her  there  but
    in any event the doctor's letter did not say  that  she  was  unfit  to
    travel.

18. By way of reply Mrs Hussain said that  the  daughter-in-law's  evidence
    was consistent with  her  husband  in  relation  to  the  situation  in
    Bangladesh and there had been a genuine change of circumstances.  There
    were simply  no  family  members  willing  to  look  after  her  there.
    Moreover the judge's assumption that the application had been made  in-
    country in order to  circumvent  the  requirements  of  the  Rules  was
    unfounded since the Sponsor was  a  wealthy  man  who  could  meet  the
    maintenance requirements.

Findings and Conclusions

19. There is no error of law in this determination.

20. With respect to the medical evidence, although the judge's  summary  of
    the letter from the GP is brief, it is not inaccurate.

21. He was entitled to state that some of the  information  in  the  letter
    derived from what had been told by the  relatives.   The  issue  as  to
    whether the Appellant did not give evidence because of  nervousness  or
    because of memory loss is not central to  this  appeal.   There  is  no
    inherent contradiction between the doctor stating  that  the  Appellant
    had short term memory impairment and the judge's observation  that  she
    was nevertheless able to provide a statement to the solicitors.

22. The judge gave  proper  reasons  for  rejecting  the  evidence  of  the
    witnesses that the son, with whom the Appellant had lived for 22  years
    in Bangladesh, was no longer willing to look after her.  There  was  no
    such suggestion at  the  time  of  the  visit  visa  application.   The
    inference that this family had not been straightforward with the  Entry
    Clearance Officer when the visit application was made was  wholly  open
    to him.  The judge's reasoning is unassailable i.e had the  claim  been
    true and  the  Appellant  had  been  cruelly  treated  by  her  son  in
    Bangladesh, it is inconceivable that the Sponsor would  not  have  been
    aware of the problems during his frequent visits to Bangladesh over the
    past twenty years and implausible that no mention would have been  made
    of them until shortly before the visit visa was about to expire.

23. The fact that the  Sponsor  might  be  able  to  meet  the  maintenance
    requirements of the Rules is immaterial since, on the judge's findings,
    she could not meet the requirement that she had no close  relatives  to
    whom she could turn to in Bangladesh.

24. This is a sustainable decision and the  grounds  disclose  no  arguable
    error of law.



The Decision

25. The appeal is dismissed.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


