
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23098/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 October 2015                   |On 13 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                          BITTUBEN HASHUKBHAI PATEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Vatis, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of India born  on  6th  August,  1984.   She
    entered the United Kingdom on 1st July, 2009 as a Tier 4 Student with a
    visa valid from 22nd June, 2009 to 11th November, 2012.  Further  leave
    to remain was granted until  22nd  July,  2012  as  a  Tier  1  General
    Student.

2.   Malik Law Chambers Solicitors wrote to the Border Agency on 19th  July,
    2012.  They made application for discretionary leave on her behalf,  on
    what  they  described  as  being,  her  exceptional  and  compassionate
    circumstances.  She sought leave under Article 8 and it was  said  that
    at the  time  of  that  letter  she  was  residing  with  her  husband,
    Chintakumar Jayantibhai Patel, who was born on 2nd June, 1985  and  who
    came to the United Kingdom on 7th December, 2006 on a six month visitor
    visa valid from 17th July, 2006.  He remained  in  the  United  Kingdom
    following the expiry of his visa. The letter says  that  the  appellant
    met her husband some three years ago and formed a relationship with him
    and that after a year they married religiously on 31st  October,  2010.
    At the time of the letter she was stated to be nine months pregnant and
    she and her husband were expecting their  first  child  together.   The
    letter says that there are serious  and  compelling  reasons  why  they
    should be granted discretionary leave.

3.   The appellant was stated not to have any desire to return to India  and
    to be extremely distressed by this prospect.   She  has  now  lost  all
    connections with India.  She and her husband live in the United Kingdom
    and they wish to remain in the United Kingdom.  She promises to be  law
    abiding and  to  continue  to  contribute  positively  to  society.   A
    maternity certificate was enclosed with the application along with what
    was said to be wedding photographs.

4.   The Secretary of State refused that application in a letter dated  12th
    August, 2013 and it was against the refusal of leave that the appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

5.   The grounds do not assist terribly  much,  simply  asserting  that  the
    appellant feels that she has established her life in the United Kingdom
    that she is a helpful and kind human being; that she  is  law  abiding;
    that she has a private life in the United Kingdom; that  she  has  made
    friends during her stay in the  United  Kingdom  and  relies  on  their
    emotional  support;  that  she  will  have  difficulty  in  maintaining
    relationships with her friends, that the Secretary of State's  decision
    is contrary to the Immigration Rules; that the Secretary of  State  has
    erred in law  by  concluding  that  the  appellant  was  not  qualified
    according to the criteria laid down by the Immigration Rules, that  the
    decision is unlawful and incompatible with her rights under  the  Human
    Rights Act; that discretion under the  Immigration  Rules  should  have
    been exercised differently; that the appellant has a  private  life  in
    the United Kingdom, she has friends which she has made during his  stay
    in the United Kingdom and he relies on their emotional support.

6.   The grounds then cite what the grounds refer to as being relevant  law,
    namely paragraph 276ADE and Article  8.   They  then  set  out  further
    grounds suggesting  that  the  respondent  should  have  exercised  her
    discretion differently, that the decision is not in accordance with the
    Rules or law, that the appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  and  has
    been able to maintain  and  accommodate  herself  without  recourse  to
    public funds, that the appellant has  established  private  and  family
    life in the United Kingdom and it would be unreasonable and  unfair  to
    expect her and her partner to reside elsewhere.  She has never  claimed
    benefits, she has strong family ties in the United Kingdom and it would
    not be in the best interests of the appellant to be sent back to India.



7.   Those grounds are confusing and confused, because they  refer  in  part
    to the appellant being male and then they refer to her being female and
    refer to her having a family life, but nowhere do  they  refer  to  her
    having any children.

8.   She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and  notice  giving  the  date,
    time and place fixed for the hearing of the  appeal  was  sent  to  the
    appellant and to her then solicitors.   Contrary to what I was told  by
    Counsel this afternoon, the appellant was notified of the  hearing  and
    indeed she  wrote  to  the  Tribunal  by  letter  dated  6th  February,
    referring to the date of the Tribunal hearing and indicating  that  she
    would not be represented by her previous solicitors and that she  would
    be representing her own case.  She asked for a hearing date on  a  date
    other than 12th February, but does not say why she wanted a hearing  on
    another day.

9.   The judge noted that the appellant's previous  solicitors  had  written
    indicating that they wanted to come off the record, since they were  no
    longer acting and that the appellant wished to have her case decided on
    the papers.  She did not attend the  hearing  on  12th  February.   The
    judge  noted  the  Secretary  of  State's  reasons  for  refusing   the
    application and that the appellant could not bring herself  within  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

10.  The judge noted that the appellant's application was  considered  under
    Appendix FM  and paragraph 276ADE and noted  that  the  grounds  merely
    asserted that the Secretary of State "did not allocate  due  weight  to
    our client's established private life in the United  Kingdom  and  that
    she never  relied  on  public  funds".   In  the  absence  of  evidence
    suggesting that the Secretary of State's assessment under  Appendix  FM
    and paragraph 276ADE was wrong, he found that the decision made by  the
    Secretary of State was in accordance with the Immigration Rules.

11.  In respect of family life, he noted that there was a suggestion in  the
    original application that the appellant lives in this country  with  an
    Indian national to whom she is married and was expecting to give birth,
    but no further evidence had been given as to whether or not  the  child
    has been born whether there are any exceptional circumstances that  are
    required to be taken into account.

12.  In the absence of such evidence, the judge said that the  Tribunal  was
    unable to make a finding to whether the appellant had a family life  in
    the United Kingdom, but accepted that given the time she had been here,
    she may well have established a private life.  He went on  to  consider
    the extent of the appellant's  private  life  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules in accordance with FM, but he pointed out that he was  unable  to
    make any meaningful assessment as to the weight  to  be  given  to  the
    factors in Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 because no evidence had been provided to him.

13.  I find that there was no error of law in  the  judge's  decision.   The
    appellant was married but had  provided  the  judge  with  very  little
    evidence.  He did not know whether the  appellant  was  still  married.
    There was no evidence as to whether or not the  child  had  been  born.
    The fact of the matter is that the appellant could  not  bring  herself
    within the requirements of the Immigration Rules and there  was  simply
    no evidence at all before the judge which could possibly have justified
    the granting of any period of  leave  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Even now, I am aware that she has married. I am told  that  she  has  a
    family life with her husband and I am told that she has a  3  year  old
    child.  There clearly will not  be  any  breach  of  her  family  life,
    because she and her husband will be returned  to  India  together  with
    their child.

14.  I uphold the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision.   This  appeal  is
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
