
[pic]

Upper Tribunal


(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/23629/2014

                                                               IA/23632/2014
                                                               IA/23630/2014
                                                               IA/23631/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3 July 2015                       |Date Sent: 13 July 2015              |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL KAMARA


                                   Between

                       MRS CARMEN PIEDAD VASQUEZ PINA
                         MR CESAR RAMON GODOY ORTIZ
                     MASTER ALBERT STEVE BELTRAN VASQUEZ
                       MISS RUTH PAMELA GODOY VASQUEZ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Harris, counsel instructed by Farani Javid
Taylor LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


    1. The appellants appeal the decision, promulgated on 9  February  2015,
       of First-tier Tribunal Judge Wright, hereinafter referred to  as  the
       FTTJ.

 Background

    2. The first appellant entered the United  Kingdom,  unlawfully,  on  19
       June 2002. She gave birth to the third appellant, in this country, on
       10 November 2005. At some point  during  February  2007,  the  second
       appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom   unlawfully.   The   fourth
       appellant, born on 7 July 2011, is the child of the first and  second
       appellants. On 10 January 2012, the first appellant sought  leave  to
       enter the United Kingdom outside  the  Immigration  Rules,  with  the
       remaining appellants as her dependants. That application was  refused
       on 19 May 2014 owing to the ineligibility of all parties for leave to
       remain under the Rules on the basis of their nationality and lack  of
       settled immigration status. In addition, it was not accepted that the
       adult appellants had lost ties to their respective countries. It  was
       considered reasonable for the minor appellants to  leave  the  United
       Kingdom with their parents and continue their family life  in  either
       Ecuador or Paraguay.

    3. During the course of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal which
       took place on 23 January 2015, the first appellant,  her  sister  and
       the second appellant gave evidence.  It  transpired  that  the  first
       appellant's sister suffered from HIV infection and the  remainder  of
       the first appellant's immediate family resided in Ecuador. The second
       appellant's immediate family reside in Paraguay bar  one  sister  who
       lives in the United Kingdom. The  third  appellant's  father  was  no
       longer living in the United Kingdom.

    4. Judge Wright found as follows:

       a. The appellants could not meet  any  of  the  requirements  of  the
          Immigration Rules.

       b. That it would not be unreasonable to expect the  third  appellant,
          who had resided in the United Kingdom for 7 years since birth,  to
          leave the United Kingdom as part of his family unit.

       c. The removal of the appellants would not be disproportionate to the
          legitimate aim of  a  coherent  and  fair  system  of  immigration
          control.

 Error of law

   5. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  FTTJ  PJM  Hollingworth,  who
       considered that it was arguable that the  judge  failed  to  consider
       whether there would be a breach of Article  8  independently  of  the
       Rules. It was also said that it  was  arguable  that  the  judge  had
       "provided insufficient analysis of the application of the criteria in
       Razgar" and that the criteria in section 117 had not been  adequately
       applied.

   6. The Secretary of State responded to the grant  of  permission  on  27
       April 2015. In essence, the appeal was opposed. It  was  argued  that
       the FTTJ found no compelling circumstances and had regard to case law
       and section 117 of the 2002 Act.

   At the outset of the hearing, Mr  Jarvis  handed  up  the  cases  of  EV
       (Philippines) and others v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874;  AM  (s117B)
       Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) and  Nasim    and  others  (Article  8)
       [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC).


    7. Mr Harris placed little reliance upon the grounds of appeal, which he
       did not draft. Instead he placed his emphasis  on  what  he  believed
       were shortcomings in the decision in relation to the circumstances of
       the third appellant who had been residing in the United Kingdom for 7
       years since birth. He made little of the first ground of  appeal.  In
       essence, Mr Harris argued that the judge failed to assess  the  third
       appellant's ties to the United Kingdom independent of the rest of the
       family.

    8. He referred  me  to  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting
       children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC),  arguing  that  it
       was not impossible for a child aged 7 to succeed. Mr Harris  accepted
       that the judge considered relevant matters at various  parts  of  the
       decision but that he had concentrated on the adult appellants in  his
       consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules before  looking  at  the
       position of the third appellant and this was the wrong way round.

    9. For the respondent, Mr Jarvis acknowledged that the  third  appellant
       was the only one of the four who could engage with the Rules but that
       the judge recognised that the decision concerned the third  appellant
       even  if  there  appeared  to  be  a  lack  of  engagement  with  his
       circumstances.

   10. I consider  that  the  FTTJ  appropriately  directed  himself  within
       paragraph 36, in relation to the case law, specifically Azimi-Moayed.
       There are multiple references  to  the  position  of  the  the  third
       appellant throughout the reasons section of the decision as  well  as
       in the parts of the decision setting out the evidence before him.  It
       is plain to me that the FTTJ had in mind the strength  of  the  third
       appellant's private life, which was, in reality, the  main  issue  in
       the appeals.

   11. The judge considered the third appellant's circumstances in line with
       paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the  Rules.He  acknowledged  the  third
       appellant's length of residence and accepted that his best  interests
       were to remain in a family unit with the other  appellants  but  that
       his interests were capable of  being  outweighed  by  the  cumulative
       effect of other considerations. The FTTJ also records that the  third
       appellant received regular telephone calls from  his  natural  father
       who lived in the USA, that he was at school and that  he  spoke  both
       English and some Spanish. Other than a reference to having friends in
       the first appellant's witness statement, the FTTJ  set  out  all  the
       relevant components to the third appellant's  private  life.  I  also
       find that the focus of the FTTJ's decision was on what  would  happen
       to the minor appellants in either Paraguay or Ecuador. In view of the
       fact that the third appellant is still only aged 8, is only receiving
       primary  education,  that  there  were  no  compelling  circumstances
       relating to the appellants or the third appellant in  particular  and
       the unlawful nature of the adult appellants' residence in the  United
       Kingdom, I consider that there was only one outcome in this case.

   13. In these circumstances I am not satisfied that there  are  errors  of
       law such that the decision ought to be set aside to be remade.

   14. The decision of the FTTJ stands.

 Conclusions

 The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the
 making of an error on a point of law.

 No application for anonymity was made and I saw no reason to make  such  a
 direction.






 Signed     Date: 11 July 2015


 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara


