
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23448/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2 April 2013                                 |On 27 June 2013            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                  Umair Ali
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Khan
For the Respondent:    Ms J Donnelly, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Umair Ali, was born on 8 September 1987 and  is  a  male
    citizen of Pakistan.  The appellant had appealed against a decision  of
    the Secretary of State dated 12 October 2012 to refuse his  application
    for further leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General)
    Student.   First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Pirotta)  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 4 January 2013, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are two grounds of appeal.  The first asserts  that  the  judge's
    findings and reasons were "conflicting and  confusing"  which  rendered
    the determination unsustainable.  The grounds note that  at  [18]  when
    discussing the maintenance requirements of the  Rules,  the  judge  had
    found that there was "no evidence of liquid assets held  by  both  [the
    appellant  and  his  sponsor]  between  19.08.2012   and   14.08.2012".
    Earlier, at [16] the judge had written, "...there was  no  evidence  of
    his assets between 19.08.2012 and 24.08.2012."   The  grounds  asserted
    there was further difficulty  at  [14]  where  the  judge  appeared  to
    indicate that a balance which had been held  in  a  bank  account  from
    27.08.2012 to 19.08.2012  (the  latter  date  being  earlier  than  the
    former).

 3. These concerns were addressed to some extent  by  Judge  Lewis  on  the
    grant of permission at [2], he wrote, "ground 1 may be no more  than  a
    typing mistake  in  paragraph  18  of  the  determination  so  that  if
    14.8.2012 becomes 24.8.2012 there is no discrepancy,  together  with  a
    reverse chronology in paragraph 14".  I have to say I agree  with  that
    analysis.  The meaning of  both  passages  quoted  in  the  grounds  is
    apparent upon a reading of the entire determination and of the evidence
    adduced by the appellant.  The  skeleton  argument,  submitted  at  the
    Upper Tribunal initial hearing, seeks to  enlarge  upon  the  point  by
    referring to other errors in the dates contained in the  determination.
    I agree that the errors are confusing and should have been picked up by
    the judge by way of proof-reading.  However, the thrust of the  judge's
    finding is unequivocal, namely that the  appellant  did  not  have  the
    required sum of funds in his possession for the 28 day period  required
    prior to the submission of his application for further leave to remain.
     That fact appears now to be acknowledged  by  the  appellant  for  the
    second part of the skeleton argument submitted to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    begins with the words, "even if there was a shortfall for a  few  days,
    the respondent should  have  followed  her  Flexibility  Policy."   The
    skeleton argument goes on to say that,

         "Judge Pirotta had seen the sponsor's brother's bank account  which
         was dated 19 August 2012 and started on 19 February 2012 and  ended
         on 19 August 2012.  ...The appellant  should  have  been  given  an
         opportunity to submit a further statement to address the shortfall.
          There was sufficient balance in the brother's account  to  address
         the shortfall.  A copy of the bank statement from 19 August 2012 to
         31 December 2012 is attached at page 4."

     The  skeleton  argument  quotes  the  case  of  Rodrigues  (Flexibility
    Policy) [2013] UKUT 00042.  It was asserted that "the respondent  erred
    in law when she did not apply the flexibility policy."

 4. I find that submission to be ill-founded.  The  Tribunal  in  Rodrigues
    discussed and distinguished the Court of  Appeal  decision  in  Alam  &
    Others [2012]  EWCA  Civ  960.   Alam  concerned  the  failure  of  the
    appellants to comply with one of the requirements to provide  specified
    documentary evidence.  As the Tribunal in Rodrigues noted at  [21]  "in
    each case the missing documentation was available at the state  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing."  The Tribunal noted  that  the  Court  of
    Appeal were concerned with the fairness of the points-based  scheme  as
    whole and the application of any flexibility policy by the  respondent.
    And it is hardly surprising giving that the  missing  documentation  in
    Alam appears only to have become available to the judge at  the  First-
    tier Tribunal hearing; it had not  been  submitted  nor  its  existence
    adumbrated to the  Secretary  of  State  either  at  the  time  of  the
    application for further leave or at any time between  the  refusal  and
    the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  The facts in the  present
    appeal resemble those of Alam rather than Rodrigues  which  concerns  a
    failure or refusal of the Secretary of State  to  apply  a  flexibility
    policy which covered the application before it.  In other words, in the
    present appeal the Secretary of State  can  hardly  be  criticised  for
    failing to apply a policy of flexibility  when,  on  the  face  of  the
    appellant's application, there was no reason to suppose that he was  in
    possession of the required  funds  for  the  relevant  period.   As  Ms
    Donnelly, for the respondent, submitted the decision by  Judge  Pirotta
    to dismiss the appeal was the only decision available given that he had
    to exclude, by virtue of Section 85A of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002, evidence (in this case evidence of the funds  held
    by the sponsor) in his consideration of the appeal.

 5. The second ground of appeal suggested that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    understand the financial evidence.   However,  it  was  clear  from  Mr
    Khan's submissions at the initial hearing together with the contents of
    the skeleton argument to which I  have  referred  above  the  appellant
    accepts that, at the time of the application to the Secretary of State,
    the appellant did not have evidence of the necessary funds.

DECISION

 6. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
