
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23193/2015
                                                               IA/23194/2015
                                                               IA/23195/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 1st September 2016               |On: 5th September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                 Mehmet [D]
                                  Sevgi [D]
                                    [A D]
                        (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Khalaf, Chamberlain Immigration Services


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondents are all nationals of Turkey. They  are  respectively  a
    husband, wife and their minor son.  On the 22nd December 2015 the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge J Lebasci) allowed their  linked  appeals  against
    decisions to refuse to grant them Indefinite Leave to Remain  following
    a period of four years' continuous residence  in  accordance  with  the
    European Community  Association  Agreement  with  Turkey  ('the  Ankara
    Agreement'). The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  now  has
    permission to appeal against that decision[1].




    Background

 2. The primary Respondent Mr [D] had been living and working in the United
    Kingdom since at least November 1996. He has latterly been doing so  in
    accordance with the Ankara Agreement.

 3. By operation of the 'standstill clause' at Article 41 of the Additional
    Protocol signed in 1972 the Secretary of State is obliged in such cases
    to apply the terms of the Immigration Rules as they stood at  the  date
    that the United Kingdom  acceded  to  the  European  Community:  HC510,
    applicable in  January 2013. Paragraph 28  of  HC510  provides  that  a
    person admitted at the first instance to work and who has  remained  in
    the United Kingdom for a continuous period of four years, may have  the
    restrictions on the period of stay removed "unless  there  are  grounds
    for maintaining it". One such ground for maintaining the restriction on
    stay is if the individual has committed a criminal offence  in  the  24
    months preceding his application. The application for indefinite  leave
    was therefore refused on the grounds that on the 29th July 2013 Mr  [D]
    was  convicted  of  affray  and  given  a  sentence  of  a  12  months'
    conditional discharge.  Since this application was made only 13  months
    later, it fell to be refused.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal accepted that Mr  [D]  had  been  convicted  of
    affray within the 24 months prior  to  the  decision  being  made.  The
    appeal against the decision to refuse indefinite leave  to  remain  was
    therefore dismissed since the Secretary of State had been  entitled  to
    maintain the restrictions on Mr [D]'s stay.  The Tribunal  went  on  to
    consider Article 8  ECHR.  It  recorded  the  very  positive  character
    references from various members of the community in which Mr [D]  lives
    in Wales, including the local Councillor and MP who  both  attested  to
    their personal knowledge of how he  is  successfully  running  a  small
    business and providing much needed employment to local people.  It  had
    regard to the impact that removal to Turkey would have on his wife  and
    child, as well as their extended family, friends and employees.  Having
    further weighed into the balance the facts that Mr [D] has been in  the
    UK lawfully, is financially self-sufficient and  the  relatively  minor
    nature of his offending behaviour, the Tribunal found that the decision
    was a disproportionate interference with the family's Article 8  rights
    and allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

 5. The grounds of appeal, drafted on the 30th December 2015,  submit  that
    the Tribunal failed to direct itself to  the  statutory  considerations
    set out at sections 117A-D of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 and that it had not identified that there were good reasons to
    go on to consider human rights, a submission for which the Secretary of
    State relied on the decision in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC).




    My Findings

 6. The grounds of appeal are not made out. The fact that the determination
    does not expressly refer in terms to s117B does not matter since it  is
    apparent that all relevant factors  were  taken  into  account  in  the
    balancing exercise. The substance of the provision  was  complied  with
    and any failure to mention  the  Act  was  therefore  immaterial:  Dube
    [2015] UKUT 90.  The strongest point made by Mr Harrison was in respect
    of s117(5) which mandates that little weight is to  be  attached  to  a
    private life which is  established  when  the  individual's  status  is
    precarious. He correctly points out that the Tribunal  nowhere  directs
    itself to attach little weight to Mr [D]'s  private  life.  However  he
    also had to agree that when that private  life  is  of  over  19  years
    standing it makes little sense to attach no weight to it at all.

 7. As for the Gulshan ground, it is now established that neither that case
    nor Nagre [2013] EWHC  720  (Admin)  provided  any  authority  for  the
    proposition that  there  is  a  "two  stage"  test  to  be  applied  in
    considering whether a decision is unlawful  under  Article  8:   R  (on
    application of Sunnassee) v Upper Tribunal (IAC)  &  Anor  [2015]  EWHC
    1604 (Admin), MM (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2014] EWCA 984.

 8. The real difficulty with the decision is not identified in the grounds.
    That is that the Tribunal should not have  embarked  on  an  Article  8
    assessment at all. this was not, contrary  to  the  suggestion  in  the
    determination, a removal case. There was no  question  of  this  family
    being removed to Turkey because they continue to exercise treaty rights
    under the Ankara Agreement. There was no removal decision nor  'section
    120 notice'. In those circumstances  neither  party  had  any  business
    making submissions on Article 8 at all: Amirteymour & Ors (EEA appeals,
    human rights) [2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC).

 9. Any error in that respect is, at the date  of  the  appeal  before  me,
    immaterial. That  is  because  at  today's  date  Mr  [D]  prima  facie
    qualifies for indefinite leave to remain on two distinct  grounds.  His
    single conviction is now well behind him and it is open to him to  make
    a new application for indefinite leave to remain under  HC510.  He  has
    continued to exercise his treaty rights, has been  doing  so  for  well
    over four years and there is now no reason to maintain the  restriction
    on his stay. Alternatively he now qualifies for leave  under  paragraph
    276ADE (3) of the Immigration Rules  since  he  has  been  continuously
    resident in the UK for 20 years.   His conviction for the minor offence
    of affray does not engage any of the  'suitability'  provisions.  There
    being no apparent obstacle to him being  granted  indefinite  leave  in
    either capacity there is no utility in the Secretary of State's  appeal
    being allowed on grounds other than those argued.




    Decisions

10. The determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  contain  a
    material error of law and it is upheld.

11. There is no order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          2nd September 2016
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 23rd May 2016 by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Adio

