
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
Ia/23837/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London              |Determination Promulgated        |
|On 14 March 2016                          |On 20 May 2016                   |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ARCHER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Shazia Ramzan

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Dogra, Counsel, instructed by Bukhari Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State)  appeals  against  the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Blake)  allowing   the
    respondent's appeal against a decision taken on 21 May 2014  to  refuse
    her application made under regulations 15A and 18A of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  ("the  Regulations")  on  9
    December 2014 for an EEA derivative residence card.

Introduction

 3. The respondent is a citizen of Pakistan born on 15 December  1980.  The
    application was made on the basis that she is the primary carer of  her
    sister, AM, who is a UK citizen.

 4.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  respondent's  identity   and
    nationality but concluded  that  there  was  insufficient  evidence  to
    support the claimed family relationship and AM could obtain  assistance
    from other organisations or individuals. Preference for a family  carer
    was not enough. There was insufficient evidence  to  conclude  that  AM
    would be unable to reside in the UK if the respondent were required  to
    leave. The respondent had entered the UK as a Tier 4 (General)  Student
    and her leave was curtailed in November 2013.

The Appeal

 5. The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing at Taylor House on 20 August 2015. She was  represented  by  Mr
    Mannan of Counsel. The First-tier Tribunal found  that  the  respondent
    and AM were honest and credible witnesses. AM had been blind since 2000
    and had been fully dependent upon her mother. Her mother was no  longer
    able to care for her because of her own health issues and the task  had
    fallen  fully  on  the  respondent.  AM  had  suffered  a   devastating
    experience through losing her sight in midlife. She was  depressed  and
    had developed a mistrust of all strangers. There was no one else in the
    family in the UK who could provide care. AM would not be able to reside
    in the UK or another EEA state if the respondent was required to leave.
    The respondent's attendance on AM as her primary  carer  was  necessary
    and within the scope of the Regulations.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  by
    failing to consider whether AM would be compelled to leave  the  UK  if
    the respondent was  required  to  leave.  The  respondent  relied  upon
    regulation 15A(4A)(c) and MA and SM (Zambrano: EU Children outside  the
    EU) Iran 2013 UKUT 380; EU law will not be engaged where the EU citizen
    is not compelled to leave. The respondent's  removal  might  result  in
    some difficulty for AM but that would not result  in  a  compulsion  to
    leave the UK. That finding was reaffirmed by the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Sanneh and others v SSWP [2015] EWCA Civ  49;  the  Zambrano  principle
    does not preclude the removal of the primary carer even if  that  would
    necessarily diminish the quality of their lives. If AM were left in the
    care of social services or another competent carer  she  would  not  be
    left without the resources to live in the EU.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer on
    25 January 2016. It was arguable that the judge had failed to  consider
    the principle whether AM would be compelled to  leave  the  UK  if  the
    respondent was required to leave.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

 9. Mr Kandola submitted that there was a material misdirection in law. The
    respondent was a primary carer of an adult  sibling  and  there  was  a
    higher threshold. There was adequate care in the UK. The judge did  not
    really grapple with that issue. There was no compulsion to leave the UK
    and no sustainable conclusion to that effect in the  decision.  AM  and
    her mother would not be left without recourse to live within the EU.  A
    decision dismissing the appeal should be  substituted.  The  respondent
    did not rely upon Article 8.

10. Ms Dogra submitted that the decision was very detailed  comprising  117
    paragraphs. The judge was clearly aware of the Zambrano principles from
    paragraphs 16, 83, 107; for the national court to determine whether the
    EU citizen would be required to leave the EU. At paragraphs  91-96  and
    109-115 of the decision the judge found that AM would not  be  able  to
    remain if the respondent left. The fact that the judge did not use  the
    words "compelled to leave" is neither here nor there. There  is  always
    the possibility of social care but that was dealt  with  at  paragraphs
    112-113 of the decision. The mere availability of social care cannot be
    enough or all Zambrano applications would fail. There was no  error  of
    law and the decision should stand.

11. Mr Kandola submitted  in  response  that  there  was  no  reference  to
    "compelled to leave" and that was highly material; actually the crucial
    question in this appeal and not dealt with by the judge. If  the  judge
    had dealt with the issue  correctly  then  the  First-tier  would  have
    concluded that AM could continue to reside in the UK.

12. I note that the refusal letter at  page  3  states  that  the  evidence
    provided was insufficient to demonstrate that AM  would  be  unable  to
    reside in the UK or another EEA state if the respondent was required to
    leave the UK. That was the  same  test  as  applied  by  the  judge  at
    paragraph 115 of the decision. It is  unsurprising  that  the  decision
    makers in this case applied the same test because both  the  respondent
    and the judge were seeking to apply regulation 15A of the Regulations.

13. Regulation 15A (4A)  states  that  P  satisfies  the  criteria  in  the
    paragraph if she is the primary carer of a British citizen, the British
    citizen is residing in the UK and the relevant British citizen would be
    unable to reside in the UK or in another EEA state if P  were  required
    to leave. There is no  requirement  in  the  Regulations  for  decision
    makers to explicitly consider compulsion although as a matter of common
    sense if a person  is  "unable  to  reside"  then  they  must  also  be
    "compelled to leave". The case law simply highlights the importance  of
    applying the test strictly - the convenience of  existing  arrangements
    or a preference for a particular carer is not enough.

14. I find that the judge applied the test appropriately at paragraphs 112-
    115 of the decision. The finding that the respondent  had  fallen  into
    error by concluding that AM could procure assistance from other sources
    with the help of social services in the absence of the  respondent  was
    properly open to the judge. There is no evidence that the  findings  of
    fact and  the  decision  arising  from  those  findings  of  fact  were
    perverse. There is therefore no material misdirection and  no  material
    error of law.

15. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  respondent's
    appeal under the Regulations did not involve the making of an error  of
    law and its decision stands.

Decision

16. Consequently, I dismiss the appeal of the Secretary of State.





Signed   [pic]                      Date 14 May 2016


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

