
[pic]
KH

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


QI (para 245ZX(l) considered) Pakistan [2010] UKUT (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 March 2010                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY



                                   Between

                                     qi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer






    The expression "current ... leave to remain" in para  245ZX(I)  of  the
    Statement of Changes in the Immigration Rules HC 395  as  amended  must
    refer to  an  applicant's/appellant's  substantive  period  of  limited
    leave. Were it to denote extended leave under s.3C of  the  Immigration
    Act 1971 ("s.3C leave"), the expression would be meaningless.  Further,
    at the time the applicant made his application, his  leave  could  only
    have been his substantive leave; any s.3C leave  could  not  come  into
    being until after he received a decision. That is  because  s.3C  leave
    does not arise until "the leave expires  without  the  application  for
    variation having been decided' (s.3C(c)).


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, applied on 29 May  2009  for  leave
to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student. His application was  refused  on  6
August 2009 under paras 245ZX(c) and (l) of the Immigration Rules.   He  had
previously had leave as a student (granted 28 May 2008) until 30 May 2009.

2. In a determination notified on 13 October  2009  Immigration  Judge  (IJ)
Jacobs-Jones  dismissed  his  appeal.  The  appellant  was   successful   in
obtaining an order for reconsideration, bringing the matter before  me.   By
virtue of the legislative changes brought into effect on  15 February  2010
the order for reconsideration  has  effect  as  if  it  were  the  grant  of
permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)
(UTIAC). The appellant's grounds as developed by  Mr  Khan  maintained  that
the IJ had erred  in  failing  to  take  into  account  a  letter  from  the
Association of Certified and Chartered Accountants (ACCA) dated 22 May  2009
showing he was registered with them, erred  in  finding  there  had  been  a
breach of para 245ZX(l) and related Policy Guidance  and  finally  erred  in
considering that the evidence did not establish that the appellant's  course
was at NQF level 7.


3. Before evaluating these grounds it should be noted that  Tier  4  of  the
Points Based system is of course the  tier  that  caters  for  international
students who wish to study in the UK. It has  been  implemented  in  phases,
with the main policy changes introduced on 31 March 2009 by HC 314.  Tier  4
consists of  two  categories:  Tier  4  (General)  Student  (which  is  what
concerns  us  in  this  appeal)  and  Tier  4  (Child)  Student.  Thus   the
Immigration  Rules  and  corresponding  Policy  Guidance  applied   to   the
appellant in this case were those in force  at  the  time  of  decision  (in
August 2009). Since then there have been a number of amendments made to  the
Rules: CM 7711 (September 2009); HC 120 (December 2009),  HC  367  (February
2010); and HC 439 (March 2010). HC 120  amended  Appendix  A,  deleting  the
requirement for  a  visa  letter  in  Tables  16  and  17.  Its  Explanatory
Memorandum explained the change from the requirement for a "visa letter"  to
one for "confirmation of acceptance for studies" as follows:


         "7.5 Tier 4 of the Points Based System caters for students and  was
         launched on 31 March 2009. A  previous  Statement  of  Changes  (Cm
         7701), which came into force on 1 October 2009)  provided  for  the
         next phase of the roll-out of Tier 4  sponsorship  arrangements  to
         allow Tier  4  applicants  to  earn  points  for  leave  to  remain
         applications by using an electronic Confirmation of Acceptance  for
         Studies. Initially, provision for migrants to be granted  leave  to
         remain using a visa letter issued by their sponsor was retained  as
         a transitional arrangement, as well  as  for  all  entry  clearance
         applications. This Statement of Changes removes those  transitional
         provisions, with the effect that, from 22 February 2010, it will be
         compulsory  for  a  Tier  4  application  to  be  supported  by   a
         Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies."


4. The first reason the IJ  gave  for  dismissing  the  appeal  was  clearly
wrong.  He stated that as the appellant had not  produced  his  letter  from
ACCA showing he was registered with them until he lodged his  appeal  on  21
August 2009, that letter could not be  taken  into  account.  But  the  said
letter was dated 22 May 2009, which was a  date  prior  to  his  application
(made on 29 May). Accordingly the IJ should have  considered  its  relevance
under s.85(4) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002:  for
analysis of a similar error see NA & Others (Tier 1 Post  Study  Work-Funds)
[2009] UKAIT  00025.  I  wholly  agree  with  the  appellant's  grounds  for
reconsideration at  Ground  1.  Whether,  however,  the  IJ's  error  was  a
material one is another matter to which I shall return later.

5. It is convenient to deal next with the  third  reason  the  IJ  gave  for
dismissing the appeal, which was that there was conflicting evidence  as  to
the level and qualification of the degree on which  the  appellant  said  he
was enrolled with London School of Business and Finance (LSBF).  Mr  Bramble
conceded that the IJ was wrong about this as the  ACCA  course  was  at  NQF
level 7.

6. That brings me to the second  reason  the  IJ  gave  for  dismissing  the
appeal.  Summarised, his concern was that the appellant  had  not  shown  he
met the requirements of para 245ZX(l) as his course of  study  at  the  LSBF
was not due to commence until 20 July 2009, i.e. more than one  month  after
his leave to remain expired on 30 May 2009.  That  was  contrary,  he  said,
both to para 245ZX(l) and to para 84 of the relevant Policy Guidance.

7. As to this reason the grounds  raised  a  twofold  objection.  The  first
contended that there was no breach of para 245ZX(l), as by  virtue  of  s.3C
of the Immigration Act 1971 the appellant had extended leave.  Therefore  it
could not be said that his course was not due to  commence  "more  than  one
month after his leave to remain expired".

8. The relevant parts of para 245ZX state:

         "To qualify for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student under
         paragraph 24ZX, an applicant  must  meet  the  requirements  listed
         below:

                  Requirements:
         ...
         (c)      The applicant must have  a  minimum  of  30  points  under
         paragraphs 113 to 120 of Appendix A.


         (d)      The applicant must have  a  minimum  of  10  points  under
         paragraphs 10 to 13 of Appendix C.


         ...


         (I)      The applicant must not be applying for leave to remain for
         the purpose of studies which would commence  more  than  one  month
         after the applicant's current entry clearance or  leave  to  remain
         expires."


9. (As already  noted,  there  have  been  subsequent  amendments  to  these
paragraphs of Appendix A, but the  wording  of  para  245ZX(l)  remains  the
same.)

10. I consider the appellant's submissions on this  point  are  ill-founded.
Whilst I would accept that the rule is  badly  drafted,  it  is  inescapably
clear that "current ... leave  to  remain"  must  refer  to  an  appellant's
substantive period of limited leave (in the appellant's case, the  leave  he
had from 28 May 2008 - 30 May 2009).  Were the above  expression  to  denote
s.3C leave, then time would never start to run and the requirement would  be
meaningless.  Further, at the time the applicant made his  application,  his
leave could only have been his substantive leave; his s.3C leave  could  not
have come into being until after he received a  decision.  That  is  because
s.3C leave does not arise until "the leave expires without  the  application
for variation having been decided' (s.3C(c)).  Accordingly,  the  IJ  cannot
be faulted for concluding that the appellant's proposed course was  not  due
to commence until more than one month after his leave to remain expired.

11. Before turning to the second objection raised by the  appellant  to  the
IJ's approach to para 245ZX(l), I would make two further  observations.  One
is that this requirement is a requirement of the Immigration Rules.   It  is
also specified as a requirement by para 84 of the relevant Policy  Guidance,
but the latter simply  reinforces  the  effect  of  para  245ZX(I)  and  its
corresponding Appendix A. Para 84 is not therefore, as the IJ  described  it
at para 12 of his determination, the legal source for the refusal  decision.
 The other observation concerns the fact that  not  only  Mr  Khan  for  the
appellant but Mr  Bramble  for  the  respondent  took  the  view  that  para
245ZX(l) should be considered as having  no  application  to  the  appellant
because he had s.3C leave and so time in his case had not  started  to  run.
The fact that  the  respondent  as  well  as  the  appellant  urged  such  a
construction is something I take into account, but I am not bound to  regard
it as correct and it was not made as a concession in the  appellant's  case.
The Tribunal is obliged to interpret and apply the law as contained  in  the
Immigration Rules.  For reasons  already  given  I  consider  that  although
erring in one respect on the issue of the relevance of the ACCA  letter  the
IJ correctly concluding that the appellant was caught by para  245ZX(l)  and
that he was right to find that the appellant could  not  show  his  proposed
course would commence within a month of  expiry  of  his  current  leave  to
remain.

12. That leaves the second objection raised by the  appellant  to  the  IJ's
finding on para 245ZX(1).  It amounted to an assertion  that  the  Court  of
Appeal in AS (Afghanistan) & NV (Sri Lanka) [2009] EWCA Civ  1076  has  held
that in the context of this type  of  appeal  the  Tribunal  is  obliged  to
consider that the appellant's grounds of appeal amount to a s.120  statement
(under the 2002 Act) in which the appellant explained  the  reasons  why  he
should be permitted to stay and not be removed and so:

         "The IJ was under an obligation to  consider  and  determine  these
         grounds and in such circumstances he should  have  considered  the
         matter as a 'fresh application' made on the day of the hearing".


13. That argument in my view misconstrues AS & NV.  In AS & NV the Court  of
Appeal was concerned with the duty on the Tribunal  to  consider  additional
grounds  relating  to  the  substance  of  the  decision  made  against   an
appellant.  It did not rule that such grounds  should  be  understood  as  a
"fresh application".  Further, if the Court's reasoning was taken to  amount
to such a proposition, then there would be no jurisdiction for the  Tribunal
to deal  with  the  appeal  because  it  would  be  an  application  as  yet
undecided.  Section 85(2) refers to, and presupposes that there has been,  a
"...decision appealed against", it does not encompass  a  decision  not  yet
made.

14. In my judgment in the appellant's case the relevant decision  under  the
Immigration Rules imposed a temporal requirement which he  failed  to  meet.
Nothing said in his grounds of appeal - whether treated as  a  s.120  notice
or not - alter that.

15.  For  the  above  reasons  the  IJ  did  not  materially  err  in   law.
Accordingly his decision to dismiss the appeal must stand.




Signed






Senior Immigration Judge Storey
(Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
