
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23778/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 June 2014                               |On 30 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE SIMLER
                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                            Mr Syed Hussain Shah
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Claire, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. In a determination promulgated on 31  March  2014  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Mayall dismissed an appeal  against  refusal  of  long  residence
    status in circumstances  where  the  appellant  had  arrived  illegally
    claiming long residence and the judge found that that was not made  out
    and that no breach of Article 8 arose either.

 2. The application to appeal, albeit made out of time,  was  admitted  and
    was allowed in circumstances  where  on  the  day  of  the  hearing  27
    February 2014 the appellant had arrived at the hearing centre  but  was
    taken ill and went to hospital.  An application for an adjournment  was
    made to the judge but in the absence  of  medical  evidence  the  judge
    refused the application.

 3. The grounds of permission to appeal was made on 12 May 2014  and  today
    Mr Duffy on behalf of the Secretary of State has realistically conceded
    that the appeal should be allowed and that the decision should  be  set
    aside on that basis.

 4.  We  consider  that  that  is  a  concession  that  is  correctly   and
    realistically  made  and  we  are  grateful  to  Mr  Duffy   in   those
    circumstances.  Accordingly we allow  the  appeal  and  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal in this case.

 5. We remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for  the  appeal  to  be
    considered afresh and we direct that an interpreter should be available
    at that hearing because the appellant has never had the opportunity  to
    give evidence and would need to do so.






Signed                                  Date


Mrs Justice Simler

