
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23792/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 June 2013                               |On 3 July 2013               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                            Ms viktoriya glushko

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance by or on behalf of the appellant
For the Respondent:    Miss H Horsley


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Russia born on  16  November  1982.   Her
    appeal against the respondent's refusal to grant her a  residence  card
    under Regulation 26 of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  was
    dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Jacobs-Jones  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 27 December 2012.

2.   On 15 January 2013 the appellant was granted permission to  appeal  the
    judge's decision.  The appellant's  appeal  came  before  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Rimington on 8 March 2013.  The appellant did not attend
    the hearing and there was no representation on her behalf.  The  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge proceeded with the hearing in the absence  of  the
    appellant and dismissed her appeal.

3.   On 18 April 2013 the appellant made an application  to  set  aside  the
    DUTJ's decision on the grounds that she did  not  receive  the  hearing
    notice for 8 March 2013 even though it was sent to her correct address.
     The first notice she had of the hearing  was  when  she  received  the
    determination on 17 April 2013.  She attributed the non-delivery  to  a
    fault by the Royal Mail.

4.   In a Memorandum and Directions issued by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Dawson
    on 10 May 2013, he  said  that  although  the  determination  of  Judge
    Rimington discloses no arguable error of law, nevertheless it  is  just
    arguable that had the appellant been present at the hearing  she  might
    have been able to persuade the judge to come to a different conclusion.
     He put it no higher than that having regard to the evidential  matters
    Judge  Rimington  observed  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  been
    entitled to take into account.  He said as follows at paragraph 4

         "4.  It is correct that the appellant has fully participated in the
             proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal and  it  is  likely
             that she did not receive notice  of  hearing.   Unless  within
             five working days from the date this memorandum  is  sent  out
             the respondent indicates with  argument  an  objection  to  my
             proposed course, the decision of Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge
             Rimington dated 11 April 2013 will be  set  aside  and  a  new
             hearing date will be given for the hearing of  her  appeal  in
             the Upper Tribunal."

5.   Thus the appeal came before me today, 19 June 2013.  The appellant  did
    not attend the hearing and there was no appearance on  her  behalf.   I
    note that the notice of today's hearing was  sent  on  17  May  to  the
    appellant at 74 The Drive, Isleworth, Middlesex TW7 4AD, which  is  the
    same address as before.  The notice of hearing has not been returned to
    the Tribunal.  There was no explanation by the appellant for  her  non-
    appearance.  Accordingly I proceeded with the hearing in the absence of
    the appellant.

6.   I also note that the respondent did not submit any objection  to  Judge
    Dawson's proposed course of setting aside  the  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge's decision.  I do note however that the respondent did  submit  a
    Rule 24 reply on 31 January 2013 opposing the appellant's appeal.

7.   On 20 June, the day after the hearing, the appellant attended at  Field
    House.  She left a note claiming once again that she  did  not  receive
    the Notice of Hearing issued by the Upper Tribunal on 17 May 2013.  She
    said her post seems to be "otherwise okay" so she  did  not  know  what
    happened.  She called a telephone number and was told that  her  appeal
    was heard the day before and that why she rushed down.   She  asked  me
    not to promulgate my decision but exercise my powers and allocate a new
    hearing date.

8.   I am unable to set aside  my  decision  under  rule  43  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008 because there is no justifiable reason to
    do so.  It is rather remarkable that the appellant did not receive  the
    notice of hearing in respect  of  the  hearing  on  8  March  2013  but
    received the determination of the DUT which was promulgated on 15 April
    2013.  It is strange that it is only the notices of  hearing  that  the
    appellant does not receive.  I  do  not  believe  her.   I  would  have
    expected her to make efforts to find out from the Upper Tribunal  about
    the hearing of her appeal in light of what happened in the past.  There
    was no evidence that she did.

9.   The appellant arrived in the UK on 27 November 2008 as a student.   She
    was given extensions of leave until 31 May 2012.  She said she  met  Ms
    Ceslava Doval (a Lithuanian born on 19 August 1966) in  November  2009.
    Ms Doval has two children from her marriage to Mr Marinan Doval.   They
    are Dalia born on 15 October 1992 and Milana born on 8 June 1989.   The
    appellant stated that she lived with Ms  Doval  briefly  in  2009,  but
    moved in with her and her daughter Dalia on  24  May  2012.   Ms  Doval
    stated that she has commenced divorce proceedings in 2011 in  Lithuania
    against her husband but they have not concluded.  The appellant  lodged
    an application for a residence card as the extended family member of an
    EEA national on 29 May 2012, on the basis that  she  is  in  a  durable
    relationship with Ms Doval.

10.  The judge was satisfied that Ms Doval  was  working  for  the  Imperial
    Recruitment Agency as a housekeeper for a hotel and therefore  she  was
    exercising treaty rights in the UK.  The judge however found that there
    was very little documentary evidence apart from bank statements to show
    that  the  parties  are  cohabiting  or  that  they  have  been  in   a
    relationship since 2009 as claimed.  An  HSBC  Bank  statement  in  the
    sponsor's name showed that she lived at 74 The Drive in Isleworth on 11
    May 2012, and a bank  statement  dated  11  November  2012  showed  her
    address as 76 The Drive.  A certificate of police  registration  showed
    the appellant living at 74 The Drive on 20 May 2012 and  a  Lloyds  TSB
    Bank statement dated 1 November 2012 showing  her  address  as  76  The
    Drive.

11.  The judge considered the appellant's evidence that their house has  two
    entrances and contains different rooms.  They  both  lived  at  74  and
    moved into number 76 when that flat became  available.   He  considered
    the letter from Dervinder Kooner dated 6 November 2012 stating that  he
    is the landlord for 76 The Drive and stating that the sponsor has  been
    living in No. 76 since 2010.  The bank statement  however  showed  that
    she was living at number 74 until May 2012.  The judge therefore placed
    very little weight on the letter from the claimed landlord.

12.   The  judge  considered  whether  the  appellant  was  in   a   durable
    relationship with Ms Doval.   The  appellant's  evidence  was  that  Ms
    Doval's relationship with her husband  had  broken  down  irretrievably
    but, she noted  that  there  was  conflicting  evidence  regarding  the
    initiation of divorce proceedings in 2011.  The appellant  stated  that
    she  had  no  evidence  to  show  proceedings  had  been  commenced  in
    Lithuania, and said she could try to get  someone  to  send  over  some
    documents from Lithuania.  The sponsor  however  stated  that  she  had
    evidence but it was in electronic form and not translated into English.
     The judge found that if the appellant knew the sponsor as well as  she
    said she did, then she would have known that the sponsor  had  evidence
    of her divorce at their home.  This was a fundamental piece of evidence
    that the appellant should have known about.

13.  The judge considered evidence from outside  parties  who  claimed  that
    the parties have been in a relationship since  long  before  May  2012.
    There was a letter dated 28 May 2012 from Elena Volkova  in  which  she
    stated that she had known the couple since June 2010, but she  did  not
    attend the hearing to support her short statement.  Likewise Ms Tatjana
    Naiden did not attend the hearing to elaborate on how she has known the
    appellant and the sponsor as a couple since the winter of  2010.   More
    importantly however was the absence from the hearing of  the  sponsor's
    two daughters Dalia and Milana  Doval.   Both  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor stated that her daughters went to Lithuania on 8 December 2012;
    the sponsor saying that her father died on 27  November  2012  and  the
    daughters could not afford to attend the hearing.  The judge found that
    it was clear that the daughters knew  about  the  hearing  but  it  was
    unclear why they chose not to attend it.

14.  There was however a note from  the  sponsor's  daughters  stating  that
    their mother had been in a relationship with the appellant since  2009,
    and it took them a long time to get used to their  relationship.   They
    also stated that it was hard for their mother since the failure of  her
    marriage.  Their mother was happy with the appellant and  they  planned
    to marry as soon as possible.  The daughters stated that the  appellant
    has been living with their mother at their  address  at  74  The  Drive
    since May 2012, but the sponsor said that she and her daughters and the
    appellant had been living at 76 The Drive since that date.   There  was
    no explanation for the discrepancies.

15.  The judge found in the light of the evidence  that  the  appellant  was
    not in a durable relationship with the sponsor within  the  meaning  of
    the 2006 Regulations.  There was  sparse  evidence  to  show  that  the
    parties have been in a relationship since 2009.  On the evidence before
    her it seemed more likely that  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  were
    little more than roommates.  Even if she was incorrect in her view that
    the parties were in a subsisting  relationship,  she  was  nevertheless
    satisfied on the balance  of  probabilities  that  the  respondent  was
    correct to conclude  that  as  at  the  date  of  the  application  the
    appellant had not been in a durable relationship with the  sponsor,  as
    they had only been cohabiting for one week before the application for a
    residence card was lodged,  and  by  the  date  of  the  hearing  their
    relationship would only have been of six months' duration.  It was  her
    understanding of the case law that a durable relationship should be  of
    a much longer period than six months.

16.  The judge considered the appellant's  argument  that  the  respondent's
    decision breaches both the sponsor's treaty rights and their  right  to
    family life under Article 8 of the ECHR.  The judge  doubted  that  the
    sponsor would be deterred from working and living in  the  UK,  as  she
    intoned that she would remain in the UK regardless of  the  outcome  of
    the appeal, and she would  not  return  to  Lithuania  because  of  her
    husband.  The judge found that whilst there was no evidence as  to  the
    status of the divorce proceedings, she noted that the  sponsor  had  in
    fact returned to Lithuania on more than one occasion.  The sponsor said
    that she was also afraid that her husband  would  attack  her  children
    when they were in Lithuania, but she gave evidence to state  that  they
    were in that country from 8  December  2012.   There  was  insufficient
    evidence for the judge to find that the appellant could  not  join  the
    sponsor in Lithuania if need be, and no supporting evidence was  lodged
    to confirm the appellant's fears that she  and  the  sponsor  would  be
    mistreated as a lesbian couple in Russia.

17.  The judge stated that she would not determine whether the  decision  to
    refuse the appellant's application for a residence card interferes with
    their rights under the ECHR, as she noted that the respondent  did  not
    issue her with a notice of removal from the UK with the  decision.   It
    was therefore open to the appellant to submit a further application for
    a residence card when she had sufficient evidence to show that she  was
    in a durable relationship with an EEA national.

18.  The grant of permission stated that it is  clear  that  the  judge  had
    concerns about some of the evidence she had before her and she did give
    reasons for her findings but it is clear that she placed a  great  deal
    of weight on the perceived lack of evidence about  the  status  of  the
    sponsor's marriage.  Copies of divorce  papers  were  attached  to  the
    grounds seeking permission.  If the divorce papers  were  delivered  to
    the hearing centre as claimed, as arranged with  the  judge,  the  fact
    that they were not received or not considered  raised  questions  about
    the judge's findings.  So far as Article 8 is concerned, it was  stated
    in the grant of permission that Article 8 was raised in the grounds  of
    appeal against the decision of the respondent and it is  arguable  that
    the judge ought to have considered it properly.

19.  Miss Horsley relied on the respondent's Rule  24  response.   She  said
    there was nothing wrong with the First-tier Judge's decision  and  that
    the grounds amount to no more than a disagreement  with  the  decision.
    The judge's finding that the appellant and the sponsor  are  not  in  a
    durable relationship  is  sustainable.   In  the  circumstances  it  is
    difficult to see how an appeal under Article 8 can be sustained.

20.  I have seen the translation of the judgment in respect  of  Ms  Doval's
    claim for a divorce from her husband Marjanas Doval.   Ms  Doval  based
    her claim on her husband's guilt and he submitted his response  to  the
    claim.  It was considered by the court that by  setting  a  preliminary
    hearing the parties could reach a mutual agreement;  specific  measures
    could be  taken  for  the  parties  to  reconcile  an  appropriate  and
    comprehensive preparation of the case could be completed for the  court
    hearing.  The judge decided to refer the case to  a  court  located  in
    Vilnius for a preliminary hearing on 30 August 2012.  The  sponsor  has
    not submitted any further evidence as to the outcome of the hearing  on
    30 August and whether she  is  now  divorced  from  her  husband.   The
    judgment is dated  12  July  2012.   The  First-tier  Judge  heard  the
    appellant's appeal on 12 December 2012.   I  would  have  expected  the
    sponsor/appellant to submit further evidence in relation to this issue.
     There is  none.   Whilst  there  is  evidence  that  the  sponsor  has
    initiated divorce proceedings against her husband,  I  find  that  this
    evidence does not affect the judge's findings at  paragraph  16,  which
    was that the appellant should have known about this  evidence  and  she
    did not know about it.

21.  Whilst I find that the judge erred in law in not  properly  considering
    the appellant's appeal under Article 8, I find that the  error  is  not
    material.  The judge's finding that the appellant and the  sponsor  are
    not in a durable relationship is well-reasoned and  sound.   There  was
    conflict in their evidence as to  where  they  both  lived  and  indeed
    whether they were living together.  The  judge  found  that  they  were
    little more than roommates.  Even if they are not roommates and are  in
    a relationship, the  judge's  finding  that  there  was  no  supporting
    evidence that the appellant and the sponsor would be  mistreated  as  a
    lesbian couple in Russia has not been challenged.   In  any  event  the
    judge did not believe that the sponsor was  in  fear  of  her  life  in
    Lithuania as a result of her husband.  As the judge found the  children
    were in Lithuania from 8 December 2012 and there was no  evidence  that
    the husband had attacked them.    It is not apparent from the  judgment
    given by the Lithuanian court that they knew  of  the  sponsor's  fears
    when they ruled that specific measures could be taken for  the  parties
    to reconcile.  If the husband was capable of attacking the  children  I
    find that this would certainly have featured in the judgment  given  by
    the court.

22.  I agree with Ms Horsley that the judge's  finding  that  the  appellant
    and the sponsor are not in a durable relationship  is  sustainable.  In
    the circumstances it is difficult to see how an appeal under Article  8
    can be sustained.

23.  I find that the judge did not make a  material  error  of  law  in  her
    decision.

24.  The judge's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

