
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23678/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25 February 2016                      |On 21 March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                kerwin willie
                          (no anonymity Order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Akther of Counsel, instructed by FLK Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                     DECISION AND REASONS: ERROR OF LAW

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  P-
    J S White, promulgated on 26 August 2016, brought with  the  permission
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler granted on 18 January 2016.  (Judge
    Pooler also extended the time limit for appealing.)


2.   The background to the Appellant's  case  is  summarised  in  the  first
    three paragraphs of the decision of Judge White.  I do not  propose  to
    rehearse all of those details but identify  for  present  purposes  one
    matter as being particularly pertinent.


3.   It was part of the Respondent's decision that was the  subject  of  the
    appeal, that the Appellant had previously entered into  a  marriage  of
    convenience with a Ms Helina Emmanuel.  The Respondent had reached this
    conclusion essentially by reference to  information  received  from  Ms
    Emmanuel which included confirmation on the face of it that she had not
    signed an earlier application in August 2005,  notwithstanding  that  a
    signature purportedly hers had appeared on the face of that document.


4.   In considering the various issues on appeal which  essentially  centred
    around the Article 8 rights of the Appellant, his current partner,  and
    their  child,  Judge  White  necessarily  gave  consideration  to   the
    allegation of forgery and the related allegation that the Appellant had
    previously  contracted  a  marriage  of   convenience.    The   Judge's
    consideration is set out in  paragraphs  15-26  of  his  'Decision  and
    Reasons'.


5.   The Judge  has  very  obviously  given  careful  consideration  to  the
    overall context of the allegation raised by the Respondent, and has had
    regard to a number of different factors  in  reaching  his  conclusion.
    One of those factors is  set  out  at  paragraph  22,  and  involves  a
    comparative consideration of the appearance of  the  supposedly  forged
    signature in the stylisation of 'Helina Willie'  that  appears  in  the
    document from August 2005, and the  signature  in  the  stylisation  'H
    Emmanuel' and the handwriting  from  Ms  Emmanuel  that  appears  in  a
    handwritten letter dated 25 May 2006 and also at the foot of the letter
    sent for authorisation and  comment from the Secretary of  State  dated
    23 May 2006 (G1-G3 of the Respondent's  bundle  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).


6.   Judge White says this at his paragraph 22:

         "I do not have expert handwriting evidence, and I do not pretend to
         expertise in that field. I do, however, have an entire letter in Ms
         Emmanuel's  handwriting,  including  2  signatures,  all  of  which
         appears to be of a piece. The individual letters in  the  signature
         on the application form all appear, a number of times in her letter
         as does the name 'Willie'.  Even to  an  untrained  eye  there  are
         clear differences particularly in the capital H and the  lower-case
         l and e.  I also note that  Ms  Emmanuel  signs  with  her  initial
         rather than her full first name."


7.   Objection to that aspect of the Judge's consideration is raised in  the
    grounds of appeal on the basis essentially that the  Judge  should  not
    have trespassed into territory which was properly the territory  of  an
    expert witness.


8.   Ms Akhter is unable to direct my attention to  any  specific  authority
    that demonstrates  that  handwriting  is  purely  a  matter  of  expert
    evidence rather than for judicial consideration, but I have it in  mind
    that  it  is  a  matter  of  some  longstanding  convention   in   this
    jurisdiction that handwriting comparison does indeed require a judicial
    evaluation informed by expert evidence (or otherwise by the evidence of
    a person familiar with the supposed  author's  handwriting),  and  that
    this is not a matter that is left to the lay - or even judicial - eye.


9.   Be that as it may, it seems  to  me  that  there  is  in  any  event  a
    difficulty in respect of paragraph 22 and it is this.   The  Judge  has
    attempted to make a comparison between the 'everyday' handwriting  that
    appears in the letter of 25 May 2006 and the signature that appears  on
    the document from August 2005.  In my judgement, whilst not  invariably
    so, it is very often the case that somebody's signature is  transcribed
    in a way very different from their normal or day-to-day handwriting. In
    my judgement it is not safe or appropriate for a lay person to  attempt
    to make a comparison between handwriting on the  basis  of  one  sample
    which is in 'normal' writing and one sample  which  is  confined  to  a
    single example of a signature. In so far as both samples herein contain
    a signature it is to be noted that the  signature  is  in  a  different
    stylisation of the writer's name - 'Helina Willie' and 'H. Emmanuel'.


10.  For these reasons it seems to me that the Judge has indeed fallen  into
    significant error at paragraph 22 in purporting to  undertake  analysis
    of the different handwriting samples that were before him.


11.  Although the Judge  has  made  reference  to  other  matters  that  are
    relevant to an evaluation of the issue of forgery, at paragraph 25  the
    Judge says this:

         "In the light primarily  of  the  indications  from  the  form  and
         letters themselves, but taking account of  all  the  other  matters
         identified, I am wholly satisfied the signature  purporting  to  be
         from Helina Willie on the application form was not written  by  her
         and was written, no other explanation being feasible, by or at  the
         instigation of the Appellant. I am therefore satisfied that he  did
         submit an application on which her signature had been forged."


12.  It is very clear from this passage that the Judge is including  in  his
    overall evaluation his analysis at paragraph 22, which for the  reasons
    I have already given is in my judgement a flawed analysis.  Ms  Everett
    accepts that it  may  be  very  difficult  to  untangle  the  different
    elements of the Judge's  analysis  leading  up  to  his  conclusion  at
    paragraph 25.  In my judgement that indeed is the case in circumstances
    where  he  has  expressly  indicated  that  the  foregoing  matters   -
    necessarily including those set out at paragraph 22 - have formed  part
    of the reasons for  his  conclusion.   The  conclusion  itself  becomes
    unsafe by reason of the flaws in the analysis considered in respect  of
    paragraph 22.

13.  It is also very clear that the Judge's conclusion  in  respect  of  the
    forgery formed a significant part thereafter of his overall  evaluation
    of the Appellant's appeal under Article 8  of  the  ECHR.    The  Judge
    relies upon the conclusion in respect of the forgery to find  that  the
    Appellants  had  indeed  entered  previously   into   a   marriage   of
    convenience: see paragraph 26. He is then  overt  at  paragraph  27  in
    identifying the significance of this:

         "The significance of this is three-fold. First, I am  in  no  doubt
         that this history, of a marriage of convenience and an  application
         supported by forgery, adds  significantly  to  the  weight  of  the
         public interest in maintaining  immigration  control.  It  led  the
         respondent to conclude that the application under the Rules  failed
         additionally on suitability grounds but it is also in my  judgement
         relevant in the assessment of proportionality outsides  the  rules.
         Second, it means that this is not one  of  those  cases  where  the
         respondent's objection to a grant of leave is effectively  confined
         to concern that an applicant has not  obtained  the  correct  entry
         clearance, in which case requiring departure in order to apply  and
         return  may  be  disproportionate.  Here  there  are  genuine   and
         significant other concerns. Third it casts very grave doubt on  the
         appellant's credibility, arising both from the  dishonesty  of  his
         conduct in 2003 and 2005 and from the dishonesty  of  his  evidence
         about it in 2015.  It is in the light  of  that  doubt  that  I  am
         unable to accept his self-serving and unsupported  evidence  of  an
         awful upbringing and a lack of any current ties in St Lucia."


14.  As is pointed out to me by Ms  Akhter,  the  Judge  in  his  concluding
    paragraphs identified that the case was  "finely  balanced"  (paragraph
    30).  It may be seen then that there is an apparent  link  between  the
    error in respect of the approach to the  handwriting  analysis  to  the
    conclusion in respect of forgery and marriage of  convenience,  and  in
    turn to the  overall  conclusion  in  respect  of  the  proportionality
    balance under Article 8.  To  that  extent  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    Judge's error at paragraph 22 is a material error of law such that  his
    overall conclusion cannot be sustained. The decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge must be set aside.


15.  The decision in the  appeal  requires  to  be  remade  accordingly.  In
    circumstances where the conclusion  is  essentially  one  based  on  an
    overall credibility assessment, in my judgement there is no alternative
    but that the appeal be reheard afresh with all issues at large, and the
    most appropriate forum is back before the First-tier Tribunal.


16.  I should say of course that what I have said in respect of the  Judge's
    error with regard to the handwriting analysis is in no way  a  finding,
    or a factual assessment, of whether or not the signature was forged  on
    the application in August 2005, and is not a finding of whether or  not
    the Appellant had previously undergone a marriage of convenience.   All
    I am concluding is that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has  reached  his
    conclusion erroneously.   Whether  that  was  nonetheless  the  correct
    conclusion - or not - will be a matter for  fresh  consideration  by  a
    different First-tier Tribunal Judge in due course.
Notice of Decision

17.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.


18.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge P-J S White,
    with all issues at large.


19.  No anonymity order is sought or made.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 8 March 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

