
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/23817/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24 August 2015                    |On 21 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                        miss kasamba murambiwa tembo
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SecretARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ishan Dave, Counsel, instructed by Greenland LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Stephen Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge  Bart-Stewart)  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  against  a
    decision taken on 9 May 2014 to refuse to grant further leave to remain
    in the UK and to remove her from the UK.

Introduction

 3. The appellant first arrived in the UK on 21  January  2001  with  entry
    clearance as a visitor until 20 March 2002. She returned in 2003  as  a
    visitor, was granted a South African Diplomatic  permit  from  2003  to
    2006 and then entered on 12 July 2006 with a student visa  valid  until
    31 July 2007. Various applications for further  leave  to  remain  were
    made; the last submissions being made on the appellant's behalf by  her
    representatives on 30 April 2014.

 4. The Secretary of State decided that the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and treatment  for  her  sporadic
    medical condition was available in Zambia,  if  needed.  There  was  no
    evidence of a genuine and subsisting relationship with her new partner.
    They were no living together and had no  children.  The  appellant  was
    financially supported from the UK and that support  could  continue  in
    Zambia.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an  oral
    hearing at Taylor House on 20 February 2015. She was represented by  Mr
    Dave. The First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant had been in  the
    UK since 2006 and  had  been  receiving  NHS  treatment.  However,  her
    condition (tuberous sclerosis and epilepsy)  was  stable  and  she  was
    doing quite well. She was fit to travel but  not  to  play  sport.  The
    appellant's husband was  hesitant  in  answering  questions  about  her
    medical condition and had never attended any medical appointments  with
    her despite claiming to have been in a relationship  since  2012.  That
    demonstrated that the relationship was not as claimed and the appellant
    had not established a family life in the UK. There were  no  compelling
    circumstances to justify a successful Article 8 claim.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant sought permission on 7 April 2015 to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had  erred  in  law.
    The judge had failed to apply  the  law  in  relation  to  genuine  and
    subsisting marriage  and  did  not  attach  sufficient  weight  to  the
    evidence  of  the  appellant,  her  husband  and  the  witnesses.   One
    independent witness  gave  unchallenged  evidence.  There  was  also  a
    marriage certificate and numerous photographs.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes on
    21 May 2015. The judge did not give adequate reasons  for  finding  the
    evidence not to be credible. The judge reached her credibility findings
    solely on the basis of the husband not attending  medical  appointments
    and the lack of evidence from other family members, in  particular  the
    mother. The judge failed  to  give  reasons  for  rejecting  the  other
    consistent evidence given. The appellant's case might not be  a  strong
    one in any event because the relationship was formed when the appellant
    was in the UK without leave but the appeal would  not  inevitably  have
    been dismissed if the judge had found the relationship to be genuine.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

 9. Mr Dave submitted that the judge had not given sufficient weight to the
    evidence of a real and genuine  relationship.  There  was  unchallenged
    evidence as to how the appellant and her husband met,  how  they  began
    dating and their decision to live  together  after  blessing  from  the
    church. The parties have lived together since 30 August 2014. They were
    cross examined at length and  gave  consistent  answers.  There  is  an
    arguable case under Article 8.  The appeal should succeed on the  basis
    that the case has been proved or a re-hearing should be ordered.

10. Mr Whitwell conformed that there was no Rule 24 response but there  was
    no error in the approach to case law. The reasons for the findings  are
    set out at paragraphs 27 and 28 of the decision. Weight is a matter for
    the judge. The parties could relocate to  Zambia.  The  refusal  letter
    states that the application failed under the suitability  criteria  and
    was therefore never substantively considered  under  Appendix  FM.  The
    only option if a  material  error  of  law  is  found  is  to  order  a
    rehearing.

11. It is common ground between the  parties  that  the  appeal  could  not
    succeed under the  Immigration  Rules  and  there  is  nothing  in  the
    decision about the Article 8 rights of  anyone  except  the  appellant.
    That appears to be because the judge found that the appellant  did  not
    have family life with anyone in the UK.

12. I  have  carefully  considered  the  reasons  given  by  the  judge  at
    paragraphs 27 to 28 of the decision.  I  am  satisfied  that  they  are
    inadequate because there is no reference to  the  substantial  body  of
    evidence that supported the claim of a genuine and subsisting marriage.
    In particular, there is no analysis of the oral evidence or findings in
    relation to that evidence.  Inadequate  reasons  and  failure  to  make
    findings on core evidence are material errors of law.

13. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law and its  decision  cannot
    stand.

Decision

14. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the errors of law infect  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier  Tribunal.  If  the
    relationship is found to be genuine then a number of legal issues  will
    fall to be resolved.

15. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.


Signed   [pic]    Date 18 September 2015

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
