
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23467/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 November 2016                  |14th December 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       MD MAHBUB AHMED SIDDIQUE NAHID
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Hosein, Legal Representative


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant  (as  they  appeared  respectivelybefore  the  First-tier
    Tribunal). The appellant, Md Mahbub Ahmed Siddique Nahid, was  born  on
    22 July 1987 and is a male citizen of Bangladesh. He  appealed  against
    the decision dated 11 June 2015 refusing his application for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant and to remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom. The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Haria),  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 23 June 2016 allowed the appeal.  The Secretary of State
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There was one ground of appeal.  There was no Presenting Officer at the
    hearing and the Secretary of State now challenges the decision  on  the
    basis that the judge admitted in evidence a letter dated 17 March  2016
    purportedly from AB Bank which the judge accepted  confirmed  that  the
    particulars of a bank account in Bangladesh which the appellant claimed
    to hold were genuine.

 3. The judge preferred that evidence to evidence adduced by the respondent
    in the form of an email chain  which  appeared  to  indicate  that  the
    "submitted documents ... are not genuine".

 4. The judge set out the text of both letters in  the  decision  [23]  and
    [25].  Mr Duffy, for the respondent, submitted that the judge  had  not
    have considered the weight of which should properly be attached to  the
    respondent's evidence diminished by reason of the redaction of names in
    the email chain.  That submission  falls  outside  of  the  grounds  of
    appeal and simply argue that, in the absence of the Presenting Officer,
    the judge should of his own motion have adorned the appeal to allow the
    respondent to verify the second  letter  adduced  in  evidence  by  the
    appellant.  In any event,  I  am  not  persuaded  that  the  judge  has
    rejected or attached little weight to the respondent's evidence  simply
    on account of the fact that names are redacted.

 5. At [32] the judge correctly stated that the burden of proof in relation
    to the alleged deception rested on the respondent.  It was plainly open
    to the judge to find  that  the  respondent  had  not  discharged  that
    burden.

 6. I do not read the judge's decision as indicating that the redaction  of
    names from the emails  indicated  that  the  evidence  adduced  by  the
    respondent was in any way dubious. The point made by the judge is  that
    the email chain contained insufficient information to "connect them  to
    the appellant or the bank account details provided by the appellant  in
    his application" [24].

 7. As regards the letter from AB Bank dated 17 March 2016, it was  plainly
    open to the judge to admit this in evidence.  The Secretary of  State's
    chose not to be represented at the hearing before the  judge.   It  was
    not for the judge, in the absence of a Presenting Officer,  to  adjourn
    the hearing for the letter to be verified; by not being represented  at
    the hearing, the Secretary of State must have known that she  took  the
    risk that the Tribunal would admit evidence regarding which  she  would
    be unable to make any submissions.

 8. Mr Hosein, who  appeared  for  the  appellant  at  the  Upper  Tribunal
    hearing, also made the valid  point  that,  in  the  months  since  the
    promulgation of the First-tier Tribunal decision,  the  respondent  has
    taken no steps to seek verification of the letter dated 17 March 2016.

 9. However, that is not the  end  of  the  matter.   The  refusal  of  the
    appellant's application dated 12  June  2015  cites  only  the  alleged
    deception on the part of the appellant as a  reason  for  refusing  the
    application; there has been no analysis whatever by  the  Secretary  of
    State of the merits of the application including the application of any
    "genuineness" test.  Both advocates agreed that, whatever  the  outcome
    of the appeal before the Upper Tribunal, the matter would  have  to  be
    returned to the Secretary of State to take a decision on the merits  of
    the application.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 10 December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
