
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23938/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 December 2017                            |On 15 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                            mrs gurdev kaur deol
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Rai, Counsel instructed by Gills Immigration
Law
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background

 1. The appellant is a national of India  born  on  15  August  1926.   The
    appellant entered the UK as a visitor with a valid visa from 4 November
    2009 until 29 March 2010.  She applied on 23 March 2010 for  indefinite
    leave to remain which was refused and her appeal rights were  exhausted
    by 1 November 2010.  On 1 April 2014 the appellant  submitted  a  human
    rights claim, which was refused by the respondent on 19 June 2015.  The
    appellant appealed and in a decision promulgated on 21  February  2017,
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Birk dismissed the appellant's  appeal
    on human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant appealed on the following grounds (as  summarised  by  Mr
    Rai):

    Ground 1:  The judge erred  in  finding  that  there  had  not  been  a
    material change in the appellant's health since her previous  dismissed
    appeal in 2010;

    Ground 2:  The judge erred in maintaining the finding of  the  previous
    appeal that the appellant's  niece  could  look  after  the  appellant,
    failing to take into account the significant passage of time  and  that
    the appellant last lived with her niece in 2009 for a  period  of  only
    two to three months;

    Ground 3:  The judge failed to take into account relevant evidence both
    in relation to whether it was reasonable for the  appellant's  daughter
    to pay for her care in India, evidence in  relation  to  the  appellant
    requiring 24 hour care, evidence in  relation  to  the  burden  of  the
    appellant's daughter visiting her,  whether  it  was  unreasonable  for
    communication to continue via modern means  and  that  the  appellant's
    daughter would have to pay for treatment.  Whilst the appellant has had
    NHS treatment it was submitted that  the  judge  failed  to  take  into
    account the appellant's daughter's ability to pay for treatment and she
    was advised that they would not have to pay for treatment  as  she  was
    over 60.

 3. For the reasons set out below I am not satisfied that any error of  law
    is disclosed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Error of Law - Discussion

Ground 1

 4. The First-tier Tribunal, properly directed itself that the findings  in
    the 2010 determination are a  starting  point  on  issues  of  evidence
    applying Devaseelan [2002] UKAIT 00702 and  the  judge  summarised  the
    findings of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal M A Khan promulgated on 28
    September 2010 including that neither the appellant nor  her  daughter,
    Mrs Kaur, were credible or consistent  witnesses,  with  contradictions
    including in relation to funds.

 5. The judge carefully considered the issue of  who  previously  supported
    the appellant and the judge was satisfied that the  evidence  presented
    as a whole provided reasons and  explanations  as  to  why,  since  the
    appellant had been in the UK, she had had no support from her sons;  in
    these circumstances the judge was prepared to accept that  this  was  a
    fuller explanation than what had been previously given and  found  that
    the appellant was financially supported by her daughter in the UK.  The
    judge also found that  none  of  the  appellant's  sons  are  currently
    residing in India.

 6. The judge went on to set out the  appellant's  circumstances  prior  to
    coming to the UK when she was looked after by her niece and  considered
    the appellant's health condition and that there was  reference  in  the
    previous determination that the appellant had been ill and in  hospital
    previously.  The  judge  acknowledged  that  the  appellant  spent  the
    duration of the appeal hearing in a wheelchair and noted  the  evidence
    before her of the appellant's current conditions.  This  included  that
    the appellant has been  diagnosed  with  cancer  and  that  the  doctor
    estimated that she has about two years to live.  However the judge went
    on to find, at [23] that the appellant  was  not  having  any  specific
    treatment for cancer or for  any  other  condition  and  this  was  not
    specifically disputed.  The judge found that:

         "All of her conditions are related to her being elderly and require
         some monitoring.  There is no treatment flowing for  the  diagnosis
         of cancer [sic] and I note that there is no medical evidence as  to
         her life expectancy.  I do not find that in the space of the last 7
         years that she is much worse or different  from  the  medical  case
         that she was presenting in 2010.  I find that although she requires
         some assistance in terms of some care to help her bathe,  going  to
         appointments, having food prepared for her and some  assistance  in
         terms of toilet provision and moving around, that  these  are  care
         needs that have not been demonstrated to be unmet or unavailable in
         India."

 7. Although the main thrust of the appellant's challenge to this  decision
    was the judge's phrasing that the appellant  was  not  "much  worse  or
    different" from 2010, that phrase in itself is  not  determinative  and
    must be considered in the context of  the  judge's  findings  in  their
    entirety.  What is important is that the judge took into  consideration
    what assistance the appellant currently requires and made detailed  and
    specific findings, including as to her conditions [19],  and  her  need
    for care.  At [22] the judge noted that "there was no medical  evidence
    that the appellant requires 24 hour  care  or  a  level  of  care  with
    specific tasks: I do not find it to be a high level of care if  it  can
    be managed by a male who himself has health issues" and  this  referred
    to the fact that the appellant's daughter stated that her  own  husband
    had serious mobility issues himself and cared for the appellant  whilst
    Mrs Kaur and her daughter were at work.  That was a  finding  that  was
    properly open to the  judge  and  she  gave  adequate  reasons  for  it
    including that the starting point in this case  was  that  neither  the
    appellant nor Mrs Kaur were credible or  consistent  witnesses  in  the
    first hearing.

 8. The fact that the Tribunal, in a  measured  decision,  found  that  the
    appellant currently had no support from her sons, which  differed  from
    the 2010 finding, was a specific finding made on  all  of  the  factual
    evidence before the judge.  It does not mean that  she  had  to  accept
    everything that was said as true and it was clear that she did not, for
    the adequate reasons given.  It is evident that  the  judge  took  into
    consideration the appellant's circumstances, including that  they  were
    compelling enough to warrant consideration outside of  the  Immigration
    Rules due to the fact that the appellant at the date  of  determination
    was aged 90 and has  a  terminal  illness.   It  is  difficult  to  see
    therefore what error the judge made in finding  the  decision  was  not
    "much worse or different" than 2010 given that the  findings  in  their
    entirety show that the judge fully considered the  appellant's  current
    medical, family and other situations at the date of the hearing.

 9. The appellant's ground 1 disclosed no error of law.



Ground 2

10. It was submitted that the judge erred in maintaining the finding of the
    previous appeal that the applicant's niece could  look  after  her  and
    that this had failed to take into account the  significant  passage  of
    time; Mr Rai submitted that the  judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for  that  finding  including  taking  into  consideration  the
    witness statements of the appellant and her daughter including that she
    had no one to return to in India and that her daughter in  her  witness
    statement  said  that  unfortunately  "my  mother's  friends  and   the
    remaining extended family in India do not want to care for  her.   They
    consider her to be a burden on them".

11. It is not the case, unlike the situation in relation to the appellant's
    financial  support,  that  the  judge  was  provided  with   a   fuller
    explanation.  The judge noted that  prior  to  coming  to  the  UK  the
    appellant was looked after by her niece on her application  form.   She
    would have declared that she was going to return  at  the  end  of  her
    visit.  However, at  paragraph  4  of  Mrs  Kaur's  statement,  it  was
    indicated that after a couple of months her  niece  had  telephoned  to
    inform her that she was refusing to take her mother back as she had her
    own family to look after.  The judge noted that this was  mentioned  at
    the previous appeal hearing and rejected this claim, on  the  basis  of
    lack of credibility and it was not accepted that there was no  extended
    family who could support the appellant.

12. Given those negative credibility findings it cannot properly be  argued
    that  the  brief  reference  at  paragraph  12  of  Mr  Kaur's  witness
    statement, to the remaining extended family saying  that  they  do  not
    want to care for her, can be seen  to  be  new  evidence  as  this  was
    exactly the evidence that was relied on at the first hearing  including
    that the niece had allegedly telephoned to say she would not  care  for
    her.  In the absence of any further adequate evidence  to  support  the
    appellant's claims, the  passage  of  time  does  not  invalidate  that
    finding.

13. No error of law is disclosed in the second ground.

Ground 3

14. Mr Rai relied on the grounds of permission, paragraph 5(iii) through to
    (vi) in his third ground and submitted that given that  the  judge  had
    found there was family life in this case, which was the case  at  [29],
    her subsequent findings were flawed including in relation to the family
    keeping in contact by modern communication, means and that there was no
    proper examination of this point.

15. I do not share that conclusion.  The judge, at [22], rejected the claim
    that the appellant required 24 hour care and it cannot be said that she
    did not adequately consider the evidence.   She  gave  cogent  reasons,
    including finding that the level of care required could not be  a  high
    level if it could be managed by Mrs Kaur's  husband  who  had  "serious
    mobility issues himself".  In relation to the judge  allegedly  failing
    to  take  into  account  whether  it  was  reasonable  to  expect   the
    appellant's daughter to pay for  care  in  India,  again  that  is  not
    properly arguable.  The judge noted the extent of the appellant's  care
    needs and that it had not been demonstrated that these would be  "unmet
    or unavailable in India" and the judge noted at [24] that there was  no
    evidence presented that in India there was no nursing or  medical  care
    for the appellant's medical  needs  and  found  specifically  that  the
    appellant and her family had chosen not to investigate this.  Therefore
    there is no error in the judge's finding that financially there was  no
    reason why her family could not support her in India nor why they could
    not visit her in India, as the appellant's daughter had in the past.

16. In addition in relation to the issue of whether or not the  appellant's
    daughter had been told she did not have  to  pay  for  the  appellant's
    treatment, it was not disputed that she has been  using  NHS  care  and
    that this is a public interest consideration, and this finding was open
    to the judge at [31].

Notice of Decision

17. In conclusion the decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose
    an error of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Dated: 12 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal is dismissed no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Dated:  12 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

