








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23195/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 2 July 2014                               |On: 16 July 2014             |
|Prepared:  14 July  2014                      |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
                         Ms Nana Ama Afrakoma Danso
                         no anonymity direction made


                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. I shall refer to the appellant as the Secretary of State for the  Home
      Department and to the respondent as the claimant.  She is  a  national
      of Ghana, born on 15th December 1970. She entered the UK illegally  in
      2003. On 16th  November  2010  she  sought  leave  to  remain  as  the
      unmarried partner of a British  citizen.  This  was  refused  on  20th
      December 2010.


   2. On 17th January 2011, she sought leave to remain under  Article  8  of
      the Human Rights Convention, which was refused on 11th February 2011.


   3. On 10th January 2012 the  appellant  then  applied  for  a  Derivative
      Residence Card as the primary carer of a British citizen  resident  in
      the UK.


   4. Her application was considered pursuant to Regulation 15A(4A) and  (7)
      of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006  ("the  2006  Regulations").
      She failed to demonstrate that she met the relevant requirements under
      the regulation.


   5. In the reasons for refusal, the secretary of state notified  her  that
      if she wished to rely on family or private life established in the  UK
      under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention, the Immigration  Rules
      included such provisions. She was informed  that  if  she  wished  the
      secretary of state to  consider  such  application  she  must  make  a
      separate  charged  application   using   the   appropriate   specified
      application form as set out  fully  at  page  3  of  the  reasons  for
      refusal.


   6. No decision was made to remove her from the UK.


   7. The claimant in the additional grounds of appeal before the First-tier
      Tribunal stated that "she has rights under Article  8"  of  the  Human
      Rights Convention regarding her two daughters. She has however made no
      application pursuant to Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights  Convention
      following the refusal of her application for leave to remain under the
      2006 Regulations.


   8. First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
      under the 2006 Regulations, but went on to allow it  on  human  rights
      grounds. The appellant was represented by Immigration Advisory  Centre
      at the hearing.


   9. He stated at paragraph 9 that "the conventional free standing  Article
      8 rules apply in this case as confirmed by the Court of Appeal case of
      Edgehill, and this is because the application was made  prior  to  the
      coming into effect of the new rules."


  10. After considering the evidence in the case, he found that  the  appeal
      should be allowed under Article 8.


  11. The secretary of state respondent sought permission to appeal  against
      that decision. Ground 1 asserted that it  was  not  wrong  in  law  to
      require  a  separate  application  for   "separate   grounds   to   be
      considered." The Judge had stated that a separate application did  not
      need to be made which the claimant would have to pay a  fee  for.  The
      contention by the secretary of state was, the Judge stated  "wrong  in
      law."


  12. Further, the secretary submitted that the authority of Edgehill v SSHD
      [2014] EWCA Civ 402, referred to was inapplicable. That judgement  was
      limited in scope to private life cases only. The present case  was  an
      application  under  the  2006  Regulations  and  not  an   Article   8
      application. The secretary was under no  obligation  to  consider  the
      claimant's  human  rights  (or  anyone  else's)  as  no  human  rights
      application had in fact been made and  the  alternative  remedy  of  a
      statutory appeal was available.


  13. It is further contended that as the first point  at  which  the  human
      rights grounds arose was 11th June 2013, when the appeal grounds  were
      lodged, the new rules are in fact applicable.


  14. The decision was in any event  flawed  as  the  Judge  had  failed  to
      "follow the process laid down in Nagre".


  15. On 22nd May 2014, First-tier Tribunal Judge J  M  Holmes  granted  the
      secretary of state permission to appeal. He noted that  there  was  no
      dispute  relating  to  the  derivative  right  of  residence  claimed.
      Further, the  notice  of  decision  contained  no  s.120  notice,  but
      informed the claimant that if she wished to advance any argument as to
      why she should be granted leave to remain based upon the existence  of
      any private or family life, she would need to make an  application  on
      the appropriate form. The Judge's apparent view that there was a s.120
      notice or that she was not obliged to make  such  an  application  was
      arguably wrong.


  16. The evidence relied on by the claimant in support  of  the  Article  8
      appeal appeared to have been served either  at  the  hearing  or  only
      shortly   before   that.   The   claimant   secretary    of    state's
      representative's objection to the approach was apparently overruled.


  17. It was also not in dispute that the claimant did not raise  Article  8
      grounds until the introduction of Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE
      into the  Immigration  Rules.  Accordingly,  if  the  Judge  had  been
      entitled to consider the Article 8 appeal, it had to have been in  the
      context of the immigration rules as they  were  at  the  date  of  the
      hearing. There was no proper basis upon which the claimant could claim
      the benefit of the earlier version of the immigration rules.


  18. Further, the Judge's finding at paragraph 15 of the determination that
      the decision under appeal was "not in accordance with the law" was not
      explained, in the light of the fact that he had dismissed  the  appeal
      under the 2006 Regulations.


  19. At the hearing before me on  3rd  July  2014,  the  claimant  was  not
      represented by any solicitor. However, her partner, who is the  father
      of her children, attended the hearing and supported  her.  During  the
      course of the proceedings, I ascertained that  he  was  aware  of  the
      nature of the proceedings. I explained to him what the issues were. He
      informed me that he had in fact read the papers the  night  before.  I
      had provided him a bundle of documents including the determination  as
      well  as  the  respondent's  grounds  of  appeal  and  the  permission
      decision.


  20. I ascertained from the claimant that she did  not  want  to  have  the
      services of a solicitor and that the hearing could continue.


  21. I  summarised  the  claimant  secretary  of  state's  grounds  seeking
      permission and made sure that she understood them.


  22. Mr Tufan relied on the permission grounds to which I have referred. He
      also referred to paragraph 400 of the Immigration Rules. That provides
      that where a person claims that their removal under paragraphs 8 to 10
      of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971, s.10 of the Immigration And
      Asylum Act 1999 or s.47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act
      2006 would be contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of  the
      Human Rights  Convention,  the  secretary  of  state  may  require  an
      application under paragraph 276ADE or Appendix FM of the rules.


  23. It is further provided that where an application is not  required,  in
      assessing that claim, the secretary of state or an immigration officer
      will, subject to  paragraph  353,  consider  that  claim  against  the
      requirements to be met under paragraph 276ADE or Appendix FM  and,  if
      appropriate, the removal decision will be cancelled.


  24. Mr Tufan finally submitted that there  has  at  yet  been  no  removal
      decision, and there had simply been a  notification  to  the  claimant
      that if she wished to make such an application pursuant to Article  8,
      such an application could be made.


  25. The claimant and her partner made no submissions.


     Assessment


  26. I find that there have  been  no  removal  directions  made,  or  even
      contemplated, against the claimant.


  27. It is accepted that she did not qualify  for  a  derivative  right  of
      residence pursuant to the 2006 Regulations.


  28. Nor was a s.120 notice contained in the notice of decision. There  was
      simply information given to the claimant that if she wished to advance
      any argument to be allowed to be granted leave to remain on the  basis
      of private or family life, she would need to make such an  application
      on an appropriate form. This was not done.


  29. There had not been a claim based on human rights which accompanied the
      application for the residence card.   The  claimant  had  only  raised
      Article 8 grounds in the grounds of appeal after the  introduction  of
      Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE  into  the   immigration   rules.
      Accordingly, even assuming that the Judge was entitled to consider the
      Article 8 appeal, this had to be considered  in  the  context  of  the
      immigration rules prevailing as at the date of hearing.


  30. For these reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      involved the making of an error of law. In the  circumstances,  I  set
      aside the determination and re-make it.  No submissions were made  and
      no further evidence was produced or relied on.


  31. I find for the reasons given that the claimant's appeal under  Article
      8 cannot succeed.   The  claimant  does  not  satisfy  the  article  8
      requirements  under  the  'new  rules'.   Nor,  after   applying   the
      requirements of  the  Rules  have  any  compelling  circumstances  not
      sufficiently recognised under them been advanced for granting leave to
      remain outside them.


     Decision


           Having set aside the First-tier Tribunal's determination, I  re-
make the decision as    follows:   The  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
State's refusal to issue the Claimant a        residence card is  dismissed















                               Signed                     Date 14/7/2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge





