

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23475/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 23 April 2014                                |On 19 May 2014             |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                               mr Moinul Alam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person - not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Bangladeshi citizen who was born on 21 August  1982.
    On 19 October 2012 he applied for further leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.   That  application  was
    refused by a decision dated 24 May 2013 which  decision  the  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. In a determination promulgated  on  28  February  2014  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge dismissed the appeal.  The appellant  sought  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and  this  was  granted.   In  granting
    permission the judge doing so said that the respondent did not serve  a
    bundle and it is arguable that in  those  circumstances  the  appellant
    provided all the  relevant  documents  with  his  application  (to  the
    Secretary of State) as there is nothing to say that he did not.

 3. I have before me the respondent's refusal letter but not a copy of  the
    application to the Secretary of State.  The reason for refusal is  that
    the appellant claimed 10  points  under  maintenance  (funds)  but  was
    awarded none because he did not supply financial documents to show that
    he held the required funds for a  minimum  of  28  days  prior  to  his
    application as required by 245ZX(d)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    appellant was sent a letter on 3 May 2013  requesting  him  to  provide
    bank statements showing that he had the required funds for a minimum of
    28 days. The appellant failed to respond and  provide  those  documents
    and therefore the Secretary of State was not satisfied that he met  the
    general grounds for leave to remain under paragraph 322(9)  which  sets
    out the grounds on which leave to remain  and  variation  of  leave  to
    enter or remain should normally be refused.

 4. Prior to the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal Judge the appellant
    made a witness statement dated 5 February 2014 which is referred to  as
    a statement of truth.  He states there that on 3 May 2013 he received a
    letter from UKBA  dated  3  March  2013  asking  him  to  provide  bank
    statements covering the period from  September  2012  to  October  2012
    which, UKBA said, had not been received with the  original  application
    and documents sent in October 2012.  A copy of  that  letter  has  been
    produced.  There is also a copy of a "track and trace" document showing
    that the letter was indeed sent on 3 May 2013 from  the  respondent  to
    the appellant.  It appears therefore that either  the  letter  dated  3
    March 2013 was incorrectly dated or for some reason it was not sent for
    two months thereafter.

 5. Contained  within  that  letter  is  the  request  to  send  "original"
    documents (the word original is capitalised)  as  photocopies  are  not
    acceptable for the purpose of deciding the application.

 6. In the appellant's statement he said that he was asked to  provide  the
    information within seven days and as the letter was dated 3  March  the
    date for responding had already passed.  Furthermore he  submitted  his
    original bank statements with the application dated  19  October  2012.
    Later in the statement he refers  to  attaching  a  copy  of  the  bank
    statement as he was unable to provide the original which was  submitted
    with his application.  He makes a further point in that statement  that
    he had previously extended his leave to remain.

 7. I am perfectly satisfied that the judge made an error in  paragraph  10
    of the determination where he refers to the appellant presenting a copy
    of a Post Office "track and trace" document to confirm that he had sent
    a letter to the respondent on 3 May 2013.  It is clear  enough  on  the
    face of the documentation that it was the respondent that sent a letter
    to the appellant on  that  date.   That  error  it  is  not  of  itself
    necessarily material.

 8. It was accepted by the judge, and indeed it is not in issue,  that  the
    appellant did not reply to the letter dated 3 March 2013 and the  point
    was made to the judge that the appellant had been in the UK since  2007
    and would have known  of  the  procedures  to  be  followed  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  The Presenting Officer  at  the  hearing  suggested
    that the bank statements which the appellant had presented were not  in
    sterling and in any  event  did  not  cover  the  relevant  period  and
    therefore the requirements of the Immigration Rules had not been met.

 9. It is then recorded that the appellant reiterated that he had submitted
    additional documents when he had  been  requested  to  do  so.   It  is
    unclear from that recording whether the appellant was  saying  that  he
    had submitted documents following the letter of 3 March 2013.  That  is
    certainly not something that he maintained was the case either  in  his
    statement, grounds seeking permission to appeal or before  me  and  may
    have been a misunderstanding and a misrecording by the  judge.   It  is
    apparent, however, from the  last  sentence  of  paragraph  13  of  the
    decision that the judge appears to make his decision based on the  fact
    that the appellant accepted that he  failed  to  produce  the  required
    evidence with his application form.  The judge  wrongly  accepted  that
    the appellant responded to the respondent's letter.  He  came  to  that
    conclusion because the appellant produced a "track and trace"  document
    confirming this.  As previously stated it was  not  the  appellant  who
    produced the "track and trace" document but the respondent.

10. The judge then went on to state  that  the  bank  statement  which  the
    appellant sent to the respondent shows an opening balance of 0.00 and a
    closing balance on  13  September  2012  of  1,310,140.00.   A  further
    document from UCB shows that the closing balance in the same account on
    17 October 2012 was 13,10,140.00.  It was not clear  to  the  judge  if
    that sum was the same sum shown as the  closing  balance  in  the  bank
    account but I do not understand why that should be  so.   Although  the
    comma appears in a different place the amount is exactly the  same  and
    it must surely be a reasonable inference that the  amount  remained  in
    the account for the intervening period.  Although it is  true,  as  the
    judge points out, that the balances shown in the two documents are  not
    in sterling I would find it difficult to understand indeed if for  lack
    of the conversion rate being shown refusal would be justified.   It  is
    but a moment's work to ascertain conversion rates using the Internet.

11. I am somewhat puzzled by the judge's  comments  in  paragraph  15  that
    ".......in this case the respondent (after some  delay)  wrote  to  the
    appellant and provided him with an  opportunity  of  producing  further
    documents.   Although  the  appellant  did  provide   some   additional
    documents it appears that the respondent did not take account of them".
    It seems likely that this comment was made because the  judge  had  not
    understood that the documents were not provided when requested  in  May
    2013. The judge then went on to say that although he had some  sympathy
    with the appellant he could not be satisfied that he had shown that  he
    had the necessary funds for the required 28 day period.

12. Cumulatively and for the reasons set out above I find that the decision
    of the judge is not a safe one.   He  has  misunderstood  some  of  the
    evidence as described  and  that  has  led  to  unsafe  findings.   His
    decision is therefore set aside.

The Rehearing

13. The appellant and Mr Nath, on behalf of the respondent, both  addressed
    me.  Mr Nath made the very pertinent point that the letter sent in  May
    2013 requested documentation which the appellant did not  provide  when
    he had the opportunity to do so.  He simply did nothing  about  it  and
    unsurprisingly the application was then refused.

14. The appellant made the point that in the knowledge that the  respondent
    does not accept photocopies and he had sent the  bank  statements  with
    his application he did not see what more he could do.  I put it to  him
    that he could have telephoned UKBA to  see  if  the  problem  could  be
    resolved to which he replied "I am sorry I could not do anything".

My Findings

15. I found the appellant to be a  witness  who  gave  his  evidence  in  a
    straightforward manner.  He has been broadly consistent as to what took
    place.  In particular he has always maintained  that  he  provided  all
    that was required of him when he made his application, that  there  was
    delay by the  respondent  of  many  months  before  he  was  ultimately
    requested to provide documents that he says he had  already  sent,  and
    that by the time he had received the wrongly dated  or  delayed  letter
    the  period  for  him  allowed  by  the  respondent  to  provide   that
    documentation had already passed.

16. I find it somewhat  perplexing  that  having  eventually  received  the
    letter requesting further evidence the appellant did not  contact  UKBA
    to explain his difficulties. He has to prove that he has satisfied  the
    Immigration Rules on the balance of probabilities.   In  coming  to  my
    decision I bear in mind that he had already renewed his application for
    leave  to  remain  on  a  previous  occasion  and  had  satisfied   the
    authorities that he had sufficient  funding  then.   More  importantly,
    however, is that he clearly understood the  Rules  when  he  made  that
    application and indeed provided then all that was required of him.   He
    must therefore have been entirely cognisant of what was required of him
    when he made the application in October  2012.   The  application  form
    itself, a copy of which is not on the file but Mr Nath  showed  to  me,
    refers to the inclusion  of  two  statements  from  his  bank  so  that
    certainly the appellant intended at the time  of  application  to  send
    them.  The only question is  whether  or  not  he  did  so.   The  copy
    statements that he provided to me and to the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    were both generated on 17 October 2012 which is just prior to the  date
    of application.  That is good evidence  that  the  statements  were  in
    existence and available to be examined with the application at the date
    of it. I see no reason to find that they were issued  after  the  event
    and  backdated.  Those  statements  reveal  that  the   appellant   had
    sufficient funds to meet the maintenance requirements of the  Rules  at
    the relevant time and for the relevant period.

17. There is no doubt that the appellant did not respond to the request  to
    provide original bank statements but of course his  point  is  that  he
    could not do  so  because  the  Secretary  of  State  already  had  the
    originals before her.  Although the appellant  has  not  proved  beyond
    reasonable doubt that he has complied  with  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules that is not the standard of proof required of him.

18. Having heard from the appellant and on a thorough review of the file  I
    am satisfied on balance that  he  did  supply  evidence  of  sufficient
    funding with  his  application  such  that  he  meets  the  maintenance
    requirements under the Rules. In the  circumstances  it  would  not  be
    appropriate for there to be a refusal under  paragraph  322(9)  of  the
    Rules since the documentation he was required to produce was already in
    the possession of the Secretary of State.

Decision

19. For the above reasons the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge is set aside and this appeal is  allowed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

20. No anonymity direction has previously been  made  and  in  the  current
    circumstances I see no need for one to be made now.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton


