
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/23427/2014
                                                               IA/23389/2014
                                                               IA/23390/2014
                                                               IA/23391/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 September 2015                 |On 10 December 2015                  |
|Prepared 14 September                |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENK (first RESPONDENT)
                           KNM (second RESPONDENT)
                           GNM (third RESPONDENT)
                           SNM (fourth RESPONDENT)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms R Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Bedford, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the respondent's as the Claimants.

2.   The Claimants, nationals of  Kenya,  dates  of  birth  respectively  24
    September 1975, 30 March 2006, 1  October  2007  and  10  October  1978
    appealed against the Secretary of State's decisions dated 27  May  2014
    to make removal directions, the form IS151A having been  served  on  27
    May 2014.  Asylum and human rights claims having been dismissed.

3.   The first Claimant  and  her  husband  the  fourth  Claimant  have  two
    children, the second and third Claimants, who are  nationals  of  Kenya
    and have no rights to remain in the United Kingdom.  Their appeals came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge P J M Hollingworth (the judge) who  on
    26 November 2014 allowed their appeals reliant upon Article 8 ECHR  and
    also purported to allow the appeals by an exercise of  discretion  that
    the Appellants should have been granted leave to remain outside of  the
    Rules.

4.   The Secretary of State had considered such claims outside of the  Rules
    but decided not to exercise any discretion.   Accordingly  the  judge's
    purported exercise of discretion outside of the Rules was an  error  of
    law.

5.   The judge's decisions were  appealed  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in
    grounds dated 1 December 2014 and permission to appeal was  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge C Andrew on 16 January 2015.  Permission  was
    given on the grounds "... complain that  the  judge  gave  insufficient
    weight to the public interest and had not taken into account the  cases
    of Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74 and EV (Philippines) [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874".
    The judge correctly noted that in the light of Section 117B(1)(b)  that
    the removal of the children KNM and GNM was not required although their
    time in the UK was very close to identified thresholds because of their
    age:  Thus their removal was not required.  However the  judge  plainly
    failed to consider: first, the children had no  basis  to  remain,  nor
    indeed did the first and fourth Claimants;  Secondly,  their  financial
    circumstances had arisen from them working unlawfully and that the best
    interests of the children in the light of Section  55  BCIA  2014  were
    important factors rather than determinative of the  claims  to  remain.
    The fact of the matters partly as the judge recorded was that the first
    and fourth Claimants had been unlawfully in the United  Kingdom  for  a
    number of years and not regulated their immigration  status.   Secondly
    the judge had made an error on the issue of self-support which error in
    turn fed into an assessment of Section 117 of the Immigration Act 2014.
     At the date of the judge's decision the  third  Claimant  was  just  7
    years of age and had been in the  United  Kingdom  for  less  than  six
    years.

6.   The  weight  to  be  given  to  involvement  in  school  life  and  the
    commencement of education was to be understood in the  context  of  the
    case of Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 197.   Evidently  the  Appellants  had
    some form of private life in the United  Kingdom  and  essentially  the
    question arose as to whether the children's interests outweighed  other
    relevant factors.

7.   It was submitted by Mr Bedford that Zoumbas  [2013]  UKSC  74  did  not
    assist as it was not country guidance and matters of  approach  arising
    from Zoumbas and EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA  Civ  874  gave  rise  to
    considerations that were not raised with the judge.

8.   I was satisfied that the judge's decision did not show  a  balance  had
    been  struck  between  a  number  of  factors,  particularly  the  best
    interests of the children as Kenyan nationals,  the  parents'  conduct,
    past costs and future costs to the taxpayer, foreign  nationals  taking
    the benefit of the UK system and  the  public  interest  both  for  the
    purposes of Article 8(2) but also in the sense of the maintenance of  a
    fair and sustainable immigration system.  I cannot see on  the  judge's
    analysis how the judge could reach the view that the first  and  fourth
    Claimants were financially independent.  In the  circumstances  I  find
    that there was not a proper and adequately reasoned decision to justify
    the view taken by the judge that Article 8 was  engaged  and  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision was disproportionate.

9.   For the avoidance of doubt the financial  circumstances  of  the  first
    and fourth Claimants, ENK and SNM, remained something of a mystery, not
    least given their status in the United Kingdom.

10.  In these circumstances I do not find that  there  has  been  a  correct
    assessment of the relevant  issues  when  making  the  judgment  as  to
    whether or not the Secretary of State's decisions  are  ECHR  compliant
    and in particular whether or not they are proportionate.

11.  The original Tribunal decision cannot stand and the  matter  will  have
    to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

ANONYMITY ORDER

An anonymity order is made in respect of the second and third Claimants

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  second  and
third Claimants are granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings
shall directly or indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.
This direction applies both to the Claimants and to the Secretary of  State.
 Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

The delay in promulgation has been caused  by  the  case  file  being  miss-
located.


Signed   Date 2 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


DIRECTIONS

1)   Remake in First-tier Tribunal  before  any  Judge  other  than  Mr  PJM
    Hollingworth .

2)   No interpreter.

3)   Time estimate 2 hours.

4)   Any further documents or statements relied upon to be served  not  less
    than 10 working days before the hearing to remake the appeal.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

