
IAC-TH-WYL-V1
                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal numbers: IA/23908/2014
                                                               IA/27608/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination promulgated            |
|On 28 January 2015                   |On 4 February 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton


                                   Between

                     MRS BRIGID OLUWAFUNMILAYO ADENIRAN
                  MISS CYNTHIA ADENIKEANJOLAOLUWA ADENIRAN
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Blundell
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes


REASONS FOR FINDING THAT TRIBUNAL MADE AN ERROR OF LAW, SUCH THAT ITS
DECISION FALLS TO BE SET ASIDE

 1. The two appellants are mother and daughter.  They applied  respectively
    for a residence card on the basis of being  a  parent/carer  and  as  a
    dependent child of an EEA national  child  claiming  to  be  exercising
    treaty  rights  under  the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations  2006.   Their  applications  for  derivative   rights   of
    residence were refused.  Importantly, their applications  were  refused
    on the grounds that they had not provided evidence in  the  form  of  a
    valid national passport as evidence of their identity.  In the case  of
    the mother her passport had  been  retained  by  the  Home  Office.  It
    expired on 8 December 2012 and there was said to be nothing  preventing
    her from obtaining a new one.

 2. The appellants appealed and in a joint determination promulgated on  30
    October 2014 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nixon  decided  that  neither
    appellant had a right of appeal because the documents produced did  not
    fall  within  the  requirements  of  Regulation  26(2)  of   the   2006
    Regulations.  This appears to have been a  mistake  because  Regulation
    26(2) refers to EEA  nationals  appealing  under  the  Regulations  and
    neither of the present appellants claims to be an EEA national.  It has
    to be assumed that the judge was referring to Regulation  26(3A)  which
    states as follows:-

         "3A.     If a person claims to be a person with a derivative  right
                of  entry  or  residence  he  may  not  appeal  under  these
                Regulations unless he produces a passport and, either -

                 a. An EEA family permit; or

                 b. Proof that -

                    (i)      Where the person claims to  have  a  derivative
                        right  of  entry  or  residence  as  a  result   of
                        Regulation  15A(2)  he  is  a  direct  relative  or
                        guardian of an EEA national who was under  the  age
                        of 18;

                    (ii)     Where the person claims to  have  a  derivative
                        right  of  entry  or  residence  as  a  result   of
                        Regulation  15A(3)  he  is  the  child  of  an  EEA
                        national;

                    (iii)    Where the person claims to  have  a  derivative
                        right  of  entry  or  residence  as  a  result   of
                        residence under Regulation 15A(4) he  is  a  direct
                        relative  or  guardian  of  the  child  of  an  EEA
                        national;

                    (iv)     Where the person claims to  have  a  derivative
                        right  of  entry  or  residence  as  a  result   of
                        Regulation 15A(5) he is under the age of 18 and  is
                        a dependant of a person satisfying the criteria  in
                        (i) or (iii).

                    (v)      Where the person claims to  have  a  derivative
                        right  of  entry  or  residence  as  a  result   of
                        Regulation 15A(4A)  he  is  a  direct  relative  or
                        guardian of a British citizen."

 3. As recorded by the judge at the hearing both advocates raised the issue
    of the right of appeal.  Mr  Doyle,  who  represented  the  appellants,
    stated that the Duty Judge had granted such a right of appeal  and  the
    judge who heard the appeals did not seek to go  behind  that  decision.
    However, after the hearing there was an e-mail exchange about which the
    judge noted as follows:-

         "3. .......Following the hearing I received an e-mail from Mr  Box,
         (who represented the Secretary of State) which  confirmed  that  Mr
         Doyle was aware of the correspondence and  its  contents.   Mr  Box
         stated that Mr Doyle had made a mistake stating  that  a  right  of
         appeal had been granted and the respondent  therefore  returned  to
         their initial standpoint that there was no right of appeal."

 4. It is noted  also  in  the  determination  that  at  the  hearing  both
    advocates decided to deal with the case by  way  of  submissions  only.
    The judge then decided that there was no right of appeal because  there
    had been failure to produce a valid national identity card or passport.



 5. The grounds for seeking permission to the  Upper  Tribunal  claim  that
    there has been procedural unfairness because the parties had  left  the
    hearing room expecting the appeals to be  allowed  or  dismissed.   The
    appellants' representative Mr Doyle set out in the grounds, and also in
    a witness statement prepared for the Upper Tribunal material  error  of
    law hearing, that he had been mistaken in stating that the  Duty  Judge
    had granted the appellants a right of appeal when this is not  in  fact
    what had occurred.  The unfairness was  because  the  judge  failed  to
    afford Mr Doyle a right  to  respond  to  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer's communication with the judge which sought to argue that there
    was no right  of  appeal.   The  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  had
    suggested that it was open to the judge to afford the appellants' legal
    representative a right to respond to the issue but  the  judge  ignored
    this and went ahead to make a decision without fully consulting all the
    parties concerned.

 6. I am not particularly impressed with this argument.   In  hindsight  it
    may have been wiser for the judge to have ensured that all  the  e-mail
    correspondence had been exchanged and  asked  for  comment  or  further
    submissions on the points raised before making  a  decision.   However,
    one can understand that the  judge,  having  looked  at  the  position,
    formed her own view that the appellants had no right of appeal and this
    was for the reasons given in the decision.  It is not clear to me  that
    at any stage anyone had referred to or made submissions upon Regulation
    29A of the 2006 Regulations to which I shall turn in a moment.   It  is
    for these reasons that I find there has been no procedural  unfairness:
    had there been any this appeal decision would have been  re-visited  of
    necessity.  In any event in the light of  what  I  say  hereafter  this
    point in effect falls away.

 7. I turn now to the second ground which is that the judge made a material
    misdirection in law.  The judge was not referred to, it seems, and  did
    not deal with Regulation 29A which provides that  alternative  evidence
    of identity and nationality may be produced to satisfy the  Regulations
    in certain circumstances.  Regulation 29A states as follows:-

         "29A(1)  Subject to paragraph  (2),  where  a  provision  of  these
                  Regulations requires a person to hold or produce  a  valid
                  identity card issued by an EEA state or a  valid  passport
                  the Secretary of State may accept alternative evidence  of
                  identity and nationality where the  person  is  unable  to
                  obtain  or  produce   the   required   document   due   to
                  circumstances beyond his or her control.

             (2) This Regulation does not apply to Regulation 11."

 8. It will be seen immediately that the matter is not as "open  and  shut"
    as is set out in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.   The  judge
    did not deal with that Regulation and it is in the circumstances a very
    important point.

 9. It is for this reason that I found that the judge has erred  materially
    in law because it cannot be said that even  without  having  made  that
    error the result would necessarily be the same.  I therefore  indicated
    to the parties that the determination of the judge would be  set  aside
    and the matter re-heard.  I indicated that I was in a position  to  re-
    hear  the  appeals  straightaway.   After  debate  about  this  and  my
    observation that at paragraph 32 of the grounds seeking  permission  to
    appeal it was said "The appellants were  then  not  in  a  position  to
    obtain a new and valid passport to be produced  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal at her appeal hearing because her funds were  being  spent  on
    legal costs and as a single mother responsible for two young  children,
    she had insufficient funds to also renew  the  passport,"  Mr  Blundell
    indicated that he would wish to take instructions  and  obtain  a  full
    witness statement from his client.  It was then late in the day  and  I
    took the decision that the matter should be returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for fresh fact finding before a judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Nixon.

 10. There was another pragmatic reason to have the hearing at a later date.
      I was informed that the decision in Ahmed v Secretary of State for the
     Home Department [2013] UKUT 89 (IAC) had been appealed and the  hearing
     before the Court of Appeal took place on about  20  January  2015.  The
     judgment was expected shortly.  The outcome of that appeal may well  be
     directly relevant to any final decision  in  this  appeal  because  the
     appellants appear to be in a similar position to the appellants in  the
     Zambrano appeal (Zambrano v Office national de l'emploi (ONEm)) (Case C-
     34/09).

11. If, therefore, the appellants do have a right of appeal  then  findings
    would need to be made on the applicability of  the  Zambrano  principle
    which should be made clearer by the outcome  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
    decision in Ahmed.

Decision

12. The First-tier Tribunal Judge erred for the reasons set out  above  and
    the appeals are returned to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  finding  on
    appeal rights and if successful  on  that  point  in  relation  to  the
    substantive issues.



Signed:

Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton


                       DIRECTIONS FOR REMITTED HEARING

 1. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting  at  Sheldon
    Court Birmingham for a fresh hearing on all  matters  before  a  judge,
    judges or panel other than Judge Nixon.

 2. Both parties have leave to file and serve updating witness  statements,
    reports and other evidence no later than ten working days prior to  the
    substantive hearing.

 3. Such other directions as may be considered appropriate shall be made by
    the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed      Dated 28 January 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton



