
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23915/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6 April 2016                          |On 28 April 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     K H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Wilocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Jesurum, Counsel for Makka Solicitors Limited,
London




                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary  of  State  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Morocco born on [ ] 1987.   She  appealed
    against the decision of the Respondent dated 14 May  2014  refusing  to
    grant her discretionary leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  under
    Article 8 outside the Rules.  The appeal was  heard  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Morris on 10  February  2015  and  was  dismissed  in  a
    decision promulgated on 26 February 2015, under the Rules and on  human
    rights grounds.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted
    and Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McCarthy  found  that  there  was  a
    material error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  and
    remitted the appeal to be heard by any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other
    than Judge Morris.  The remitted appeal was limited to consideration of
    the proportionality assessment necessary under Article 8 of ECHR.   The
    appeal was heard by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Thanki  on  25
    August 2015.  He allowed the appeal in relation to Article 8  of  ECHR,
    in a decision promulgated on 16 September 2015.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hollingworth on 4  February
    2016.  The permission states that an arguable error of law  has  arisen
    in the context of the scope of the judge's analysis of the  failure  to
    meet the Immigration Rules and the weight to be  attached  thereto,  in
    the  context  of  the  carrying  out  of  the  overall  proportionality
    exercise.

 4. There is a Rule 24 response on file dated 14 March 2016.   This  refers
    to the First-tier Tribunal Judge describing  the  Appellant`s  and  her
    husband`s situation as unusual and exceptional.   The  response  states
    that the Judge explains why he finds this and he is clearly mindful  of
    public interest in the maintenance of effective immigration control.

The Hearing

 5. The Presenting Officer submitted  that  when  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge considered Article 8 he gave insufficient weight to the fact that
    the terms of  the  Immigration  Rules  could  not  be  satisfied.   She
    submitted that the judge did not give weight to public  interest  which
    he was required to do as the terms of the  Immigration  Rules  had  not
    been satisfied.

 6. I was referred to the case of SS Congo and Others [2015] EWCA  Civ  387
    which refers to the considerable weight  which  has  to  be  placed  on
    public interest.  I was referred in particular to paragraphs 87 and  88
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision in which reference is  made
    to  Section   117B(1).    The   Presenting   Officer   submitted   that
    consideration under Section 117B is not limited to the factors referred
    to in the decision.

 7. The Presenting Officer submitted that the application fails  under  the
    Rules because the financial  requirements  cannot  be  satisfied.   She
    submitted therefore that the Appellant cannot maintain herself  without
    recourse to public funds.  She submitted that  the  judge  should  have
    identified this and given  considerable  weight  to  this  issue.   She
    submitted that the Appellant conceded that the terms of the Rules could
    not be satisfied not only based on the financial  situation.   I  asked
    what other terms of the Immigration Rules could not be satisfied and  I
    was told that the terms of Appendix FM and paragraph 267ADE  could  not
    be satisfied.  She submitted that there are no insurmountable obstacles
    to the Appellant going back to Morocco and that the Appellant has  ties
    to Morocco.

 8. The Presenting Officer submitted that when the  balancing  exercise  is
    dealt with and proportionality assessed, the fact that the Rules cannot
    be satisfied has not been given sufficient  weight  by  the  judge  and
    because of this his decision is skewed when Article 8 outside the Rules
    is considered.  She submitted that had the judge dealt with this  in  a
    different way there could have been a different outcome.

 9. Counsel for the Appellant made his submissions, referring to  the  case
    of AJ Angola [2014] EWCA Civ 1636 and MF Nigeria [2013] EWCA Civ  1192.
    He submitted  that  these  are  the  root  authorities  and  the  later
    decisions flow from them.

10. He submitted that when it is stated that when decisions are  made  they
    should  be  made  through  the  lens  of  the  Rules,  this  refers  to
    deportation cases in which the Rules are a complete code.  He submitted
    that public interest has to be taken into account in these cases but in
    non-deportation cases such as this one the terms of the  Rules  do  not
    cover all aspects.

11. Counsel submitted that this case turns on its own facts and  it  is  an
    error if proportionality is not properly assessed.  He  submitted  that
    in this case family life should be given considerable weight.  The case
    law makes it clear that there can be family life  between  parents  and
    adult children.

12. Counsel submitted that the Appellant got leave to  enter  as  a  spouse
    expecting this to lead to her settlement in  the  United  Kingdom.   He
    submitted that precariousness cannot be given as much weight as in many
    cases because of the basis on which the Appellant came  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  She has always been lawfully in the United Kingdom.

13. Counsel referred me to the lawfulness of the Rules themselves.   I  was
    referred to paragraph 33 of  SS  Congo  which  states  that  compelling
    circumstances need to be identified to support a claim for a  grant  of
    leave to remain outside the Rules.  SS Congo states that this is not as
    strict a test of exceptionality as the requirement of "very  compelling
    reasons" referred to in  MF  Nigeria,  in  the  context  of  the  Rules
    applicable to foreign criminals.  He submitted that public interest has
    to be weighed against the Appellant's and her  husband's  human  rights
    and he submitted that the judge has dealt with compelling circumstances
    and found that they weigh in the Appellant's favour.  He submitted that
    exceptionality embodies  public  interest  and  the  judge  dealt  with
    exceptionality and found that this Appellant's  claim  is  exceptional,
    mainly because of her husband's family in the United  Kingdom.   I  was
    asked to give weight to the Rule 24 response on file.

14. I was asked to consider the procedural history in  this  case  and  the
    fact that there  is  only  one  element  to  this  decision,  which  is
    proportionality.  He submitted that the  judge  has  used  the  correct
    approach when dealing with proportionality.  The  test  the  judge  has
    applied is one of exceptionality and I was referred to paragraph 89  of
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  He submitted that  the  judge  has
    applied an elevated test.  Strict exceptionality is  not  required  but
    the judge has found that  the  case  should  succeed  based  on  strict
    exceptionality.

15. Counsel referred me to the Strasbourg approach to this type of case and
    submitted that the relevant consideration is whether it  can  be  shown
    that there are insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant  returning  to
    her own country and if there are not,  is  there  exceptionality?.   He
    submitted that paragraph 33 of SS Congo should  be  followed  and  that
    compelling circumstances is a formulation which is not as strict  as  a
    test of exceptionality or a requirement of very compelling reasons.  At
    paragraph  89  of  the  decision  the   judge   finds   there   to   be
    exceptionality.

16. Counsel submitted that the judge has  directed  himself  appropriately,
    has found the claim to be exceptional and I was asked to find that this
    is not too generous a view based on the facts.  He submitted that there
    is no challenge to the findings of fact, no challenge to what the judge
    has taken into account and no challenge to his  conclusion  on  to  the
    weight to  be  given  to  public  interest  when  weighed  against  the
    Sponsor's family life with his adult children and his one minor  child.
    He submitted that what the Respondent is suggesting is that the matters
    the judge took into account should be considered again but there is  no
    binding authority for that approach.  The  Judge`s  decision  has  been
    adequately reasoned.

17. The Presenting Officer submitted that the case of SS Congo  has  to  be
    read in full.  She submitted that the Immigration Rules are a  complete
    code and I was referred to paragraphs 51 to 53 of SS Congo which  refer
    to the evidence rules and state  that  compelling  circumstances  would
    have to apply to justify a grant of leave to remain where the  evidence
    rules are not complied with. She submitted that at paragraph 53  it  is
    stated that these Rules ensure that  everyone  applying  for  leave  to
    remain is treated equally and fairly  in  relation  to  the  evidential
    requirements they must satisfy and she submitted that that is  not  how
    the judge has dealt with this case.  She referred to paragraph 56 of SS
    Congo and submitted that the near miss situation is irrelevant  to  the
    balancing exercise required under Article 8.  She submitted that as the
    terms of the Rules cannot be  satisfied  this  has  to  be  taken  into
    account  as  a  factor  in  the  proportionality  assessment  and  that
    sufficient weight has not been given by the judge to  relevant  factors
    in this case.  She submitted that the Tribunal  has  not  followed  the
    proper approach and the Respondent believes that the judge  has  failed
    to apply the terms of SS Congo properly.

18. She submitted that there are not different  levels  of  precariousness.
    This Appellant came to the United Kingdom and knew that she  could  not
    stay unless she was granted.  She submitted that her  stay  has  always
    been precarious.

19. The Presenting Officer submitted that  public  interest  has  not  been
    adequately considered.  Sufficient weight has not been given to this as
    the terms of the Rules cannot be satisfied.







20. Counsel for the Appellant referred me to the case of  Dube  UKUT  00090
    (IAC) and submitted that the terms  of  SS  Congo  have  been  properly
    considered and in certain circumstances "near miss"  has  to  be  taken
    into account.  I was referred to paragraph 56 of SS Congo.

21. The Presenting Officer submitted that the way the judge has dealt  with
    Section  117B  is  deficient.   Public  interest  has  not  been  fully
    addressed.  The judge states that he has considered it but as the terms
    of Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules  cannot  be  satisfied  public
    interest should be given more weight than the weight accorded to it  by
    the judge.

Decision and Reasons

22. First-tier Tribunal Judge Thanki dealt with the procedural  history  of
    the appeal and then made his observations.  There has been  no  dispute
    about  the  facts  of  the  case.   The  judge  has  dealt  with  these
    thoroughly.

23. At paragraph 61 of the first-tier decision the judge states "There  are
    occasions when the economic wellbeing of  the  country  meant  that  it
    could be necessary on occasions to prevent a person from living in  the
    UK even when married".  The judge makes it clear that he is aware  that
    the maintenance requirements of the Rules under paragraph 287(v) cannot
    be satisfied.

24. He finds that because of the facts of this case the terms of the  Rules
    do not cover the situation and so he goes on to  deal  with  Article  8
    outside the Rules and the case of Razgar [2004[ UKHL 27.  He deals with
    the Sponsor's relationship with his adult children and his minor  child
    and the part the Appellant plays in this.  He finds that the  situation
    is exceptional.  He takes into account  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration control in the context of the public interest at  paragraph
    87.  He is aware that only proportionality is being dealt with  in  the
    remitted hearing. He has taken into account not  only  the  appellant's
    human rights but also her husband's and his family's  human  rights  in
    the proportionality assessment.

25. The judge does not refer specifically to the said case of SS Congo  but
    I find that he has followed its terms. In proportionality  assessments,
    if there is a "near miss" situation this should be taken  into  account
    when proportionality is assessed and if  an  appellant  can  show  that
    there are individual interests at stake covered  by  Article  8,  which
    give rise to a strong claim that compelling circumstances may exist  to
    justify the grant of leave to remain outside the Rules, the  fact  that
    their case is also a "near miss" case can also tip  the  balance  under
    Article 8 in their favour.   At paragraph 81 of the decision he  refers
    to the Appellant's situation as unusual.  At paragraph 85 he refers  to
    the Appellant, because she came to the  United  Kingdom  as  a  spouse,
    having a legitimate expectation of being able to  settle  here  and  at
    paragraph 89 he refers to the situation being exceptional.

26. Judge Thanki followed the directions in the decision  of  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge McCarthy, considered public interest and the maintenance
    of  effective  immigration  control,  considered  the  fact  that   the
    maintenance requirements and the Immigration Rules cannot be  satisfied
    but because he finds the case to be unusual and exceptional  he  grants
    discretionary leave.

27. The judge has given adequate  reasons  for  finding  this  case  to  be
    exceptional and has carried out a proper balancing exercise.

28. I find that there is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.





Notice of Decision

29. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Thanki, promulgated on 16 September 2015.  This decision
    must stand.

30. Anonymity has been directed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray


