
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23533/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 June 2013                                |On 1 July 2013               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                                 Imran khan

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Khan, instructed by GK Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan,  born  on  13  June  1989.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 21 April 2011, with leave to remain as
    a student until 14 August 2012.

2.   Prior to his leave expiring he applied for further leave to  remain  as
    a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant to follow  a  course  leading  to  a
    Diploma in Business and Administrative  Management  at  the  School  of
    Information Risk Management situated in Ilford.

3.   In his application form the appellant gave details of the number  of  a
    Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies  (CAS).   The  application  was,
    however, refused on 12 October 2012.  No points were awarded under  the
    points-based system because when the CAS  was  checked  on  10  October
    2012, through the checking service, it was apparent that  it  had  been
    withdrawn.  Thus the appellant was not in possession of a valid CAS  as
    required  under  paragraph  245ZX,  subparagraphs  (c)  and  (d),  with
    reference to paragraph 116(c) of Appendix A to the  Immigration  Rules.



4.   The appellant sought to appeal against that decision on the basis  that
    the CAS had been withdrawn by his college by mistake and  that  it  was
    therefore unfair of the respondent to have acted as has been done.

5.   His appeal was heard by Designated Judge French on  28  February  2013.
    The appeal was dismissed.

6.   Leave to appeal was however granted on  the  arguable  unfairness  that
    there was a refusal of the application at a time  when  the  respondent
    knew that the CAS had been withdrawn but the appellant  did  not  know.
    Thus, the appeal comes before me upon that permission.

7.   Mr Kala Khan, who represents the appellant, invited me to  have  regard
    to the appellant's statement and to what was stated by him to the Judge
    at the hearing.

8.   The course for which the application had been made was to  commence  on
    28 August 2012 with an anticipated finishing date of  12  August  2014.
    After making his application to the college he submitted an application
    for further leave to remain on 11 August 2012.  He had started to study
    on the course on 28 August 2012 and regularly attended.  He was shocked
    to receive the refusal letter stating that the CAS had been  withdrawn.
    The applicant contacted the college management but  the  principal  was
    abroad.  He met the principal and owner on 13  November  2012  and  was
    assured that the issue would be resolved and  his  admission  would  be
    reinstated.

9.   On 16 November he was given a letter  by  the  college  explaining  the
    reasons  for  the  withdrawal.  Although  the  college  had  also  been
    suspended, for the same reasons of withdrawing the CAS submission forms
    of other students,  the principal assured him that the college would be
    reinstated.  He continued to attend courses for that term.  In  January
    2013 he found that the college had closed permanently.   The  appellant
    had paid money for his fees and had attended the classes.  He maintains
    that it was not his fault that the situation has arisen.

10.  The letter which the college wrote on 15 November 2012 is  set  out  at
    paragraph  13  of  the  decision.   The  letter  confirmed   that   the
    Confirmation for Acceptance for Studies was  withdrawn by  the  college
    due to an administrative error.  The letter went on to confirm that the
    college had already notified the UK Border Agency to that effect  in  a
    letter dated 13 November 2012.  It went on to say that as  the  college
    licence has currently been suspended pending further  investigation  by
    the UK Border Agency it was  unable  to  re-issue  the  CAS  until  the
    outcome of the investigation.

11.  Mr Khan had argued before Judge French that the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law as it was unfair.  The  case  of  Thakur  (PBS:
    decision - common law fairness) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00151 (IAC)  was
    relied upon as also cases on a similar theme of Patel and Naved.  Judge
    French noted such matters but did  not  find  in  this  case  that  the
    respondent had been at fault in making the  decision.   The  respondent
    had an application which cited a CAS  number  and  on  enquiry  it  was
    apparent that it had been withdrawn by the institution.   That  it  was
    withdrawn was not in issue.  The Judge could find no unfairness on  the
    part of the respondent in the decision-making process.  The  respondent
    was entitled to rely upon the CAS checking  service  and  the  response
    received was not in error.

12.  The Judge made a clear distinction between cases  where  the  Secretary
    of State had no knowledge and could not have any knowledge that the CAS
    was mistakenly withdrawn and those cases  in  which  the  Secretary  of
    State has revoked a licence but the appellant is not aware of that.  It
    was  to  the  latter  situation  that  Thakur,  Patel  and  Naved   had
    application.

13.  Mr Khan,  in  his  submissions,  makes  complaint  that  there  was  no
    evidence as to how the checking procedure was carried out and  contends
    that in  any  event,  having  found  the  CAS  withdrawn,  it  was  the
    responsibility of the respondent, before refusing the  application,  to
    contact the appellant for an explanation.

14.  Mr Mills, who represents the respondent, submitted that the process  of
    checking is an automatic one through the computer checking system.   As
    is apparent from  the  printout  of  that  computer  contained  in  the
    respondent's bundle, it is clear that the details reveal that  the  CAS
    was withdrawn at the time when the printout was made.  He submits  that
    it would defeat the object in  commonsense  of  an  automatic  checking
    procedure if thereafter the caseworkers are expected to  contact  those
    who have been shown on the checking not to have a current CAS.

15.  Thus, the issue in this appeal is  having checked  the  CAS  and  found
    that it was withdrawn what  steps  should  have  been  taken  prior  to
    refusal by the respondent.  Mr Mills submits that the  respondent  need
    do nothing further and that the unfairness lay with the college and not
    with the respondent.

16.  Mr Khan  submits  that  given  the  potential  serious  nature  of  the
    consequences of the appellant it was  incumbent  upon  the  respondent,
    prior to the refusal ,to raise the query at the  very  least  with  the
    appellant as to why his CAS was withdrawn.

17.  I bear in mind the case of Rodriquez (flexibility policy)  [2013]  UKUT
    00042 (IAC).  This was a case that considered the  policy  relating  to
    the processing and determination of applications under the points-based
    system.  This was revised with effect from May  2011.   In  its  policy
    letter of 19 May 2011, the UKBA stated that during an unspecified trial
    stage appellants would be contacted where mandatory evidence is missing
    from their applications and given the opportunity to provide this.

18.  It was a  policy  that  came  into  effect  to  mitigate  some  of  the
    consequences of the imposition of Section 85A(2)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

19.  Since that date on 6 September 2012 a change to the  Immigration  Rules
    was made by the addition of paragraph 245AA of HC 395.   That  provides
    as follows:-

         "245AA.  Documents not submitted with applications


         (a)  Where Part 6A or other appendices referred to in Part 6A state
             that specified documents  must  be  provided,  the  UK  Border
             Agency will only consider documents that have  been  submitted
             with  the  application,  and  will  only  consider   documents
             submitted  after  the  application  where   subparagraph   (b)
             applies.


         (b)  This subparagraph applies if the applicant has submitted:


             (i)  A sequence of documents and some of the documents in  the
                  sequence have been  omitted  (for  example,  if  one  bank
                  statement from a series is missing);


             (ii) A document in the wrong format; or


             (iii)    A  document that  is  a  copy  and  not  an  original
                  document.


             The UK  Border  Agency  will  contact  the  applicant  or  his
             representative in writing, and request the correct  documents.
             The requested documents must be  received  by  the  UK  Border
             Agency at the  address  specified  in  the  request  within  7
             working days of the date of the request."


20.  The policy is set out as an Appendix to the decision and sets  out  the
    various steps that should be followed by a decision makes.   The  first
    issue is whether there is any missing document.  For a request for that
    evidence can be made there has to be  a   reason  to  believe  that  it
    exists before an appellant is to be contacted.

21.  I do not find that that policy extends to  the  circumstances  of  this
    particular case.  It is not a case of the CAS being missing but  rather
    the categorical statement by the issuer of the CAS that at the time  of
    the investigation it had been withdrawn.  It is not a crucial  document
    that had been omitted from the application or missing but existed  once
    and did not exist at the time of the investigation because it had  been
    withdrawn, albeit erroneously.  I do not find  in  those  circumstances
    that the case of Rodriquez assists the appellant.   What is  not  clear
    from the facts of the case is when it was  that  the  college  had  its
    license suspended.  Clearly, if the college had its  license  suspended
    prior to the decision of 13 October 2012, then it is arguable that  the
    situation as in Thakur has application in this case.  If the license of
    the college was suspended prior to the decision  then  it  is  arguable
    that that was a fact to be notified to the appellant in advance of  the
    decision in order to enable him to find another college.

22.  Neither party seemed to know when it was that the suspension came  into
    operation.  It was clearly in operation at the time when the letter  of
    15 November 2012 was written.

23.  Mr Mills sought to make enquiries on the  subject  but  could  find  no
    indication as to when that suspension had taken place.   The  appellant
    did not know. Mr Mills has now sent me that information. The  college's
    licence was first suspended in July 2011 but was reinstated  in  August
    2011 upon the lodging of  Judicial  Review.  The  licence  was  finally
    revoked on 24th November 2012. Thus at the time of  the  decision  that
    College had its licence.

24.  Having considered the determination I can  find  no  error  as  to  the
    approach taken by the Judge.  It  is  extremely  unfortunate  that  the
    appellant has been placed  in  a  difficult  position  because  of  the
    behaviour of his college.  It seems however to me that  the  remedy  is
    against his college rather than against the respondent.

25.  The appellant has been placed to  some  extent  in  a  limbo  situation
    where he has no existing leave in order to apply to another college  in
    order to get a CAS.

26.  It is to be hoped that, given the  difficult  situation  in  which  the
    appellant finds himself through no  fault  of  his  own,  that  in  the
    exercise of discretion the respondent might consider that it would be a
    merciful course to grant the appellant a period of leave in order  that
    he may obtain a CAS from another college so as to continue  his  study.
    However that must be a matter for the respondent and not for me.

27.  Mr Khan also submits that the Judge was in error in the approach  taken
    to Article 8 of the ECHR.  Not only was the appellant a student but  it
    was the clear evidence before the Judge  that  he  had  married  on  25
    January 2013 and lives with his wife.  It  is  noted  that  his  wife's
    parents, her siblings and all her extended family members  are  settled
    in the United Kingdom and many of the appellant's family  members  also
    are in the United Kingdom.

28.  It seems to me however that it is unreasonable  to  seek  to  criticise
    the Judge because it is noted  specifically  in  paragraph  18  of  the
    determination that Article 8 of the ECHR was not  relied  upon  in  the
    appeal.  Mr Khan, who represents the appellant, indicated that it was a
    decision which he had made to concentrate upon the immigration decision
    rather  than  complicate  matters  by  embarking  upon  the  Article  8
    argument.  I was  invited  to  find  that  it  was  reasonable  in  the
    circumstances of the appeal to re-visit that aspect of the  matter.   I
    disagree.  The purpose for the appeal is to determine  whether  or  not
    the Judge made an error of law.  If he was specifically invited not  to
    consider Article 8 then it cannot be said that the Judge acted in error
    of law.  What was apparent from the papers was that the respondent  had
    erroneously issued a notice under Section 47.  That clearly  could  not
    stand.  Thus the appellant's right  to  raise  Article  8  against  any
    removal decision is of course intact and can be made at the appropriate
    time.

29.  It may be sensible for that application to be made  to  the  respondent
    sooner than later in order to obtain a decision which can  then  itself
    be the subject of an appeal.

30.  There is nothing to suggest otherwise than  that  the  appellant  is  a
    bona fide student, seeking to progress his studies.  Little  is  to  be
    gained by a period of limbo.  It is for that reason that I  would  hope
    the respondent would be prepared to grant the  appellant  a  period  of
    leave in order for him to sort out his studies.

31.  Were it of course simply that the appellant  was  a  student  then  the
    comments made by the Tribunal in MM (Tier 1 PSW; Art.8;  private  life)
    Zimbabwe [2009] UKAIT 00037 may be of importance.  If a student  is  in
    the United Kingdom on a temporary basis there is no  expectation  of  a
    right to remain in order to further those ties.  However, in this case,
    the appellant has married in the United Kingdom a British citizen  with
    other consequences.  The sooner matters are resolved the better for all
    parties concerned.

Decision

32.  The decision of Judge French shall stand, namely  that  the  appeal  in
    respect of the Immigration Rules is dismissed.   No  finding  has  been
    made in respect of Article 8  of  the  ECHR.   That  remains  at  large
    pending any decision as to removal by the respondent.







Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
