
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23885/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 November 2014                           |On 3 December 2014            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE E B GRANT


                                   Between

                           mercy Charles rhuppiah
                         (anonymity order not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Sellwood of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Background to this Appeal

 1. The appellant who was born on 26 October 1973 is a citizen of  Tanzania
    and is female.  She entered the United Kingdom with entry clearance  as
    a student in 1997.  She remained as a  student  renewing  her  visa  at
    various periods until her student leave expired on  30  November  2009.
    Throughout the period as  a  student  her  leave  was  not  continuous,
    however on 28 November 2009 she submitted an application for indefinite
    leave to remain on the basis of length of residence which  was  refused
    in February 2010 and the appeal was appeal rights exhausted by  October
    2010.  In June 2013 a decision was made to refuse her  application  for
    leave to remain and to give directions for her removal from the  United
    Kingdom.  The appellant appealed that decision and her appeal was heard
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Blundell and in a decision promulgated  on
    19 August 2014 he dismissed her appeal on Article 8 grounds.

 2. The appellant issued an application for permission to  appeal  in  time
    and the substance of grounds is as set out in paragraphs 11  to  18  of
    the grounds of appeal which I set out in full below:

         "11. The IJ dismissed the appeal.  He  did  however  make  positive
             findings and accepted the evidence of the  appellant  and  her
             witnesses [para 22-36].  The findings made by the IJ  are  set
             out below;

             i)   The appellant cannot meet the  Immigration  Rules  (which
                  was never in dispute).  [37]

              ii) The  error  in  the  application  form  submitted  at  the
                  beginning of July 2012 closed down the fourteen year route
                  (again not disputed).  [38]

             iii) Based on the ties set out at  [22-36]  the  appellant  has
                  accrued a  protracted  private  life  [42]  Article  8  is
                  engaged.  [43]

              iv) The IJ considered the best interests  of  the  appellant's
                  niece McKenya in line with EV (Philippines) and  that  the
                  best interest of McKenya favour  the  appellant  remaining
                  marginally.  [47]

               v) The IJ accepted that there would be a very real impact  on
                  Miss Charles, who is emotionally, and physically dependent
                  on the appellant and has been for a number of years.  That
                  there is no family or friends able to take over  the  care
                  of Miss Charles and that it would fall on the public purse
                  to  do  so.   Furthermore,  Miss  Charles'  health   would
                  deteriorate and she would be unable  to  continue  working
                  for the Ministry of Defence and that 'her  life  would  be
                  turned upside down'.  [49]

              vi) The IJ  accepted  the  Pastor  Amin's  evidence  that  the
                  appellant  is  a  committed  member  of  the  church   and
                  committed to charitable work and that this  is  worthy  of
                  assessment in itself.  [50]

             vii) These matters fall to be considered against a growing list
                  of   considerations   on   the   respondent's   side    of
                  proportionality scales  and  have  now  been  codified  by
                  statute by s.14 of the Immigration Act 2014.  [51]

            viii) In particular s.117B of the amended Act that is  relevant.
                  [52]

              ix) The public interest in s.117B(2) provides  someone  to  be
                  able to speak English.  [54]

               x) The appellant's ability to speak English does not militate
                  in her favour but rather is a neutral factor.  [55]

              xi) The appellant is not financially independent as she worked
                  part-time for most of her stay (in line  with  her  visa),
                  she is  financially  supported  by  her  father  and  Miss
                  Charles  and  that  weighs  against   the   appellant   in
                  assessment of proportionality.  [57]

             xii) S.117B(4) is relevant as she her  lawful  leave  ended  in
                  2010 but her private life had already been built up  prior
                  to that and the him attached little  weight  to  his  sub-
                  Section.  [58]

            xiii) S.117B(5) requires little weight to be placed  on  private
                  life  if  the  immigration  status  is  precarious.    The
                  appellant  had  student  leave  and  her  leave  was  thus
                  precarious.  The IJ further stated that the scope  of  the
                  provision is not defined and will need to be  resolved  by
                  the Upper Tribunal.  The IJ found that the provision  must
                  include those with temporary admission and visitors.  [59]

             xiv) The appellant only ever had student leave and her stay was
                  thus precarious she had  no  expectation  that  she  could
                  remain indefinitely.  Accordingly s.117B(5)  requires  the
                  IJ to apply little weight to the appellant's private life.
                   [60]

              xv) The IJ accepted the factual  premise  that  the  appellant
                  narrowly missed the ten  year  ILR  as  a  result  of  the
                  college not making the applications on time and  that  she
                  also missed the fourteen year  Rule  as  a  result  of  an
                  invalid application at the start of 2014.  [61]

             xvi) These must be  considered  narrow  misses  and  cannot  be
                  considered in the proportionality assessment.  [62]

            xvii)  The  IJ  came  to  the  reluctant  conclusion  that   the
                  appellant's removal is proportionate  and  that  both  the
                  appellant  and  Miss  Charles  have  been  dealt  with   a
                  succession  of  cruel  hands  and  that  the   scales   of
                  proportionality would not have been loaded against her  if
                  her appeal had concluded before 28 July 2014 and that Miss
                  Charles will  be  particularly  badly  affected.   The  IJ
                  concluded that he was required by statute to attach little
                  weight to those relationships, the fact  that  she  cannot
                  meet the Immigration Rules introduced by HC 194.   The  IJ
                  concludes that 'As a result of  the  legislative  changes,
                  and the current state of the authorities regarding the new
                  Rules, I consider that I am bound  to  conclude  that  the
                  harsh consequences which will flow  from  the  appellant's
                  removal are justified and proportionate to the  legitimate
                  aim pursued by the respondent'.  [63]

         12.  The  grounds  of  appeal  are  twofold,  the  first  is   the
             construction of S.117B(5) and  the  construction  of  the  and
             meaning of 'precarious' immigration  status.   The  second  it
             that the IJ clearly felt he  had  no  discretion  due  to  the
             legislative changes despite the factors that clearly militated
             in the appellant's favour and the fact that the  IJ  felt  the
             consequences were unjustifiably harsh and that  the  appellant
             and Miss Charles would suffer badly.

         13. S.117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in
             all cases.

               1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
                  the public interest.

               2) It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
                  interests of the economic wellbeing of the United Kingdom,
                  that persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United
                  Kingdom are able to speak English, because persons who can
                  speak English -

                   a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                   b) are better able to integrate into society.

               3) It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  the
                  interests of the economic wellbeing of the United Kingdom,
                  that persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United
                  Kingdom are financially independent, because such  persons
                  -

                   a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                   b) are better able to integrate into society.

               4) Little weight should be given to -

                   a) a private life, or

                   b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                  that is established by a person at a time when the  person
                  is in the  United Kingdom unlawfully.

               5)  Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
                  established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
                  immigration status is precarious.

         14. It is submitted that the interpretation by  the  IJ  that  the
             appellant's stay as a student  was  precarious  and  that  her
             private life ought not to be given any weight.  Whilst  it  is
             accepted that the periods in question were for short  periods,
             she always complied with the immigration law and she built  up
             a sufficiently long period to qualify for ILR.  The  ten  year
             ILR route is precisely for build up of student leave and other
             leave (it would highly unlikely that a visitor would  be  able
             to amass that ten year lawful residence).  The  fact  is  that
             the appellant had studied here for a number  of  years,  there
             was and still is ILR for those that remain in the UK lawfully,
             thus it cannot be said she had no expectation that  she  would
             be allowed to remain.  Coupled with the IJ findings  that  had
             it not been for the ineptitude of the college  in  making  the
             applications on behalf of the appellant she  would  have  been
             granted ILR.  Such a restrictive interpretation is not defined
             in the Rules.

         15. The second  ground,  is  that  the  IJ  has  stated  that  the
             legislative requirements have taken away any discretion the IJ
             may have had in balancing proportionality.  This does not  sit
             well with Strasbourg jurisprudence as it would simply beg  the
             question why have appeals on Article 8 as all  are  doomed  to
             failure.  Furthermore this interpretation does not still  well
             with Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).

                  'As appears from the new guidance issued by the  Secretary
                  of  State  in  relation  to  exercise  of   her   residual
                  discretion to grant leave to remain outside the Rules,  as
                  set out above, and as  Mr  Peckover  makes  clear  in  his
                  witness statement, the new Rules  contemplate  that  there
                  will be some cases in which a right  to  remain  based  on
                  Article 8 can be established, even though falling  outside
                  the new Rules.  Therefore, the basic framework of analysis
                  contemplated by Lord Bingham in Huang continues to  apply,
                  as was recognised by the Upper Tribunal in Izuazu.
                   1. I agree with the guidance given by the Upper Tribunal
                      in Izuazu at paras.  [40]-[43], as follows:
                      '40.   We  accordingly  further  endorse  the   Upper
                           Tribunal's observation in [MF (Article  8  -  new
                           Rules) Nigeria  [2012]  UKUT  00393  (IAC)]  that
                           judges called on  to  make  decisions  about  the
                           application of Article 8 in cases  to  which  the
                           new  Rules  apply,  should   proceed   by   first
                           considering whether a claimant is able to benefit
                           under   the   applicable   provisions   of    the
                           Immigration Rules designed to address  Article  8
                           claims.   If he or she does,  there  will  be  no
                           need to go on to consider  Article  8  generally.
                           The appeal can be allowed because the decision is
                           not in accordance with the Rules.
                      41.       Where  the  claimant  does  not  meet   the
                           requirements of the Rules it  will  be  necessary
                           for the judge to go on to make an  assessment  of
                           Article 8 applying the  criteria  established  by
                           law.
                      42.      When  considering  whether  the  immigration
                           decision is a  justified  interference  with  the
                           right  to  family  and/or   private   life,   the
                           provisions  of  the  Rules  or   other   relevant
                           statement of policy may again re-enter the debate
                           but this time  as  part  of  the  proportionality
                           evaluation.    Here  the  judge  will  be  asking
                           whether  the  interference  was  a  proportionate
                           means of achieving the legitimate aim in question
                           and a fair balance as to the competing interests.
                      43.      The weight to be attached to any reason  for
                           rejection of the human rights claim indicated  by
                           particular provisions of the  Rules  will  depend
                           both on the particular facts found by  the  judge
                           in the case in hand and the extent that the Rules
                           themselves  reflect  criteria  approved  in   the
                           previous case law of the Human  Rights  Court  at
                           Strasbourg and the higher courts  in  the  United
                           Kingdom'.
                   1. The Secretary of State does not contend that the  new
                      Rules completely  cover  every  conceivable  case  in
                      which a foreign national may have a  good  claim  for
                      leave to remain under Article  8.    In  relation  to
                      both Section EX.1 (family life) and paragraph  276ADE
                      (private life) it is possible to envisage cases where
                      they would not:
                      i)   In relation to  Section  EX.1(b),  for  example,
                           there may be individual cases in which, for  some
                           reason, there are particularly compelling reasons
                           arising from the specific circumstances why leave
                           to remain should be granted under Article 8, even
                           though there may not be  insurmountable  barriers
                           to family  life  continuing  outside  the  United
                           Kingdom, in the applicant's  country  of  origin;
                           and
                      ii)  In relation to paragraph  276ADE,  for  example,
                           there may be individual cases of adults who  have
                           lived in the United  Kingdom  for  less  than  20
                           years and  who  do  retain  some  ties  to  their
                           country of origin, but in relation  to  whom  the
                           ties they have developed and the roots they  have
                           put down in the  United  Kingdom  manifestly  and
                           strongly outweigh those ties, so that it would be
                           disproportionate to remove them.
                   1. In cases where consideration of the  new  Rules  does
                      not fully dispose of a claim based on Article 8,  the
                      Secretary  of  State  will  be  obliged  to  consider
                      granting leave to remain outside the Rules.   If  she
                      does not, where there is  an  appeal  the  First-Tier
                      Tribunal will be obliged  to  consider  allowing  the
                      appeal, and where there is no appeal, judicial review
                      will lie.'

         16. It is quite clear that the IJ fund that  the  removal  of  the
             appellant is unjustifiably harsh and that in  particular  Miss
             Charles will be badly affected, to such an extent that she may
             have to give up her work with the Ministry of Defence  without
             the care from the appellant.  The IJ further concluded that he
             had to 'reluctantly' find  the  appellant's  removal  was  not
             disproportionate, despite the factors that militated towards a
             different decision.

         17. Such a stark  decision  leaves  the  FTT  with  absolutely  no
             discretion and that cannot  sit  comfortably  with  Strasbourg
             jurisprudence and established law by the Higher courts in this
             country.

         18. It is submitted that there is an important point  of  law  and
             construction of the Immigration Act 2014 that permission ought
             to be given."

 3. On 3 October 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne granted  permission
    to appeal in the following terms:

         "1.  The grounds seek permission to appeal a determination of First-
             tier  Tribunal  Judge  Blundell   who   in   a   determination
             promulgated 22 August 2014 dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
             against the respondent's decision to  refuse  her  application
             for settlement on the grounds of long residence under  Article
             8 ECHR.

          2. The grounds  assert  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in  his
             construction of Section 117B(5) Immigration Act 2014  and  the
             meaning  of  'precarious'  immigration  status.   The  judge's
             interpretation of  the  appellant's  stay  as  a  student  was
             precarious and that her private life ought not to be given any
             weight  is  too  restrictive.   The  judge  found   that   the
             legislative requirements have taken away  any  discretion  the
             judge   may   have   in   balancing   proportionality.    This
             interpretation is contrary  to  Strasbourg  jurisprudence  and
             Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) [28, 30,  33,  34].   The  judge
             concluded that he had to reluctantly find that the appellant's
             removal was not  disproportionate  despite  the  factors  that
             militated towards a different decision.  Such a stark decision
             leaves the First-tier Tribunal with absolutely no  discretion.
             An important point of law and construction of the  Immigration
             Act 2014 means permission should be given.

          3. In a detailed, careful, and  well-reasoned  determination  the
             judge set out the pertinent issues, law and evidence, relating
             to the facts of the appeal.  Despite the commendably  forensic
             approach adopted by the judge,  it  is  nevertheless  arguable
             that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in  his  interpretation  and
             construction of each of the sub-Sections of Section 117 of the
             amended Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 following
             the enactment of Section 19 Immigration Act 2014.   It  is  at
             least arguable that an appellant's ability  to  speak  English
             (at Section 117B(2)) should amount to a  positive  finding  in
             the proportionality assessment and not merely neutral as found
             by the judge.  Similarly in relation to Section 117B(3) it  is
             at least arguable that an appellant's  financial  independence
             should amount to a positive in the proportionality  assessment
             rather than merely neutral.  It is further arguable  that  the
             judge erred in his interpretation of  'precarious'.   Finally,
             it is arguable that the  judge  erred  in  his  assessment  of
             proportionality.

          4. As these arguable errors of law have been identified  all  the
             issues raised in the grounds are arguable."

 4. Thus the matter came before me.

 5. Mr  Sellwood  submitted  at  the  outset  that  there  were  compelling
    circumstances in the appeal which amounted to an exceptional  case  but
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge had felt compelled by the changes brought
    about by the Immigration Act 2014 to dismiss the appeal notwithstanding
    those compelling circumstances.  Mr Sellwood reiterated the grounds  as
    summarised above and submitted  that  the  judge  fell  into  error  by
    misapplying the law in particular the factors set  out  within  Section
    117 of the Immigration Act 2014.  Counsel's submissions are  fully  set
    out in the skeleton argument and the relevant aspects of that  skeleton
    argument in relation to the submissions made before me are paragraphs 4
    to 17 which I set out below.

         "4.  There is a dispute  as  to  the  periods  of  'out  of  time'.
             According to the SSHD there was a period of time btw  31  July
             1999 and 9 September  1999  when  her  application  was  made.
             However, on the SSHD record, there is a letter dated  27  July
             1999 and the notes clearly state 'I am satisfied that we  will
             have  to  treat  the  letter  of  27.07.99  as  an   in   time
             application.  Although the appellant never submitted a form we
             chose to treat the letter as  an  application.   It  would  be
             unfair  not  wot  inform  the  appellant  she  never  made  an
             application.  Accordingly, the appellant was not out  of  time
             not that occasion.  Arguably the 67 days without leave  should
             in fact be 28 days.  [see p13 first appeal bundle.]

         5.   Furthermore, according to the SSHD notes  the  period  between
             01.08.98-03.08.98 might have been in time.

         6.   The periods of continuous leave being broken are

             01.08.98 and 03.08.98 (three days) disputed.

             01.08.99 and 09.09.99 (39 days) disputed

             01.09.00 and 04.09.00 (four days)

             01.10.01 and 02.10.01 (two days)

             01.11.02 and 11.11.02 (eleven days)

             01.10.05 and 07.10.05 (seven days)

         7.   The appellant has built up her private life here in the UK and
             has studied for most of that time (lawfully).  She has created
             friendships and relationships with the Seventh  Day  Adventist
             Church.  Her brother is in the UK and has a  child  with  whom
             the appellant is very close the niece McKenya Claire  Rhuppiah
             is now 4 years old.  [WS p10]

         8.   The SSHD accepts that the appellant has  built  up  a  private
             life [p16 first bundle) and that she has been  studying  since
             her arrival in the UK.

         9.   Thus there are short gaps in her leave so that  she  does  not
             fall within the ten years of continuous residence.  The  issue
             will be whether on the facts  of  this  case  considering  the
             length of stay and the private life she has built up it  would
             be disproportionate to remove her.

         10.  An immigration decision affecting private/family life will  be
             in breach of Article 8 if:

             a)   The decision must interfere with the right to respect for
                  private/family life; and either

             b)   The decision is not in accordance with the law; or

             c)   The decision is not made in order to further one  of  the
                  legitimate aims; or

             d)   The extent of the interference cannot  be  justified  as,
                  necessary in the interests of democratic society' in order
                  to fulfil a legitimate aim.

         11.  The burden of showing a) is  on  the  appellant,  and  he  has
             clearly shown that there is a  right  to  private  and  family
             life, then the onus is on the state to show that none  of  the
             conditions in b), c) and d) apply.  If  the  state  cannot  do
             this then there is a breach of Article 8.

         12.  However the Court of Appeal in Senthuran [2004] EWCA Civ 950:

                  15.  We do not think  that  Advic  is  authority  for  the
                      proposition  that  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
                      Convention can never be engaged when the family  life
                      which it is sought to establish is that between adult
                      siblings living together ...

         13.  The HL in Huang'

         14.  18 ... It is unnecessary for present purposes  to  attempt  to
             summarise the Convention jurisprudence on Article 8,  save  to
             record that the article imposes on member states  not  only  a
             negative duty to refrain from unjustified interference with  a
             person's right to respect for his or her  family  but  also  a
             positive duty to show respect for it.  The reported cases  are
             of  value  in  showing  where,  in  many   different   factual
             situations, the Strasbourg court, as the ultimate guardian  of
             Convention rights, has drawn the line, thus  guiding  national
             authorities in  making  their  own  decisions.  But  the  main
             importance of the case law is in illuminating the  core  value
             which Article 8 exists to protect.  This is not, perhaps, hard
             to recognise.  Human beings are social animals.   They  depend
             on others. Their family, or extended family, is the  group  on
             which many people most heavily depend,  socially,  emotionally
             and often financially.  There comes  a  point  at  which,  for
             some, prolonged and unavoidable  separation  from  this  group
             seriously inhibits their ability to live full  and  fulfilling
             lives.  Matters such as the age, health and  vulnerability  of
             the applicant, the  closeness  and  previous  history  of  the
             family,  the  applicant's  dependence  on  the  financial  and
             emotional support  of  the  family,  the  prevailing  cultural
             tradition and conditions in the country  of  origin  and  many
             other factors may all be relevant.  The Strasbourg  court  has
             repeatedly recognised the general right of states  to  control
             the entry  and  residence  of  non-nationals,  and  repeatedly
             acknowledged  that  the  Convention  confers   no   right   on
             individuals or families to choose where they prefer  to  live.
             In most cases where the applicants complain of a violation  of
             their Article 8 rights, in a case where the impugned  decision
             is  authorised  by  law  for  a  legitimate  object  and   the
             interference (or lack of respect) is of sufficient seriousness
             to engage the operation of Article 8, the crucial question  is
             likely to be whether the interference  (or  lack  of  respect)
             complained of is proportionate to the legitimate end sought to
             be achieved.  Proportionality is a subject of such  importance
             as to require separate treatment.

         15.  In Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct  approach)  [2013]
             UKUT 00640 (IAC) the UT held:

                  (b)     after applying the requirements of the Rules, only
                      if there may be arguably good  grounds  for  granting
                      leave to remain outside  them  is  it  necessary  for
                      Article 8 purposes to go on to consider whether there
                      are compelling circumstances
                      not sufficiently recognised  under  them:  R  on  the
                      application of Nagre v Secretary  of  State  for  the
                      Home Department [2013 EWHC 720 (Admin).


                  (c)      the term 'insurmountable obstacles' in provisions
                      such as Section EX.1  are  not  obstacles  which  are
                      impossible to surmount: MF (Article 8  -  new  Rules)
                      Nigeria [2012] UKUT 393 (IAC); Izuazu  (Article  8  -
                      new Rules) [2013] UKUT 45  (IAC);  they  concern  the
                      practical  possibilities  of  relocation.    In   the
                      absence  of  such  insurmountable  obstacles,  it  is
                      necessary to show other non-standard  and  particular
                      features   demonstrating   that   removal   will   be
                      unjustifiably harsh: Nagre.


         16.  Sales J in Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) held;

             27.  There is, in my judgment, nothing untoward  in  the  fact
                  that the new Rules do  not  necessarily  track  absolutely
                  precisely and provide  in  detail  in  advance  for  every
                  nuance in the  application  of  Article  8  in  individual
                  cases.  I do not think  it  would  be  feasible,  or  even
                  possible, to produce simple Immigration Rules  capable  of
                  providing clear guidance to all the officials who have  to
                  operate  them  that  did  that.   That  was  true  of  the
                  Immigration Rules prior to their amendment, and  it  could
                  not be suggested that they were unlawful as a result.   As
                  observed by Lord Bingham  in  Huang  at  [17],  'It  is  a
                  premise of the statutory scheme enacted by Parliament that
                  an applicant may fail to qualify under the Rules  and  yet
                  may have a valid claim by virtue of Article 8'.
               1. As appears from the new guidance issued by  the  Secretary
                  of  State  in  relation  to  exercise  of   her   residual
                  discretion to grant leave to remain outside the Rules,  as
                  set out above, and as  Mr  Peckover  makes  clear  in  his
                  witness statement, the new Rules  contemplate  that  there
                  will be some cases in which a right  to  remain  based  on
                  Article 8 can be established, even though falling  outside
                  the new Rules. Therefore, the basic framework of  analysis
                  contemplated by Lord Bingham in Huang continues to  apply,
                  as was recognised by the Upper Tribunal in Izuazu.
               1. Nonetheless, the new  Rules  do  provide  better  explicit
                  coverage of the factors identified in case-law as relevant
                  to analysis of claims under Article 8  than  was  formerly
                  the position,  so  in  many  cases  the  main  points  for
                  consideration in relation to Article 8 will  be  addressed
                  by decision-makers applying the new Rules. It is only  if,
                  after doing that, there  remains  an  arguable  case  that
                  there may be good grounds for  granting  leave  to  remain
                  outside the Rules by reference to Article 8 that  it  will
                  be necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on  to  consider
                  whether   there   are   compelling    circumstances    not
                  sufficiently recognised under the new Rules to require the
                  grant of such leave.
               1. I agree with the guidance given by the Upper  Tribunal  in
                  Izuazu at paras. [40]-[43], as follows:
                  '40. We accordingly further endorse the  Upper  Tribunal's
                      observation in [MF (Article 8 -  new  Rules)  Nigeria
                      [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC)] that  judges  called  on  to
                      make decisions about the application of Article 8  in
                      cases to which the new Rules apply, should proceed by
                      first considering  whether  a  claimant  is  able  to
                      benefit  under  the  applicable  provisions  of   the
                      Immigration  Rules  designed  to  address  Article  8
                      claims.  If he or she does, there will be no need  to
                      go on to consider Article 8 generally. The appeal can
                      be allowed because the decision is not in  accordance
                      with the Rules.
                  41.  Where the claimant does not meet the requirements  of
                      the Rules it will be necessary for the judge to go on
                      to make an  assessment  of  Article  8  applying  the
                      criteria established by law.
                  42.  When considering whether the immigration decision  is
                      a justified interference with  the  right  to  family
                      and/or private life, the provisions of the  Rules  or
                      other relevant statement of policy may again re-enter
                      the  debate  but   this   time   as   part   of   the
                      proportionality evaluation.  Here the judge  will  be
                      asking whether the interference was  a  proportionate
                      means of achieving the legitimate aim in question and
                      a fair balance as to the competing interests.
                  43.  The weight to be attached to any reason for rejection
                      of the human rights  claim  indicated  by  particular
                      provisions of the  Rules  will  depend  both  on  the
                      particular facts found by the judge in  the  case  in
                      hand and the extent that the Rules themselves reflect
                      criteria approved in the previous  case  law  of  the
                      Human Rights  Court  at  Strasbourg  and  the  higher
                      courts in the United Kingdom'.
               1. The Secretary of State does not contend that the new Rules
                  completely cover every conceivable case in which a foreign
                  national may have a good claim for leave to  remain  under
                  Article 8. In relation to both Section EX.1 (family  life)
                  and paragraph 276ADE (private  life)  it  is  possible  to
                  envisage cases where they would not:
                  i)   In relation to Section EX.1(b),  for  example,  there
                      may be individual cases in which,  for  some  reason,
                      there are  particularly  compelling  reasons  arising
                      from the specific circumstances why leave  to  remain
                      should be granted under Article 8, even though  there
                      may not be insurmountable  barriers  to  family  life
                      continuing  outside  the  United  Kingdom,   in   the
                      applicant's country of origin; and
                  ii)  In relation to paragraph 276ADE, for  example,  there
                      may be individual cases of adults who have  lived  in
                      the United Kingdom for less than 20 years and who  do
                      retain some ties to their country of origin,  but  in
                      relation to whom the ties they have developed and the
                      roots they  have  put  down  in  the  United  Kingdom
                      manifestly and strongly outweigh those ties, so  that
                      it would be disproportionate to remove them. (On  the
                      facts of the Claimant's case, as  determined  by  the
                      Secretary of State, he does not have an arguable case
                      of this kind available to him).
               1. In cases where consideration of the  new  Rules  does  not
                  fully dispose of a claim based on Article 8, the Secretary
                  of State will be obliged to  consider  granting  leave  to
                  remain outside the Rules. If she does not, where there  is
                  an appeal the  First-Tier  Tribunal  will  be  obliged  to
                  consider allowing  the  appeal,  and  where  there  is  no
                  appeal, judicial review will lie.
         17.  The court is enjoined to allow the appeal."

 6. In response, for the Secretary of State Ms  Isherwood  submitted  there
    was no material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge and the grounds amount to a mere disagreement and  nothing  more.
    The appellant entered the United Kingdom and remained  in  a  temporary
    capacity as a student who was  granted  entry  clearance  based  on  an
    intention to leave when  her  studies  were  complete.   She  had  made
    repeated out of time applications to extend leave.  But in reliance  of
    Patel and Others v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2013]
    UKSC 72 there is no near miss applicable in this case.   Article  8  is
    not there to provide a promising student with leave to remain  and  the
    intention of the appellant if  she  is  granted  further  leave  is  to
    continue with her studies.  At paragraph 34 of  her  witness  statement
    she hopes to take a further course at Greenwich University followed  by
    a Masters in Engineering Management followed by a PhD in the same area.
     There is no basis under the Immigration Rules  for  the  appellant  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as a  student.   She  does  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 7. Ms Isherwood submitted that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is
    well reasoned taking into account the evidence and  submissions  before
    the judge.  The judge accepted at paragraph 25 that the  appellant  was
    appeal rights exhausted in 2010.

 8. When looking within the Immigration Rules and at Article 8  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge did make positive findings as regards the appellant
    for example at paragraph 27 of the decision the judge noted  that  Miss
    Charles is heavily dependent on the appellant and at paragraph  29  the
    only criticism is that the appellant is not paid by Miss Charles but is
    a student and has worked part-time.  Nevertheless he found Miss Charles
    heavily dependent upon her.  He found that she helps Miss  Charles  out
    of friendship and habit and will  continue  to  do  so  if  allowed  to
    remain.

 9. At paragraph 32 he took into account her relationship with her  brother
    and noted the school reports.  At paragraph 33 he took into account her
    church  activities.   At  paragraph  35  he  took  into   account   her
    professional life.  The judge noted at paragraph  37  Counsel  for  the
    appellant before the First-tier Tribunal accepted that  paragraph  276B
    was not available to the appellant.

10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge properly went through case law on how  to
    approach the appellant's case.  He  weighed  everything  together.   He
    noted there were compelling  circumstances.   He  considered  case  law
    including Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC), Haleemudeen [2014] EWCA  Civ
    558, R (on the application of Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and
    MM [2014] EWCA Civ 985.  At paragraph 42 the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    disagreed with the appellant's submissions in respect of  family  life.
    Although she has close blood ties with her brother these are  not  more
    than the normal emotional family ties.  She is close to her  niece  but
    has always lived apart by a coach journey.  She has a close  friendship
    with Miss Charles.

11. At paragraph 43 the judge found that Article 8  was  engaged.   On  the
    issue before the judge was proportionality.

12. The judge took into account all the factors argued before  him  and  he
    also dealt with the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's  niece.   He
    considered the very real impact on Miss Charles  if  the  appellant  is
    removed but noted that alternative arrangements would have to  be  made
    for her care.

13. Having considered a large number of factors in the  appellant's  favour
    at paragraph 51 the judge found that these matters fell to be  balanced
    against a growing list of considerations on the  respondent's  side  of
    the proportionality scale.  Many of those  considerations  outlined  in
    authorities such as Huang and FK and OK Botswana have now been codified
    in statute with the enactment of Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014
    which  had  the  effect  of   introducing   a   number   of   mandatory
    considerations into paragraph 5A of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  Thereupon the judge deals with Section 117A to  D  of
    the amended Act.

14. Ms Isherwood submitted that the weight to be attached  to  the  various
    factors was for the judge and he has properly weighed all  the  factors
    in the balance in  concluding  that  the  appellant's  removal  is  not
    disproportionate.  For these reasons there is no error of  law  in  the
    determination.

Reply

15. In response Mr Sellwood indicated the  question  is  not  so  much  the
    findings reached by  the  judge  as  to  the  statutory  interpretation
    applied by him.  It is clear from the decision at paragraph 63 that the
    judge felt he had no choice.  If he had not said  he  was  required  to
    attach little weight to the various relationships had he not made  that
    error the outcome would have been different.

Decision

16. I cannot agree with the submissions which have been raised on behalf of
    the appellant before me or in the grounds of appeal.  In a  cogent  and
    well reasoned decision the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  has  given  very
    careful consideration of all the factors weighing  in  the  appellant's
    favour and those factors weighing in the respondent's favour and having
    weighed those factors  in  the  balance  he  has  been  driven  to  the
    "reluctant conclusion that the appellant's removal  is  proportionate".
    The appellant's representative submits that the  judge  has  misapplied
    the law as set out in Section 117 of the amended Act and that if he had
    not misapplied or misunderstood that legislation he would have gone  on
    and allowed the appeal.  I cannot accept that is what the judge did.

17. At paragraph 53 the judge sets out the relevant aspects of Section  117
    which apply and at 117B he notes that the  maintenance  of  immigration
    control is in the public interest something which  has  always  been  a
    matter to weigh in the scale of proportionality by judges of the First-
    tier Tribunal.  As the judge rightly says Section 117B(1) adds  nothing
    to the proportionality assessment already required by  the  authorities
    to which he had already referred.  He goes on to  consider  other  case
    law such as SS Nigeria [2013] EWCA Civ 550 where  it  is  not  said  by
    Parliament as it is in the case of foreign criminals that their removal
    is in the public interest.  The principle he had to apply is couched in
    more general terms which simply accord with the  principles  that  have
    been established in the jurisprudence for many years.  It  is  hard  to
    disagree with that analysis of Section 117 as set out by the judge.

18. The judge goes on to look at Section 117B(2)  at  paragraph  54  noting
    that it is in the public interest that persons who seek  to  remain  in
    the UK are able to speak English.  It was submitted  before  the  judge
    that the appellant's proficiency in English which was  a  matter  which
    militated in her favour in the proportionality assessment in the  light
    of the new provisions.  The judge noted that guidance  from  the  Upper
    Tribunal and higher courts would no doubt be given in due  course,  but
    for his part he did  not  consider  the  sub-Section  to  support  that
    construction.  It does not provide that the public interest  is  served
    by permitting those who speak English to remain in the UK.  It provides
    that it is in the public interest for those seeking to remain in the UK
    to be able to speak English.  The  judge  took  the  view  that  in  an
    inability to speak English  is  a  matter  to  be  weighed  against  an
    individual whereas an ability to do so seemed to him to  be  a  neutral
    factor.  That was a matter properly for him to  assess.   There  is  no
    error of law in his reaching an assessment on the basis that he did.

19. The judge reached the same conclusion on the  construction  of  Section
    117B(3).  This says it is in the public interest that those who seek to
    remain in the UK are financially independent but it does not  say  that
    it is in the public interest that financially independent  persons  are
    permitted to remain in the UK.  The provision seems to take matters  no
    further than authorities such as Konstatinov v The  Netherlands  [2007]
    ECHR 336 as paragraph 50 or more recently Nasim [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC) at
    paragraphs 25 to 27.

20. But the judge went on to consider financial independence in relation to
    the appellant's case and found there was no basis upon which  he  could
    consider she was financially independent.  That was a decision properly
    open to him on the evidence before him.  Whilst she was a  student  she
    undertook part-time work and was otherwise  supported  by  her  father.
    The current position brought about by the fact that she was  unable  to
    work because of her immigration status was that she received board  and
    lodging  from  Miss  Charles  and  her  father   provided   a   further
    contribution to her maintenance.  A finding that the appellant  is  not
    financially independent as she depends on others for all of  her  funds
    was a finding properly open to the judge on the evidence before him.

21. The  judge  went  on  to  consider  paragraph  117B(4)  finding  it  of
    questionable relevance to the appellant which left him with sub-Section
    117B(5)  that  little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
    established by a person at a time when the person's immigration  status
    is  precarious.   It  is   on   this   issue   that   the   appellant's
    representatives' grounds of appeal and submissions were most  forceful,
    arguing that her status had not been precarious in the sense  that  for
    much of the time in the United Kingdom she had been here lawfully.

22. Those arguments were placed before the judge and those arguments in the
    grounds before me are merely a reiteration of arguments  placed  before
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge upon which he made findings.  As with all
    the grounds placed before me  they  amount  to  nothing  more  than  an
    attempt to re-argue the appeal on matters which were  all  capably  and
    well argued by Ms Fisher, Counsel, who appeared before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge.   Ms  Fisher  had  submitted  that   the   appellant's
    immigration status was not precarious from her entry to  the  UK  until
    the latter half of 2010 and she submitted that  precarious  was  to  be
    given the same meaning as unlawful.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge  did
    not agree with that submission.  Precariousness as such is not  defined
    but the judge found that it must include those who were present in  the
    United Kingdom as visitors and those with temporary admission.  To find
    otherwise would be illogical and it  must  at  the  other  end  of  the
    spectrum exclude those who have settled status albeit that they are not
    British citizens.  Having reviewed case law including Omoregie v Norway
    [2008] ECHR 761 and Konstatinov the judge went on to say

         "Ultimately, however, I cannot see how the appellant's status since
         her arrival to the UK can  be  described  as  anything  other  than
         precarious.  The only type of leave which the  appellant  has  ever
         had was as a student.  That fact led Ms Ahmed to ask the appellant,
         during cross-examination, whether she expected that she would  have
         to leave the UK at some point.  She  replied  in  the  affirmative.
         The fact is that the appellant has only ever held a type  of  leave
         granted under paragraphs 57 to 62 of the  Immigration  Rules  which
         required  her  to  demonstrate  an  intention   to   return.    Her
         immigration  status  was  precarious   throughout;   she   had   no
         expectation that she would be allowed to  remain  indefinitely  and
         leave to remain as a student would not have been granted if she had
         suggested otherwise."

    The judge went on to find that Section 117B(5) required him  to  attach
    little weight to the private life established by the appellant.

23. If the judge had taken a different view of the private life established
    by the appellant, in other words if he had adopted the  approach  which
    was urged upon him by Counsel who appeared before him  to  attach  some
    weight to the private life the appellant had established in the  United
    Kingdom the judge properly noted at  paragraph  63  that  he  was  also
    required to weigh against her the fact that she  cannot  meet  the  new
    Immigration Rules introduced by HC 194. There is  nothing  new  in  the
    2014 Act in relation to Article 8. For example, it is settled law  that
    a student here on a temporary basis has no expectation of  a  right  to
    remain in order to further  ties  and  relationships  formed  whilst  a
    student if the criteria of the Immigration Rules are not met  following
    MM (Tier 1 PSW; Art 8; "private life") Zimbabwe [2009] UKAIT 00037. The
    appellant has always been in the United Kingdom as a student until  her
    leave expired and she failed to depart. Whether the judge  followed  MM
    or applied section 117B (5),   the outcome would be the same.

24. In the light of established case law the judge was entitled to conclude
    that the harsh consequences  which  would  flow  from  the  appellant's
    removal were justified and proportionate to the legitimate aim  pursued
    by the respondent.

25. In a very careful, wide-ranging and sympathetic decision the judge  has
    fully weighed in  the  appellant's  favour  everything  that  could  be
    weighed in her favour save that he did not give weight to  her  private
    life.  There can be no credible suggestion that the outcome would  have
    been any different if he had given greater weight to this private  life
    established whilst the appellant  was  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  an
    entirely temporary basis, and I am satisfied that the grounds amount in
    essence to an attempt to re-argue the appeal having disagreed with  the
    well-founded conclusions reached by the First-tier Tribunal judge.

26. For all of these reasons I find the judge did not err  in  law  in  his
    determination and the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  will
    stand.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the determination.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration tribunal Procedure Rules 2005.




Signed                                  2 December 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge E B Grant





