

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number:     IA/23085/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                   |Determination Promulgated|
|On: 12th June 2014                     |On:11th August 2014      |
|                                       |                         |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                             Naftali Zvi Kalish
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr Leskin,  Birnberg Pierce and Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant is a national of Israel date of birth 27th December 1988.
 He has permission to appeal against the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal (Judge Lambert) to dismiss his appeal against the Respondent's
decision to refuse to vary his leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom.
That decision followed from the refusal to grant the Appellant  further
leave to remain as the spouse of his British wife.



Background and Matters in Issue

The Appellant was first given leave to enter as a spouse  in  2010.  In
March 2013 he returned to Israel for a family visit. When the Appellant
presented himself at Manchester airport hoping to re-enter  the  UK  to
join his wife and children he was stopped by border force officials who
pointed out that his last visa had expired before he had even left  the
UK.  The Appellant was nevertheless granted two months leave  to  enter
in order to "regularise his position".

Once in-country the Appellant made an application for leave  to  remain
as a partner.

The Respondent refused the application by way of letter dated the  28th
May 2013. The Appellant did not qualify for leave to remain because  he
had not shown that he had  the  requisite  level  of  English  language
skills. Nor had he shown he had sufficient funds. The letter  also  put
in issue whether this was a genuine and subsisting relationship, but in
view of the  couple's  three  children  the  Respondent  has  now  very
sensibly withdrawn that ground  of  refusal.  The  letter  went  on  to
wrongly state that there was no  right  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal. No consideration is given to Article 8 outwith the  framework
of the Immigration Rules.

Judge Lambert correctly found that there was a  full  right  of  appeal
since the Appellant had valid leave  at  the  date  that  he  made  his
application, having been given two months leave to enter at  Manchester
airport. She noted that the Appellant's representative had nevertheless
conceded that the Appellant could not succeed under the  Rules  because
he could not  meet  the  requirements  as  to  maintenance  or  English
language  skills.   The  skeleton  argument  made  it  clear  that  the
Appellant relied solely on Article 8  outside  of  the  Rules.    Judge
Lambert prefaced her analysis of Article 8 by making a number of  clear
findings of fact.   She accepted that the Appellant and his  wife  have
been in a genuine relationship since 2009. She found that they  have  a
large extended family living close  by  in  Manchester:  "relationships
within the family are close and mutually  supportive.  The  Appellant's
mother-in-law helps the sponsor and Appellant with child care  whenever
she is needed. The loss through illness of the sponsor's younger sister
in June of this year caused  suffering  for  the  family  and  for  the
sponsor in particular". She found  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  the
Appellant had made any consistent attempt to  learn  English  since  he
first arrived here  in  2010;  this  was  to  be  contrasted  with  his
prioritisation of his religious study.  In respect of  the  Appellant's
role  in  parenting  his  British  children  that  was  found   to   be
significant.  These facts clearly led to a finding of family life,  and
the Tribunal accepted that there would be an interference  with  it  if
the Appellant were to have to return to Israel.

In respect of proportionality the First-tier Tribunal placed weight  on
the fact that the Appellant has three young children who  all  live  in
the UK with their mother. She has lived here all her life and does  not
speak Hebrew.   She enjoys a close and supportive family network in the
UK and the sponsor has been  particularly  reliant  upon  this  network
since the death of her sister. The Appellant conceded that life for his
family would not be impossible in Israel, but rather  than  they  would
face difficulties in trying to  relocate  there.   Judge  Lambert  gave
primary consideration to the best interests of  the  Appellant's  three
young children and to what Blake J says in Mansoor about the importance
of being able to live in the country of one's  nationality.  She  noted
however that they are very  young  and  that  none  are  in  full  time
education. At present their lives  revolve  around  their  parents  and
extended family. She noted the evidence as to the  close  relationships
within the wider family but found no evidence to suggest that a  period
of separation from those family members would be "actively damaging" to
their wellbeing". They would be  able  to  develop  relationships  with
their father's family in Israel. Judge Lambert could find no reason  to
find that it would be contrary to the best interests  of  the  children
for them to live with their father in Israel for a period, should their
mother decide that she  wanted  to  go  with  him.   This  was  in  the
alterative to the Appellant returning to Israel  alone  and  making  an
application to come back once he  had  all  the  requisite  matters  in
order:

         "4.17...The obstacles to the  Appellant  being  able  to  meet  the
         requirements of Appendix FM are on the evidence before  me  capable
         of being overcome within a reasonable timescale. He is literate man
         who applies himself readily to religious learning. I have no  doubt
         that provided he chooses to apply himself to the task he  also  has
         the ability to learn English and pass a  language  test.  He  would
         not, if he wished to return to the United Kingdom, need  to  remain
         in Israel for any prolonged period of the children's lives. If they
         and their mother accompanied him  they  would,  in  the  relatively
         foreseeable future, be able to expect to return to this country  to
         take full advantage of their British citizenship"

Having considered the evidence before her Judge Lambert concluded  that
the Sponsor would be "in no worse position than any  number  of  single
parents who have to cope alone". Although she would find  it  difficult
she would be aided by the close support of her  family.   The  decision
was not disproportionate and the appeal under Article 8 was dismissed.

The grounds of appeal are almost as long as the  determination  itself.
Numerous errors are alleged, most of which  amount  to  a  disagreement
with the decision. Some of the paragraphs make  no  sense.  Others  are
repetitive. I hope I do no injustice to the  grounds  by  boiling  them
down to the points focussed upon in Mr Leskin's oral submissions. It is
said that the First-tier Tribunal erred in the following respects:

        i)  Failing  to  record  or  consider  material  evidence.  The
           Appellant relied on the oral evidence of five  witnesses  in
           addition to himself and his wife yet none of their  evidence
           was noted nor apparently any weight  given  to  it.  All  of
           these witnesses  (members  of  the  Sponsor's  family)  gave
           important evidence about the very close relationship between
           the Sponsor and her family, all of  which  was  relevant  to
           proportionality and the assessment of 'best interests'; this
           omission led the Judge to "skirt over" the very  great  loss
           suffered by the family when the Sponsor's sister died.  This
           matter was also confirmed in writing by  the  family  doctor
           and the Judge failed to have regard to his evidence.  It was
           this ground that attracted First-tier Tribunal  Campbell  to
           grant permission to this Tribunal.


       ii) Failure to deal with points made by the Appellant.  This  is
           said to include failing to make findings on  the  fact  that
           the Sponsor would have to give up her job if  she  moved  to
           Israel; that she was having a "very difficult time" with her
           young baby; that her mother had to  give  her  more  support
           than she has had to give to any of her other children;  that
           the family would find it difficult to move to Israel because
           of the very substantial degree of  emotional  and  practical
           support that they receive here from  the  Sponsor's  family,
           and that the Appellant would stand a much better  chance  of
           being able to learn English in  the  UK  than  he  would  in
           Israel.


      iii) Applying "too  much  weight"  to  the  Appellant's  lack  of
           English.  It  is   submitted   that   the   Judge   attaches
           "disproportionate and excessive weight" to the fact that the
           Appellant has not passed his English language test.

It is also alleged that the determination erred in its approach to  the
Sponsor's  financial  situation.  Mr  Leskin  conceded  in   his   oral
submissions that this was not a central ground of appeal, since it  was
agreed that the Appellant could not meet the requirements of the  rules
in any event.   The evidence that the Judge considered lacking has  now
been provided.

In his oral submissions Mr Leskin further submitted that the First-tier
Tribunal had erred in failing place adequate weight on  the  fact  that
the children are British.


My Findings on Error of Law

It is a trite observation that a judge need not address in detail every
single argument advanced before her, nor consider  in  isolation  every
single piece of evidence. She must weigh all  of  the  evidence  before
her, and give clear reasons for her conclusions such that the  parties,
and in particular the losing party, can understand the reasons for  her
decision. Judge Lambert could not have been plainer in  this  decision.
She heard what was said about the sad loss of the Sponsor's sister, and
about how close the Sponsor is to  her  family.   She  took  that  into
account. The determination refers in several places to  the  amount  of
practical and emotional support the  Sponsor  gets  from  her  extended
family [see for instance 4.10, 4.13, 4.15].  It was not  in  issue  and
she accepted that it was so. It is  therefore  difficult  to  see  what
difference it would have made if the Judge had "stated that she  had  a
record of the evidence which can be referred to",   "given  justice  to
the oral evidence" or "referred to the fact that there were five  other
witnesses" (all discrete 'errors' alleged by the  grounds  of  appeal).
I find that if there was an error in failing to record the evidence  of
the witnesses it cannot be said to  be  material,  since  none  of  the
findings  contradicted  anything  any  of  these  witnesses  said.  The
determination gives full consideration to the fact that this is a close-
knit family who have suffered a bereavement.

Similarly I do not find that the Tribunal erred in its approach to  the
submissions advanced by the Appellant.   Most of the points  raised  in
the grounds amount to a disagreement with the determination.  I am told
that Mr Leskin advanced an argument that the  Appellant  would  be  far
better placed to learn English in the UK than he would in  Israel,  and
it is now said that the omission to deal with this was an error of law.
 With respect, it is difficult to see how  that  could  have  made  any
impact  on  the  Judge's  decision.  If  she  considered  that  it  was
reasonable that he return to Israel in order to to apply for  a  spouse
visa she would no doubt have considered it reasonable that he apply for
a student visa if he wanted to study in the UK.

Much of Mr Leskin's oral submissions were taken up with the  matter  of
the Appellant's failure to meet the requirement that he  speak  English
to a specified standard.  It is said in  the  grounds  that  the  Judge
placed "excessive weight" on the fact that the Appellant did not appear
to have taken  any  real  steps  to  study  English.   This  matter  is
addressed by the determination at paragraph 4.17 where the Judge points
out that there are no apparent  obstacles  to  the  Appellant  actually
learning English, it's just that so far  he  has  chosen  to  do  other
things. I find it hard to see how that can be said to be "excessive"  -
the determination gives  no  indication  as  to  how  much  weight  the
Tribunal placed on this factor, it is just  listed  as  one  amongst  a
number.   I would add that it is clearly a factor of some importance as
far as the Respondent is concerned, the new rules reflecting  the  will
of parliament in introducing the English language  requirement,  upheld
by Beatson J and then the Court of Appeal in Chapti.   I  do  not  find
that there was any error in the weight attached to this matter.

The final matter that was  raised  before  me  was  the  issue  of  the
children's nationality.  A number of cases were cited  which  emphasise
the importance of a child's nationality, and how a child has the  right
to grow up in his or her country of nationality and enjoy the  benefits
that  this  might  bring.  Judge  Lambert  herself  gives   very   full
consideration to some of those authorities at  paragraph  4.14.  If  it
could be said that there was any error in her approach, which I do  not
find, I cannot find it to be material, since these children are plainly
also entitled to Israeli citizenship. Mr Leskin protested that I  could
not take judicial notice of that. Their father is Israeli. Their Jewish
mother is entitled to make aliyah to  Israel  whenever  she  likes.  It
would therefore be extraordinary to suppose that the Israeli government
would deny  these  children  confirmation  of  their  citizenship.  The
argument as to nationality is therefore neutral.

In respect of finances I think it fair to say that the determination is
incomplete. Judge Lambert was not asked to make findings on whether the
Appellant could meet the financial requirements of Appendix FM  and  it
would  appear  that  the  evidence  before  her  was  limited.  If  the
Appellant's evidence about the family's financial situation is  correct
no doubt he will very easily be able to satisfy an Entry  Clearance   -
or Immigration  - Officer that he can meet those requirements.

The decision of Judge Lambert does not contain any errors of  law.  Her
findings are clear and were open to her on the evidence before her. She
was entitled to find that the Appellant should  return  to  Israel  and
take his English language course. I note that  the  Appellant  has  now
been back in the UK for some time and may have already completed it. If
that is so then his absence from the UK will likely be brief.



Decisions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law and it
is upheld.

I make no direction as to anonymity.



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             23rd  July 2014
