
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23119/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 October 2016                    |On 10 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                 ZUBAIDA NAZ
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini, of Counsel, instructed by E2W (UK) Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW



Anonymity

1.   The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity  order.  I  have  not
    been asked to make one and I see no public policy reason for  doing  so
    and so none is made.



Background

2.   This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Talbot who dismissed the Appellant's appeal against  the
    Respondent's decision refusing to  vary  her  leave  to  remain  and  a
    concomitant decision to remove her to Pakistan contrary to  Section  47
    of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

3.   The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 20 September 1954.  She
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 17 December 2013 with entry  clearance
    conferring leave to enter as a visitor until 14 April 2014. On 28 March
    2014 the Appellant applied for leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
    contrary to Article 8 of the ECHR on the basis of  family  and  private
    life. The Respondent refused  the  application  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and concluded that there were  no  exceptional  circumstances  to
    warrant a grant of leave outside of the Rules.

The Decision of Judge Talbot

4.   The Appellant's appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Talbot
    (hereafter "the Judge"). After hearing oral evidence from the Appellant
    and her nephew the Judge dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated
    on 11 April 2016. The Judge found the evidence of the witnesses 'to  be
    broadly credible'. He accepted the Appellant  had  established  'strong
    ties with her extended family members in the UK  including  her  nephew
    and his family', and that her status as a divorcee was viewed adversely
    by some of her family members and  the  wider  Pakistani  society.  The
    Judge further accepted that the Appellant  had  been  living  with  her
    elderly and ailing older brother in Pakistan in an overcrowded house in
    dilapidated conditions, and that he and his family may be reluctant  to
    have the Appellant return to live with them ([24]-[25]). The Judge made
    reference to the Appellant's health and noted  that  she  was  able  to
    manage her diabetic condition in Pakistan and he was not satisfied that
    she would be unable to do so on return  [26].  The  Judge  went  on  to
    consider paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and found  that  the
    Appellant did not qualify for leave there under [27] and  proceeded  to
    consider the claim outside of the Rules contrary to Article  8  of  the
    ECHR. He concluded that the Appellant  had  established  a  family  and
    private life and that there would be a sufficiently grave  interference
    with her right to private and family life as to engage the operation of
    Article 8 [30]. The crux  of  the  Judge's  findings  relating  to  the
    proportionality of removal was as follows:

         "34. There are certainly compassionate factors in  the  Appellant's
         favour, as has been put forward by her and her brother  and  by  Mr
         Bazini. She would be returning to Sri Lanka (the  reference  to  an
         incorrect country of removal is unfortunate but nothing  materially
         turns on it) in difficult circumstances  and,  although  I  am  not
         satisfied that her brother would refuse to accommodate her, she may
         well feel that she would be unwelcome particularly  by  members  of
         his family and the living conditions would  be  uncomfortable.  She
         would also, I am sure, miss the warm  family  atmosphere  that  she
         enjoys with her extended family in the UK. Living in her own rented
         accommodation would be an option with the financial support of  her
         UK-based relatives, but I accept it is not one she would  willingly
         choose. I note the reference in the Home Office Country Guidance on
         'Single  Women'  (paragraph  2.4)  which  states  that  it  is  not
         generally socially acceptable for women to lie (sic) alone,  albeit
         it is easier in urban areas such as the Appellant's  home  town  of
         Lahore but that remains 'quite a rare occurrence'.  The  report  of
         the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada makes similar  comments
         but states: 'older  women  can  live  alone  but  still  they  feel
         insecure socially and physically'."

         35. In making an overall assessment, I  note  from  Huang(2007)UKHL
         11,  SS(Congo)  and  other   jurisprudence   that   there   is   no
         exceptionality test as such but that there  must  be  circumstances
         that are sufficiently compelling to outweigh  the  public  interest
         factors represented by the Secretary of State. I have set  out  the
         balancing factors and I am not  satisfied  that  the  compassionate
         circumstances in  this  case  are  sufficiently  compelling  as  to
         outweigh the public interest factors. I have to conclude  that  the
         Respondent's decision would  not  constitute  a  violation  of  the
         Appellant's Article 8 rights and that the  interference  caused  to
         her private and family life would not be  disproportionate  to  the
         Secretary of State's legitimate aim in the maintenance of a  system
         of immigration control."

Permission to Appeal

5.   Permission to appeal was granted on limited  grounds,  namely,  grounds
    two and three by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley on 5 September 2016.
    In respect of ground two it was arguable that the  Judge  in  assessing
    the question of proportionality failed to consider the  best  interests
    of the children and the impact of the  Appellant's  removal  upon  them
    and, secondly, in respect of ground three, it  was  arguable  that  the
    findings were contrary to the evidence and failed to take into  account
    a material consideration.

6.   At the hearing I heard submissions from both representatives  following
    which I announced that the decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.  My reasons are set out below.

Error of Law

7.   There is no challenge to the Judge's  decision  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The  focus  of  the   Appellant's   appeal   relates   to   the
    proportionality assessment carried out by the Judge in  the  paragraphs
    quoted above at [4]. While the Judge  considered  the  factors  he  was
    required to consider by primary legislation under section 117B,  it  is
    incumbent on the Judge to deal with all matters that  are  relevant  to
    the assessment of proportionality as dictated to by the evidence in the
    case. While Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  made  every  effort  to  defend  the
    Judge's decision,  even  she  acknowledged  that  it  would  have  been
    desirable for the Judge to have conducted a more comprehensive analysis
    of the facts. I agree and conclude that in this case the Judge did  not
    undertake  an  evaluative  assessment  of  all  relevant  factors  when
    conducting the balancing exercise under Article 8(2). My reasons are as
    follows.

8.   In relation  to  the  second  ground,  the  evidence  showed  that  the
    Appellant had formed inter alia unusually strong ties to  her  nephew's
    minor children. This evidence was set out in the witness statements  of
    the Appellant and nephew respectively. Therein they both described  the
    Appellant's relationship with the children being  akin  to  that  of  a
    grandmother and grandchild.  The  evidence  plainly  demonstrated  that
    there was a  symbiotic  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  her
    nephew's children who relied  on  her  for  nurture  and  support  (the
    Respondent's rule 24  response  stating  that  the  children  were  not
    dependent on the Appellant is contrary to the evidence in this regard).

9.   The Judge accepted the substance  of  these  relationships  in  finding
    that the Appellant had established strong ties with her nephew and  his
    family and that family life had thus been established in the UK. It was
    argued before the Judge that the  impact  of  the  Appellant's  removal
    would have consequences for the nephew's  minor  children  given  their
    strong ties to the Appellant. In view of that background,  and  as  the
    Judge accepted that Article 8 was  engaged,  I  find  that  a  duty  to
    consider section 55 of the BCIA 2009 and  the  best  interests  of  the
    children was thus engaged. At the very least, the Judge was required to
    consider the human rights of all family members said to be affected  by
    the decision: see  Beoku-Betts  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2008] UKHL 39. The consideration is absent. I am  satisfied
    and find therefore that  the  Judge's  failure  to  consider  the  best
    interests of the children and their  human  rights,  in  terms  of  the
    impact of the Appellant's  removal  upon  them,  is  an  error  of  law
    material to the assessment of proportionality. I find the second ground
    is made out.

10.  There are several facets to the third ground which essentially  asserts
    that  the  Judge's  reasoning  in   respect   of   proportionality   is
    fundamentally flawed. I do not need to deal with each and every one  of
    them as the following in combination with the above error is,  I  find,
    sufficient to establish that  the  Judge's  assessment  is  flawed  and
    cannot stand.

11.  It was the Appellant's claim that she could not  return  to  live  with
    her brother as before in Pakistan. Her brother had  not  been  able  to
    support her for a number of years; he was bedridden  and  dependent  on
    his  children;  the  house  that  he  lived  in  with  his  family  was
    overcrowded and dilapidated, and his children who were embroiled  in  a
    dispute over their claims to the property did not want  her  to  return
    there. While the Judge correctly observed that there  was  no  explicit
    reference  in  the  brother's  statement  that  he  would   refuse   to
    accommodate the Appellant, I agree with the  submission  of  Mr  Bazini
    that the evidence clearly indicated  that  the  issue  of  whether  the
    Appellant could live in the house in Pakistan  was  no  longer  in  the
    hands of the brother, but that of  his  children.  The  Judge  at  [34]
    plainly failed to take  all  these  material  factors  adequately  into
    account, and his conclusion  that  the  brother  would  not  refuse  to
    accommodate her, is not supported by  the  overall  evidence  that  was
    before him.

12.  I also agree with Mr Bazini that the Judge's assessment of whether  the
    Appellant could live alone in Pakistan is speculative and  inadequately
    reasoned. Whilst he set out the background evidence relating to  single
    women in Pakistan and  their  ability  to  live  alone,  he  failed  to
    consider  the  Appellant's  individual  characteristics   and   whether
    expecting her as an older woman to live alone in an  environment  where
    she  would  still   feel   socially   and   physically   insecure   was
    proportionate. The purported analysis of this issue is incomplete.

13.  In summary, I find that the Judge failed to properly and  fully  assess
    the realities of the situation awaiting the Appellant on return in view
    of the accepted facts.

14.   For  all  these  reasons  the  Judge's  approach  to  the   issue   of
    proportionality is flawed and is set aside.

Disposal

15.  Both parties invited the Tribunal to remit the  matter  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for the decision to be remade. By paragraph  7.2  of  the
    relevant practice statement for appeals on or after 25 September  2012,
    I must be satisfied that:
    "... the nature or  extent  of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to  the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal." In  all  the
    circumstances I am satisfied that it would be appropriate to remit  the
    case to the First-tier Tribunal - there was an indication that there is
    a change of circumstances and further evidence may be required from the
    Appellant.

Notice of Decision

The decision involved the making of an error on a point of law  and  is  set
aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

No anonymity direction is made.

Directions to the Parties

1.   The issue in the remitted appeal is: whether  the  Appellant's  removal
    is proportionate contrary to Article 8(2) of the ECHR in light  of  the
    circumstances prevailing at the date of next hearing.

2.   The Judge's findings of fact are preserved.

Procedural Directions

1.   The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-listed on  a
date to be fixed.

2.   The remitted appeal shall not be heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Talbot.

3.   Any further evidence to be called by the Appellant must be set  out  in
    a witness statement to stand as evidence-in-chief.

Signed   Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral
