

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/23187/2014
     IA/23193/2014
     IA/23198/2014
     & IA/23200/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 04 December 2014                      |On 11 December 2014       |
|                                         |                          |

                                   Before

              The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey and
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Holmes


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    ABOLAGI SHAKIRU ISMAIL (AND 3 OTHERS)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
Appellant:    Mr I Kingham,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Respondents:  Unrepresented, in person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellants are all citizens of Nigeria  and  members  of  the  same
    family.  The first and second Appellants  are  the  father  and  mother
    respectively.  The third and fourth Appellants are  the  children,  now
    aged 9 and 6 years respectively.

The Secretary of State's Decision

 2. These conjoined appeals originate in a decision dated 08 May 2014  made
    on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home   Department
    (hereinafter the "Secretary of State").  The context of the decision is
    apparent from the opening passage:

         ".....  You have asked that  your  case  be  considered  under  the
         [ECHR].  You claim it will breach your human rights to  return  you
         to Nigeria, a country which is  listed  in  section  94(4)  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002."

    The case made by the Appellants was summarised by the decision maker in
    the following terms:


         "You have stated that removal would  be  a  breach  of  your  human
         rights because you have established private life during  your  time
         in    the    United    Kingdom,    particularly    your    daughter
         ............................. who is now over seven  years  of  age
         and has spent the whole of her life in the United Kingdom,  so  you
         do not feel it would be reasonable  to  expect  her  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom ....................


         [Further] you claim that  you  and  your  family  have  a  fear  of
         returning to Nigeria due to the fact that you no  longer  have  any
         links to Nigeria, where there is a very high level of  poverty  and
         unemployment and poor standards of education and health care  which
         would inflict physical and mental stress on the  children  and  the
         family as a whole."

    The decision maker concluded,  firstly,  that  the  Appellants'  claims
    could not succeed  under  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules.   In particular, the assessment was  made  that  the
    parents had submitted no evidence  that  they  have  lost  all  family,
    social and cultural ties with Nigeria.  The parents' evidence that both
    had attempted to find work there during the preceding three  years  was
    noted.

 3. It was acknowledged that the  older  of  the  two  children  had  lived
    continuously in the United Kingdom for  at  least  seven  years.   This
    triggered consideration of whether it would be  "reasonable  to  expect
    [her] to leave the United Kingdom.   The  decision  maker  reasoned  as
    follows:


         "It is usually considered in the best interests  of  the  child  to
         remain in the family unit with their  parents  and  siblings.   The
         children would not be separated from their parents, as  the  family
         would be expected to return to Nigeria as a whole unit.   Both  you
         and your wife grew up in Nigeria and would be able to  support  the
         children in the family and outside in the wider community in  order
         to help them to  adapt  to  living  in  Nigeria  and  learning  the
         language if required ..........  You  and  your  wife  have  family
         living in Nigeria and they could also help and support the children
         to integrate into the way of life ...............


         [The older child] ..................... is young enough to adapt to
         the education system in Nigeria  ........................   Primary
         education in Nigeria begins at six years of age and lasts  for  six
         years .................. Education to junior secondary level  (from
         6 to 15 years of age) is free and compulsory....................


         Neither child has any health problems.  Any friendships  formed  in
         the United Kingdom can be continued from abroad by  modern  methods
         of communication .................


         You have not submitted any evidence to show that [the older  child]
         has formed exceptional bonds with  anyone  in  the  United  Kingdom
         which would make it unreasonable to expect her to live  in  Nigeria
         ................  [or] ................ that there  is  exceptional
         physical or emotional dependency on other members of the family  in
         the United Kingdom outside your immediate family unit."

    It is then stated that due consideration has been given  to  the  needs
    and welfare of the children as required by Section 55 of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009  (the  "2009  Act").   This  is
    followed by a rehearsal of the factors put forward in  support  of  the
    contention that it would be in the childrens' best interests to  remain
    in the United Kingdom.  Stripped to its essentials, the case  made  was
    that this country provides a much better place for the education,  care
    and development of the children than Nigeria. This case  was  rejected,
    essentially on  the  same  grounds  as  the  case  advanced  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

 4. Finally, the decision maker purported to consider the Appellant's cases
    under the rubric of "exceptional  circumstances".   The  passage  which
    follows appears to be directed to the first Appellant,  the  father  of
    the family:

         "You have attempted to obtain leave to remain using false documents
         and your wife obtained entry  clearance  by  deception.   You  have
         remained in the United Kingdom beyond the period of  granted  leave
         to remain and your wife has remained beyond the period  of  granted
         leave  to  enter.   You  failed  to  bring  your   children   under
         immigration control following  their  births,  when  you  submitted
         applications for leave after they were born in the United Kingdom."



    The decision continues:

         "You have not submitted any  evidence  that  there  are  compelling
         compassionate circumstances which would lead to a grant of leave to
         remain because it would not be reasonable to expect the children to
         leave the  United  Kingdom.   Education  and  health  services  are
         available in Nigeria, albeit not necessarily to the  same  standard
         as in the United Kingdom."

    In accordance with the usual practice, removal decisions were  made  in
    respect of all four  Appellants  one  week  later.   Being  immigration
    decisions, these attracted a right of appeal which the Appellants  duly
    exercised.

Decision of the FtT

 5. The First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT") allowed the appeals.  The basis for
    doing so is encapsulated in the following passage, in [89]:

         "I am therefore satisfied that in the context of  my  findings  set
         out  above  the  Respondent's  removal   decisions   were   not   a
         proportionate and  fair  balance  between  the  relevant  competing
         considerations."

    The appeals were allowed under Article 8 ECHR accordingly.

 6. The "findings set out above" in the determination are, on analysis, the
    following:

    (a)  The first two Appellants entered the United Kingdom  legally,  but
         have now over stayed following exhaustion of their application  and
         appeal rights.


    (b)  (In terms) the Appellants' extensive periods of residence  in  the
         United Kingdom is a weighty factor: see [48].


    (c)  The third and fourth Appellants,  the  children,  have  spent  the
         whole of their lives in the United Kingdom and are integrated  into
         UK society.


    (d)  The fourth Appellant has special educational requirements  because
         of his elective mutism, giving rise to the need for speech  therapy
         intervention.


    (e)  The parents have been  lawfully  present  in  the  United  Kingdom
         during most of their sojourn.


    (f)   The  act  of  registering  each  child's  birth  demonstrated  "a
         willingness to engage with the authorities".


    (g)  The two  children  "are  positively  thriving  in  a  school  with
         excellent pastoral care ...  [and] ............. clearly feel  very
         much a part of the school community and are progressing well  .....
         [and] ..............  the school and the surrounding community  are
         parents and members of the congregation at church where they attend
         are extremely attached to the children and family as a whole".


    (h)  "Every resource available to the teaching  staff  and  pupils  has
         been engaged for the benefit of these children".


 7. Next, having referred  to  ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC  4,  the  Judge
    reasoned that a period of substantial residence as a child may become a
    weighty consideration in the balance of competing factors because -

         "During such a lengthy period of time roots are put down,  personal
         identities are developed, friendships are formed and links are made
         with the community outside the family unit".

    The Judge then noted the periods during which the two children had been
    attending school, the parents' heavy involvement with their church  and
    the  childrens'  participation  in  Sunday  school  and  other   church
    activities.  In [77] the Judge directed himself impeccably:


         "I have considered the best interests of both children as a primary
         consideration but not the primary consideration within the  context
         of the entire countervailing factors."

    The Judge then acknowledged the public interests, being "the clear need
    to maintain immigration controls ..... and the  economic  interests  of
    the country".  Finally, the Judge identified the factors  which  tipped
    the  balance  in  the  Appellants'  favour.    These   focused   almost
    exclusively on the well developed settlement of the two children in the
    United Kingdom, linked mainly to the lives  they  are  leading  through
    their education here. He found, by  implication,  that  the  childrens'
    enforced return to Nigeria "....   would seriously  impact  upon  their
    development with  a  strong  possibility  that  [the  younger  child's]
    elective mutism would return".  The appeals were allowed accordingly.

 8. The manner in which the FtT  dealt  with  the  discrete  issue  of  the
    parents' "immigration conduct" warrants  separate  consideration.   The
    Judge noted clear findings in an earlier  Tribunal  determination  that
    the father had submitted a false invoice  in  support  of  his  Tier  1
    application and a forged letter from a firm of  solicitors,  while  the
    mother had used a different (though not false) name in her second  visa
    application for the sole  purpose  of  securing  entry  to  the  United
    Kingdom: see [56] - [60].  The Judge further  found,  contrary  to  the
    father's assertion, that contact had  been  maintained  both  with  his
    brother and other family members of both parents in Nigeria: see [61] -
    [62].

Appeal to this Tribunal

 9. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal contend that the decision of
    the FtT is vitiated by a fundamental error of  law.  This  is  said  to
    arise from its incompatibility with the decision of the Court of Appeal
    in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874, at  [58]  -  [64]  especially.
    The grounds also canvass a separate error of law,  constituted  by  the
    FtT's  failure  to  give  effect  to  the  new  section  117B  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, inserted by section 19 of
    the Immigration Act 2014 and commenced on 28 July 2014,  which  was  in
    force on the date of promulgation of the decision, 04  September  2014.
    Permission to appeal was granted on both grounds.

10. On behalf of the Secretary of State, the submissions of Mr Kingham,  in
    substance, adopted the grounds of appeal. Reference was  also  made  to
    the decision of the Supreme Court in Zoumbas - v - Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74.

11. We were addressed by both Mr and Mrs Ismail.  They presented their case
    in a dignified manner.  They  were  articulate  in  their  submissions.
    Further, there was evident passion in all that they said on  behalf  of
    their children. They are obviously caring and responsible parents.  The
    central theme of their submissions was that by remaining in the  United
    Kingdom the future for their children will be immensely better  in  all
    material respects.  They emphasised their lack of real  family  support
    in Nigeria, the dangers prevailing in that country and the inadequacies
    in the education  system,  with  particular  reference  to  the  speech
    disability  of  their  younger  child.   They   contrasted   the   safe
    environment of the United Kingdom  with  that  prevailing  in  Nigeria.
    They argued that it would be very difficult  for  their  children,  who
    have spent all of their lives in this country, to adjust to  living  in
    Nigeria.  They contrasted the facts of their case with those in Zoumbas
    and EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 374, contending that their case is
    to be viewed in a much more favourable light.

12. At the conclusion of the hearing, we announced our decision, with brief
    reasons, which is that the determination of the FtT must be  set  aside
    as it is vitiated  by  material  error  of  law.   We  draw  attention,
    firstly, to what was stated by the Supreme Court in Zoumbas, at [24]:

         "There is no irrationality in the conclusion that  it  was  in  the
         childrens' best interests to go with their parents to the  Republic
         of Congo.  No doubt it would have  been  possible  to  have  stated
         that, all things being equal, it was in the best interests  of  the
         children that they and their parents stayed in the  United  Kingdom
         so that  they  could  obtain  such  benefits  as  health  care  and
         education ....


         But other things were not equal.  They were not  British  citizens.
         They had no right to future  education  and  health  care  in  this
         country.  They were  part  of  a  close  knit  family  with  highly
         educated parents and were of an  age  when  their  emotional  needs
         could only be fully met within the immediate family unit."

    In the context of this appeal, the significance of this passage is that
    it draws attention to  the  limitations  of  the  rights  protected  by
    Article 8 ECHR.  This is nowhere acknowledged in the  decision  of  the
    FtT.

13. Properly  analysed,  the  judgment  of  the  FtT,  while  replete  with
    reference to and quotation from  authority,  fails  to  articulate  the
    governing  test.   In  particular,  there  is  no  recognition  of  the
    criterion of unjustifiably harsh  consequences.   Furthermore,  in  the
    recitation of reported cases, there is no mention of  the  decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria).  Nor does the decision give effect
    to the following passage in Patel - v - Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2013] UKSC 72, at [57]:

         "It is important to remember  that  Article  8  is  not  a  general
         dispensing power .....


         One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's call  in  Pankina  for  'common
         sense' in the application of the Rules to graduates who  have  been
         studying in the UK for some years. However, such considerations  do
         not by themselves provide grounds of appeal under Article 8,  which
         is concerned with private or family life, not  education  as  such.
         The opportunity for a promising student to complete his  course  in
         this country, however desirable in general terms, is not in  itself
         a right protected under Article 8."

    This is nowhere acknowledged in the decision of the FtT.

14.  The final clearly identifiable error in the determination  of  the  FtT
    is its failure to consider the decision  in  EV  (Philippines)  -  v  -
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ  874.   This
    is an important decision of the Court of Appeal concerning the  correct
    approach to the question of proportionality in  Article  8  ECHR  cases
    involving the best interests of children.  The Upper  Tribunal,  giving
    effect to section 55 of the 2009 Act, had found that while it would  be
    in the best interests of  the  children  concerned  to  continue  their
    education  in  England,  the  countervailing  public  interest  in  the
    maintenance of firm immigration control  should  prevail.   As  appears
    from [34] and [43] - [44] of the  leading  judgment,  this  involves  a
    balancing exercise.  As Christopher Clarke LJ observed at [36]:

         "In a sense the Tribunal is concerned with how emphatic  an  answer
         falls to be given to the question: Is it in the best  interests  of
         the child to remain?"

    Thus  a  case  in  which  the  Tribunal's  assessment  is  that  it  is
    overwhelmingly in a child's best interests not to be removed  from  the
    United Kingdom is to be contrasted with one  in  which  non-removal  is
    merely in the child's best interests.  In essence, the  Tribunal  found
    that it was reasonable to  expect  the  children  to  live  in  another
    country.  The Court of Appeal concluded that  this  was  unimpeachable.
    In a concurring judgment, Lewison LJ added, at [55]:

         "These statements of principle recognise the real world  fact  that
         the parent has no right to remain in the UK.  So no counter-factual
         assumption is being made and the  interests  of  the  other  family
         members are to be considered in the light of the real  world  facts
         ........


         ... Thus the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable to  expect
         the child to follow the parent with  no  right  to  remain  to  the
         country of origin?"

    The Lord Justice's further observations  in  [60]  constitute  a  plain
    recognition of  the  limitations  of  Article  8.   None  of  this  was
    considered by the FtT.

15.   Finally,  the  decision  of  the  FtT  neglects  entirely  the   newly
    introduced provisions of sections 117A and  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  inserted  by  section  19  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014, in force from 28 July 2014.  This  amounts  to  a
    fundamental misdirection in law per se.  In practical terms,  its  main
    consequence in the context of the present appeal is that the FtT failed
    to give effect, in particular, to  section  117B(5),  which  prescribes
    that little weight should be given to a private life established  by  a
    person at a time when such person's immigration status  is  precarious.
    The reality of the present case is that, subject to further argument in
    the remaking hearing  (infra),  the  immigration  status  of  all  four
    Appellants has at most, or all, material  times  been  precarious.  The
    error of law of the FtT was to neglect this obligatory statutory factor
    and to compound this by, ultimately, giving determinative weight to the
    private lives of the two Appellant  children.   The  error  of  law  is
    unmistakable.

Decision and Directions

16.  On the grounds and for the reasons elaborated above, the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal must succeed.

17.  We decide and direct as follows:

      a) The decision of the FtT is set aside.


      b) It will be remade in this forum, on the  first  available  date  in
         2015, to be notified.


      c) We accede to the Appellants'  application  to  adduce  the  further
         documentary evidence produced at the hearing.


      d) Any application to adduce additional documentary evidence  must  be
         made at least seven days in advance of the scheduled hearing date.

    Finally, we repeat our observation at the  conclusion  of  the  hearing
    that in cases of this  kind  it  is  invariably  desirable  that  legal
    representation is secured, if possible.




                                                           Bernard McCloskey

                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                     Date:  04 December 2014

