
[pic]
IAC-AH-     -V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23946/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 26 January 2015                   |On 6 February 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE E B GRANT


                                   Between

                            Mr Fazeel Akhtar Butt
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Iqbal of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Shilliday, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant was granted permission to  appeal  a  determination  of
       FTTJ Hague in which the Judge found the appellant had not established
       that he was a dependent family member of an EEA  national  exercising
       treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

    2. The grounds submit the judge erred in failing to make findings on the
       appellant's credibility, that the judge erred in  failing  to  record
       that the appellant received 1,500 Euros for maintenance  in  December
       2012, that the Judge erred in finding that the appellant was required
       to accompany the sponsor to the United Kingdom whereas  he  was  also
       entitled to "join" his  sponsor   and  failed  to  make  findings  on
       whether  the  appellant's  work  in  Italy   made   him   financially
       independent. Reliance is placed upon a  handwritten  document  placed
       before the Judge at the appeal hearing.

    3. The respondent opposes the application and submits that even  if  the
       Judge had noted down the payment of 1,500 Euros in December  2012  it
       could not make any difference to the outcome of  the  appeal  because
       the appellant is required to show dependency prior  to  entering  the
       United Kingdom. Secondly the  guidance  on  extended  family  members
       states that the extended family member must have come to  the  UK  at
       the same time as the sponsor, just before or recently thereafter. The
       appellant arrived over a year and a few months after the EEA national
       left therefore dependency is broken by passage  of  time.  The  Judge
       found the appellant was vague and the findings at paragraphs  10  and
       11 are properly reasoned. Paragraph 12 is a  summary  the  Judge  was
       entitled to make.

    4. The Judge had to decide whether the appellant was an extended  family
       member and to make  that  finding  he  had  to  examine  whether  the
       appellant had shown he was dependent upon the sponsor.

    5. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 24  April  2011  as  a
       student.  After completing his studies he returned home  to  Pakistan
       for a few months and then  he  joined  the  sponsor  in  Italy.  They
       remained together until going their  separate  ways  at  the  end  of
       December 2012 when the sponsor came to  the  UK  to  exercise  treaty
       rights and the appellant went to Rome.

    6. The judge had evidence before him  in  the  appellant  and  sponsor's
       witness statements an in oral evidence  before  him.  The  record  of
       Proceedings shows that the judge  was  given  contradictory  evidence
       from the appellant and sponsor about money allegedly  left  with  the
       appellant by the sponsor when he left for  the  United  Kingdom.  The
       appellant said he receive E1,500 the sponsor said he left him E2,200-
       E2,300.

    7. The Judge found that had the appellant been a dependent family member
       he could have been expected to have accompanied his  sponsor  to  the
       United Kingdom in December 2012, In fact the appellant went  to  Rome
       to seek  work.  The  Judge,  having  heard  the  evidence,   was  not
       satisfied the appellant was a dependent family member noting that the
       appellant did not accompany the sponsor to  the  United  Kingdom  but
       went to Rome where he gave evidence that  he  worked.   Although  the
       judge accepted the evidence of monthly payments of E500 that does not
       establish dependency which is a matter  of  fact  for  the  Judge  to
       determine having heard all the evidence which  showed  the  appellant
       living in his own accommodation in Rome and working some of the time.

    8. The alleged payment of E1,500 could not make any  difference  to  the
       outcome of the appeal because it predates by some fifteen months  the
       appellant's arrival in the United Kingdom which was preceded  by  his
       residence in Rome for 15 months in a property which had no connection
       to the sponsor.  I have taken into the account the notes of the Judge
       which show the appellant and his  brother  gave  discrepant  evidence
       about the alleged payment of E1,500 giving different  amounts.  There
       was no clear evidence before the Judge that E1,500 had been paid  and
       unlike the later payments no documentary evidence to support  it.  In
       the circumstances although the Judge did not expressly refer to  that
       evidence he was entitled to give little weight to it in coming to his
       findings and in finding  that  the  appellant  was  not  a  dependent
       relative of his brother before he  entered  the  United  Kingdom  the
       Judge did not err in law.

    9. The payment of Euros into the appellants account for his student visa
       application in 2011 could not affect the outcome of the appeal before
       the Judge and did not show he was dependent immediately prior to  his
       arrival in the United Kingdom. By failing to make any  finding  about
       the irrelevant matter of the student funding 2011 the Judge  did  not
       err in law.

   10. If the appellant was dependent  upon  the  sponsor  when  they  lived
       together in Seregna this dependency was broken when he went  to  Rome
       for 15 months  in December 2012 and the sponsor came  to  the  United
       Kingdom and this was a finding properly open  to  the  Judge  on  the
       evidence before him.

   11. Overall the findings reached by the Judge were properly open  to  him
       on the evidence before him. The grounds and submissions before me  by
       Mr Iqbal amount to a lengthy disagreement with the  findings  of  the
       Judge and an attempt to reargue the appeal. They disclose no arguable
       error of law.

Notice of Decision

Conclusions:

       The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
       the making of an error on a point of law.

           I do not set aside the decision

           The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        6 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge E B Grant




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed        6 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge E B Grant

