
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23455/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Oral Determination            |
|On 7 October 2014                               |Promulgated On 13 October 2014|
|                                                |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                             GBENGA FEMI OLAJUBU
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T. Ogunnubi, TM Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 28 June 1974.  He
    sought permission to reside in the United Kingdom as the husband  of  a
    Dutch citizen who is exercising Treaty rights in  the  United  Kingdom.
    The application was refused on 14 May 2014.  The Judge, in allowing the
    appeal  in  August  2014,  found  that  Nigerian  law  permitted  proxy
    marriages. He was satisfied as to the procedures in relation  to  proxy
    marriages and came to the conclusion that the marriage  was  valid  and
    properly registered.  He considered that this  sufficiently  determined
    the appeal and allowed it.

 2. The Secretary of State has appealed against that decision and in  doing
    so has raised two cases of the Tribunal.  The  first  is  the  case  of
    Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT  24  decided  in  January
    2014 (pre-dating the determination in this appeal) and  the  second  is
    the case of TA (Kareem explained) Ghana  [2014]  UKUT  316.   In  those
    cases it was determined that where an individual wishes to rely upon  a
    marriage to a Union citizen but a marriage which is  conducted  outside
    Europe and is a proxy marriage, then in every case the validity of  the
    marriage must be examined in accordance with  the  law  of  the  Member
    State from which the Union citizen derives nationality.

 3. In this case, however, there is an additional factor raised in the case
    of TA and that is, in addition to the  claim  based  on  marriage,  the
    appellant also claimed that he was in a durable relationship as defined
    in Reg. 5 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.
    Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor who determined TA and Others  decided  in
    that case that no  sufficient  consideration  had  been  given  to  the
    question of a durable relationship.   Accordingly  he  found  that  the
    decision made by the decision maker was not in accordance with the  law
    and required the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  a  fresh  and  lawful
    decision, a process sometimes described as 'remitting' the case back to
    the Secretary of State.

 4. That is the situation that exists in the present appeal.   Consequently
    whilst the question of the validity of the marriage  was  not  properly
    addressed in the evidence by reason of the failure to  adduce  evidence
    as to whether this was a marriage which  would  be  recognised  by  the
    Dutch authorities, it was also a case where a decision had to  be  made
    on the issue of Reg. 8(5) and a durable  relationship.   That  was  not
    done.

 5. It follows that it is open to the appellant to raise with the Secretary
    of State what issues he wishes  about  the  recognition  of  the  proxy
    marriage in addition to any matters he wishes to raise as  far  as  his
    claim to be involved in a durable relationship.

 6. I find there was an error of law and direct that the matter  goes  back
    to the Secretary of State for a fresh decision to be made in accordance
    with the principles established in cases such as Abdi v SSHD [1996] Imm
    AR 148 (CA).

DECISION


     The Judge made an error on a point of law and I re-make the decision
    in the following terms:
      i) I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.
     ii) The appeal is allowed to the limited extent that a decision on the
         appellant's application awaits a lawful decision of the Secretary
         of State.


                            [pic]

                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                             10 October 2014
