
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23274/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th December 2018                 |On 18th March 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MRS FAHMIDA [R]
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. S Vidyadharan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. M Hasan, Counsel instructed by Kalam Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in the appeal before me is the Secretary of State for the
    Home Department and the respondent to this appeal is Mrs  Fahmida  [R].
    However for ease of reference, in the course of this decision  I  shall
    adopt the parties' status as it  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    ("FtT").  I shall in this decision, refer to Mrs [R] as the  appellant,
    and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh. She  was  granted  leave  to
    enter the UK as a visitor from 21st May 2006  to  21st  November  2006.
    She arrived in the UK  on  12th  June  2006  and  remained  in  the  UK
    unlawfully, when her leave to enter expired.  On 12th  June  2014,  the
    appellant married Mr. [AH], a  British  Citizen.   Thereafter,  on  1st
    April 2015, the appellant made an application for leave  to  remain  in
    the UK as the spouse of a person present and settled in  the  UK.   The
    application was refused by the respondent for the reasons set out in  a
    decision dated 10th June 2015.

 3. The decision of 10th June 2015 gave rise to an appeal that was heard by
    FtT Judge Abebrese on 18th August 2016.  For the reasons set out  in  a
    decision promulgated on 15th September 2016, the FtT Judge allowed  the
    appeal on human rights grounds. It is that decision that  that  is  the
    subject of the appeal before me.  Permission to appeal was  granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson on 26th October 2018.  In  doing  so,  she
    noted that it is arguable that the FtT Judge erred in his  approach  to
    the issues under paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, and that insufficient reasons have been given for  the  apparent
    conclusions that the requirements are met.

 4. Mr Hasan, rightly in my judgement, accepts that the Judge erred in  his
    approach to paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules, and
    the public interest considerations under s117B Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.  He submits that the error is  immaterial  because
    on any proper consideration of the evidence, the outcome of the  appeal
    would be the same.

 5. At the conclusion of the hearing before me, I informed the parties that
    in my judgement, the decision of the FtT Judge does contain a  material
    error of law, and that I set aside that decision.  The assessment of an
    Article 8 claim such as this is always a highly  fact  sensitive  task.
    The Judge placed significant weight upon the fact that the appellant is
    married to a British Citizen and that since the respondent's  decision,
    the appellant has given birth to a child who is a British Citizen.  The
    Judge appears to have treated those factors  as  determinative  of  the
    appeal without adequately addressing the  test  under  paragraph  EX.1.
    Having carefully considered the decision of the FtT Judge, I cannot  be
    satisfied that the Judge would have reached the same  decision  had  be
    properly and  adequately  addressed  the  relevant  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules and the public interest considerations under s117B.

 6. Directions were issued to the parties in advance of the hearing  before
    me requiring the parties to prepare for the hearing on the basis  that,
    if the Upper Tribunal decides to set aside  the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, any further evidence, including supplementary oral
    evidence, that the Upper Tribunal may need to consider if it decides to
    re-make the decision, can be so considered at that hearing.

 7. In preparation for the hearing of the appeal before me, the appellant's
    representatives filed a bundle comprising  of  53  pages,  including  a
    witness statement made by the appellant (dated 8th August 2016)  and  a
    statement made by her partner, Mr [AH] (dated 8th August  2016).   Both
    of those witness  statement  were  before  the  FtT  Judge  previously.
    Although there was no application made pursuant to rule 15(2A)  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, I was provided  with  a
    copy of the birth certificate of the appellant's youngest child ("MZH")
    who was born on 3rd October 2018.

 8. The only ground of appeal  available  to  the  appellant  is  that  the
    respondent's decision is unlawful under s6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act
    1998.  As to the Article 8 claim, the  burden  of  proof  is  upon  the
    appellant to show, on  the  balance  of  probabilities,  that  she  has
    established a family life with her husband and children, and  that  her
    exclusion from the UK as a result of the respondent's  decision,  would
    interfere with that right. It is then for the respondent to justify any
    interference caused. The respondent's decision must  be  in  accordance
    with  the  law  and  must  be  a  proportionate  response  in  all  the
    circumstances.  If Article 8 is engaged, the Tribunal may need to  look
    at the extent to which an appellant is said to have failed to meet  the
    requirements of the rules, because that may inform the  proportionality
    balancing exercise that must follow.

The respondent's decision

 9. In the decision of 10th June 2015, the respondent  concluded  that  the
    appellant is unable to satisfy the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  immigration  rules.   The  respondent
    considered the appellant's application by reference to the requirements
    for leave to remain as a partner under  Appendix  FM  R-LTRP.   As  the
    appellant could not meet all of the requirements of Section E-LTRP, the
    respondent considered the application by reference to the  requirements
    of  Section  E-LTRP.1.1(a),  (b)  and  (d).   The  respondent  was  not
    satisfied that the requirements  of  paragraph  EX.1  are  met  by  the
    appellant.  The respondent acknowledged that  the  appellant's  partner
    has lived all his life in the UK but noted that that is not to say that
    the  appellant  and  her  partner  are  unable  to  live  together   in
    Bangladesh. The respondent stated that although  living  in  Bangladesh
    together may cause a degree of hardship for  the  appellant's  partner,
    there is no evidence that there are insurmountable obstacles preventing
    the appellant and her partner from  continuing  their  relationship  in
    Bangladesh. The respondent went on to consider whether  there  are  any
    exceptional circumstances which, consistent with the right  to  respect
    for private and family life contained in Article 8  might  warrant  the
    grant of leave to remain outside of the requirements of the immigration
    rules. The respondent  noted  that  the  appellant  was  pregnant,  but
    concluded that that was not a barrier to  the  appellant  returning  to
    Bangladesh.

The evidence before me

10. The appellant's evidence is set out in her witness statement dated  8th
    August 2016, that is signed with a statement of truth.  It comprises of
    five paragraphs.  The appellant confirms that she entered the UK  as  a
    visitor on 12th June 2006.  She offers no  explanation  whatsoever  for
    her failure to leave the United Kingdom when her  visit  visa  expired,
    and fails to provide any evidence of the background to her relationship
    with Mr. [AH] beyond stating that they married on 12th  June  2014  and
    that they have been "... maintaining a happy married life since we  got
    married.".  The appellant confirms that her marriage is subsisting  and
    that there is a child of that relationship ("MRH") who was born on  6th
    October 2015.  She confirms that her son is  a  British  Citizen.   The
    appellant refers to the refusal of her application for leave to  remain
    and simply states "... I have provided evidence that I  am  a  pregnant
    woman (sic) with an expected date of delivery of 4th October 2015 ...".
     The appellant invites the Tribunal to allow the appeal, and allow  her
    leave to remain in the UK "... for the sake of family unity to maintain
    family life and for our newly born baby ...".

11. Although there was  no  application  to  call  any  supplementary  oral
    evidence, I note from the decision of the FtT Judge that the  appellant
    was cross-examined. At paragraph [17] of his decision,  the  FtT  Judge
    records the evidence given by the  appellant  in  cross-examination  as
    follows:

         "... the sponsor was married through an arranged marriage. She gave
         evidence that she allowed her leave in this country  to  expire  in
         2006 because she has family in this country and  therefore  decided
         not to return to Bangladesh. She then went on to give evidence that
         however she does have family in Bangladesh  which  consist  of  one
         brother, father and stepmother. She  was  being  supported  by  her
         brother. She does not think that it is practical for her to  return
         to Bangladesh by leaving a 10 month old baby behind in this country
         because he will not be able to go with her so therefore it would be
         very difficult. Furthermore, she gave evidence that she  would  not
         be supported by members of her family in  Bangladesh  because  they
         did not have the resources or the capacity to do so. It would  also
         not be possible for her husband to bear the expenses if she were to
         return  to  Bangladesh.  There  was  no   re-examination   of   the
         appellant."


12. I also have a statement made by Mr [AH] dated 8th August 2016, that  is
    signed with a statement of truth. The statement is in almost  identical
    terms to the statement made by the appellant. Mr [H] confirms  that  he
    is a British Citizen by birth and the husband of the appellant.  Mr [H]
    also states that they married on 12th June 2014,  and  that  they  have
    been "... maintaining a happy married life since we got married.".   Mr
    [H] also confirms that the marriage is subsisting and that there  is  a
    child of that relationship ("MRH") who was born on 6th October 2015 and
    is a British Citizen. The appellant's husband refers to the refusal  of
    the appellant's application for leave to remain and confirms  that  the
    appellant has provided evidence that she is pregnant with  an  expected
    date of delivery of 4th October 2015.  The appellant's  husband  states
    "... we are currently facing mental turmoil due to the  uncertainty  of
    my wife's immigration status.  We have been suffering  anxiety  because
    of this present situation ...".  He too invites the Tribunal  to  allow
    the appeal and allow the appellant leave to remain in the UK  "...  for
    the sake of family unity to maintain family life and for our newly born
    baby ...".

13. I note from the decision of the FtT Judge that the appellant's  husband
    was also cross-examined. At paragraph [19] of  his  decision,  the  FtT
    Judge records the evidence given by the appellant's husband  in  cross-
    examination as follows:

         "... he gave evidence that was consistent with that of his wife  in
         relation to when they met and the fact that their marriage  was  an
         arranged marriage. He found out after he married the appellant that
         his wife did not have leave to remain  in  this  country.  He  also
         confirmed that his wife does have a family in Bangladesh consisting
         of a father, brother and a stepmother. His  wife  arrived  in  this
         country as a child and has resided here for a long period of  time.
         Since then she has become a part of his family and that it has been
         a long time since she went back to Bangladesh."


14. The appellant's bundle comprising of 53 pages has within it, a contract
    of employment that shows that Mr [AH] is  employed  by  Mitie  Security
    Limited.  His  employment  as  a  Security  Officer  is  said  to  have
    commenced on 2nd December 2013.  The contract of employment states that
    he is paid a basic hourly rate  of  �9.00  for  work  undertaken  at  a
    particular site, and that his hours of work are variable. There is also
    within the appellant's  bundle,  a  number  of  payslips  that  show  a
    variable income for the six months between February 2016 and July 2016.
     The bundle also includes bank statements that demonstrate  payment  of
    the income from that employment into a bank account in the name of  the
    appellant's partner, for January 2016, February  2016,  June  2016  and
    April 2016.  There is no explanation for the failure  to  provide  bank
    corresponding to the same period as the payslips or the other  evidence
    that is required to evidence earned income as set out in Appendix FM-SE
    of the rules.

15. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Hasan submits  that  the  appellant  can
    meet the requirements of the immigration rules, if an  application  for
    entry clearance  were  to  be  made  by  the  appellant.  Relying  upon
    paragraph [51] of the judgement of the Supreme  Court  in  Agyarko  -v-
    SSHD [2017] UKSC 11, he submits that although the  appellant  has  been
    residing in the UK unlawfully, the public interest does not require the
    removal of the appellant from the UK, so that an application for  entry
    clearance can be made by her.





Findings and Conclusions

16. The limited evidence  before  me  is  uncontroversial.  The  respondent
    appears to have accepted, and in any event I find, that  the  appellant
    is married to Mr [AH], who is a British citizen. I  am  satisfied  that
    the relationship between the  appellant  and  Mr  [H]  is  genuine  and
    subsisting. I find that there are two children of  that  marriage,  RH,
    born on 6th October 2015 (now aged 3) and MZH, born on 3rd October 2018
    (now 3 months old). I accept that both children are  British  Citizens.
    Beyond the fact that the appellant and her husband live  together  with
    their children as a family unit, there is no evidence at all before  me
    about the family's circumstances.  Mr Hasan submits, and I accept, that
    the appellant's husband and the two children are in good health.

17. The appellant has remained in the United Kingdom unlawfully  since  her
    leave to enter as a visitor expired in November  2006.  She  could  not
    therefore satisfy  the  immigration  status  requirements  set  out  in
    appendix FM of the immigration rules. The question for me is  therefore
    whether paragraph EX.1 of the Immigration Rules applies.  It is  useful
    to set out the relevant provision;

         'EX.1. This paragraph applies if


             (a)  (i) the applicant has a genuine and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a child who-


                      (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was  under  the
                      age of 18 years when the applicant was first  granted
                      leave on the basis that this paragraph applied;


                      (bb) is in the UK;


                      (cc) is a British Citizen or  has  lived  in  the  UK
                      continuously for at least  the  7  years  immediately
                      preceding the date of application; and


                  (ii) taking into account their best interests as a primary
                  consideration, it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the
                  child to leave the UK; or


             (b)  the applicant has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
             with a partner who is in the UK  and  is  a  British  Citizen,
             settled in  the  UK  or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or
             humanitarian  protection,   and   there   are   insurmountable
             obstacles to family life with that partner continuing  outside
             the UK.


         EX.2.  For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable
         obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which  would  be
         faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their  family
         life together outside the UK and which could  not  be  overcome  or
         would entail very serious  hardship  for  the  applicant  or  their
         partner.'


18. Here, I must consider paragraphs EX.1(a) and (b).  It is useful however
    to begin by considering whether paragraph EX.1(b) applies, first.

19. Although I have found that the applicant has a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a partner who is in the UK and is a British  Citizen,
    there is nothing in the evidence before me that begins to suggest  that
    there are insurmountable obstacles to family  life  with  that  partner
    continuing outside the UK.  There is no evidence whatsoever, before me,
    that could even begin to establish that very  significant  difficulties
    would be faced by the appellant or  her  partner  in  continuing  their
    family life together outside the UK, and which could not be overcome or
    would entail very serious hardship for the appellant or her partner.

20. On the evidence before me, I find that appellant is unable to establish
    that there are insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life  between  the
    appellant and  her  partner  continuing  outside  the  UK.   Where  the
    appellant and her partner are expected to be, is plainly relevant since
    it will normally be reasonable for the children to be with them.

21. I accept on the evidence before me that the appellant has a genuine and
    subsisting parental relationship with her two sons, both  of  whom  are
    under the age of 18, are in the  UK,  and  are  British  Citizens.  The
    question for me is whether, taking into account their best interests as
    a primary consideration, it would be reasonable to expect the  children
    to leave the UK.

22. It is to be noted that the question of whether it  is  "reasonable"  to
    expect a child to leave the UK as set out  in  paragraph  EX.1  of  the
    rules, arises in other places too.  A similar "reasonableness" test  is
    referred  to  in  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the   rules   and   the
    "reasonableness" test appears identical to that   of  section  117B(6),
    taken with the definition of "qualifying child".  In KO  (Nigeria)  and
    Others -v- SSHD [2018] UKSC 53, Lord Carnwath,  with  whom  Lord  Kerr,
    Lord Wilson, Lord Reed and Lord Briggs agreed, referred  to  paragraphs
    276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules, and s117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

23. At paragraphs [17] to [19], Lord Carnwath stated:

             "17. As has been seen, section 117B(6) incorporated the
             substance of the rule without material change, but this time
             in the context of the right of the parent to remain. I would
             infer that it was intended to have the same effect. The
             question again is what is "reasonable" for the child. As Elias
             LJ said in MA (Pakistan) Upper Tribunal (Immigration and
             Asylum Chamber) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, [2016] 1 WLR 5093, para
             36, there is nothing in the subsection to import a reference
             to the conduct of the parent. Section 117B sets out a number
             of factors relating to those seeking leave to enter or remain,
             but criminality is not one of them. Subsection 117B(6) is on
             its face free-standing, the only qualification being that the
             person relying on it is not liable to deportation. The list of
             relevant factors set out in the IDI guidance (para 10 above)
             seems to me wholly appropriate and sound in law, in the
             context of section 117B(6) as of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).


             18.  On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it
             seems to me inevitably relevant in both contexts to consider
             where the parents, apart from the relevant provision, are
             expected to be, since it will normally be reasonable for the
             child to be with them. To that extent the record of the
             parents may become indirectly material, if it leads to their
             ceasing to have a right to remain here, and having to leave.
             It is only if, even on that hypothesis, it would not be
             reasonable for the child to leave that the provision may give
             the parents a right to remain. The point was well-expressed by
             Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State for the Home
             Department 2017 SLT 1245:


                  "22. In my opinion before one embarks on an assessment of
                  whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave the
                  UK one has to address the question, 'Why would the child
                  be expected to leave the United Kingdom?' In a case such
                  as this there can only be one answer: 'because the parents
                  have no right to remain in the UK'. To approach the
                  question in any other way strips away the context in which
                  the assessment of reasonableness is being made ..."


             19.  He noted (para 21) that Lewison LJ had made a similar
             point in considering the "best interests" of children in the
             context of section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and
             Immigration Act 2009 in EV (Philippines) -v- Secretary of
             State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:


                  "58. In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best
                  interests of the children must be made on the basis that
                  the facts are as they are in the real world. If one parent
                  has no right to remain, but the other parent does, that is
                  the background against which the assessment is
                  conducted. If neither parent has the right to remain, then
                  that is the background against which the assessment is
                  conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be: is it
                  reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent with
                  no right to remain to the country of origin?"


             To the extent that Elias LJ may have suggested otherwise in MA
             (Pakistan) para 40, I would respectfully disagree. There is
             nothing in the section to suggest that "reasonableness" is to
             be considered otherwise than in the real world in which the
             children find themselves."


24. Here,  the  appellant's  husband  is  a  British  Citizen  as  are  the
    appellant's two sons.  The eldest child is 3 years old and the youngest
    is 3 months  old.   It  is  unfortunate  that  the  appellant  and  her
    representatives have failed to put before  the  Tribunal  any  evidence
    that goes beyond the existence of a family unit.  I  have  no  evidence
    before me regarding the circumstances of the family, any  wider  family
    support available to them, their health, their plans  for  the  future,
    evidence as to the  best  interests  of  the  children  and  crucially,
    addressing the question as to whether it would be reasonable to  expect
    the children to leave the UK.

25. I find that the appellant, her husband and their  children  have  lived
    together as a family unit.  The children have been brought up, by their
    parents since they were born and it is very much in the children's best
    interests that  this  continues.   The  children  are  not  however  in
    education and there is  no  evidence  before  me  that  they  have  any
    particular needs that could not be met, if they were to leave  the  UK.
    Beyond the fact that they are British Citizens, there  is  no  evidence
    before me of any particular factors to support a claim  that  it  would
    not be reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK.

26. The children are in  no  way  to  be  held  responsible  for  the  poor
    immigration history of the appellant, but as has been said  repeatedly,
    the children are not a "trump card".  As Lord  Carnwath  states  in  KO
    (Nigeria)  and  Others,  a  "real  world"  view  must  be  taken.   The
    appellant's husband and the children are British Citizens and there can
    be no question of them  being  required  to  leave  the  UK,  with  the
    appellant.  In the real world, families move countries  and  continents
    all the time, for any number of reasons, and  frequently  so  that  the
    parents can find, or continue with work.  There is no  evidence  before
    me to suggest that the appellant's partner  would  be  unable  to  cope
    alone with the children, with the support of his family, if they  chose
    to remain in the UK.  In my judgement, whether the appellant's  husband
    and children remain in the UK whilst the appellant makes an application
    for entry clearance, or choose to live with the appellant in Bangladesh
    temporarily whilst an application for entry clearance is  made  or  for
    some longer period, will in the end, be a matter of choice.   There  is
    nothing in the evidence before me that suggests that if they  chose  to
    live with the appellant in Bangladesh for a period  whilst  steps  were
    taken to secure entry clearance, the children would suffer some adverse
    consequence.  To the contrary, it seems that the children would have an
    opportunity to meet and live with  their  maternal  family.   They  are
    young enough to adapt.  There is quite simply nothing in  the  evidence
    before me that could properly lead me  to  conclude  that  taking  into
    account their best interests as a primary consideration, it  would  not
    be reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK.

27. As Lord Carnwath stated, at paragraph [18] in KO (Nigeria), the  record
    of the parents may become  indirectly  material.   My  conclusion  that
    there are no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  between  the
    appellant and her husband continuing outside the UK, is again  relevant
    because taking a holistic view of the  circumstances,  it  is  in  that
    context that I  should  consider  whether  it  is  reasonable  for  the
    children to live in  the  UK  with  their  father,  or  live  with  the
    appellant and her husband as a family  unit.   I  understand  that  the
    appellant claims that the best interests of the children would  be  for
    the whole family to remain here. However, in the  context  where  there
    are no insurmountable obstacles to family life  between  the  appellant
    and her husband continuing outside  the  UK,  the  natural  expectation
    would be that the children, aged 3, and 3 months, would go  with  them,
    and there is nothing in the evidence to  suggest  that  that  would  be
    other than reasonable.

28. I find therefore that the appellant is unable to meet the  requirements
    of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

29. As to the human rights claim on Article 8 grounds, I adopt the approach
    set out by Lord Bingham  in  Razgar  [2014]  UKHL  27.   I  must  first
    determine whether Article 8 of the ECHR is engaged at all.  If  Article
    8 is engaged, I should go on to  consider  the  remaining  four  stages
    identified in Razgar.

30. I have already found that the appellant is in a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship with her husband  and  children.   Article  8  is  plainly
    engaged.  I also find that the decision to refuse the  appellant  leave
    to enter may have consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage
    the operation of Article 8.  I  accept  that  the  interference  is  in
    accordance with the law, and that  the  interference  is  necessary  to
    protect the economic well-being of the country.

31. The issue in this  appeal,  as  is  often  the  case,  is  whether  the
    interference is proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be
    achieved.  The appellant's ability to satisfy the immigration rules  is
    not the question to be determined by the Tribunal, but  is  capable  of
    being a weighty, though not determinative factor, when deciding whether
    such refusal is  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of  enforcing
    immigration control.  I have already found for the reasons set out that
    the appellant cannot satisfy the requirements of the immigration rules.



32. I remind myself that section 117A Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 requires that in considering the public interest  question,  I
    must (in particular)  have  regard  to  the  considerations  listed  in
    section  117B.   I  acknowledge  that  the  maintenance  of   effective
    immigration controls is in the public  interest.   I  acknowledge  that
    s117B(6) of the 2002 Act provides that in the case of a person  who  is
    not subject to deportation, the public interest does  not  require  the
    person's  removal  where  the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parenting relationship with a qualifying child, and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the United  Kingdom.   For  the
    purposes of s117B(6) a qualifying child means a child under the age  of
    18 who, inter alia, is a British  citizen.   For  the  reasons  I  have
    already set out when considering whether paragraph EX.1.(a) of Appendix
    FM applies, I am unable to conclude on the evidence before me, that  it
    would be unreasonable to  expect  the  children  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.

33. On behalf of the appellant Mr. Hasan submits that the  public  interest
    does not require the removal of the appellant because  any  application
    for entry clearance made by the appellant, would  succeed.  He  submits
    that any disruption caused to the family's Article 8 rights,  would  in
    the circumstances, be entirely disproportionate to the  legitimate  aim
    of immigration control.   I  accept  as  Mr  Hasan  submits,  that  the
    decision of the House of Lords in Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL  40  and
    subsequent decisions of the Court of Appeal and Tribunal establish that
    where there is evidence that an application for  entry  clearance  from
    abroad is likely to succeed, then the weight  to  be  accorded  to  the
    requirements of obtaining  entry  clearance  from  abroad  is  reduced,
    particularly in cases involving children.  However, in my judgement, an
    argument founded on Chikwamba cannot succeed on the evidence before me.
     In Chikwamba, the House of Lords had  found  that  there  would  be  a
    violation of Article 8 if the applicant were removed from  the  UK  and
    forced to make an out-of-country application for leave to  enter  which
    would clearly be successful, in circumstances  where  the  interference
    with her family life could not be said to serve any good purpose.  Here
    there is insufficient evidence before me to conclude  that  an  out-of-
    country application would clearly be  successful  because  all  of  the
    relevant requirements for leave to enter under Appendix FM and Appendix
    FM-SE can be satisfied.  The respondent did not concede that all of the
    requirements of Appendix FM were met by the  appellant,  and  there  is
    simply a void in the evidence before me.  Although it is claimed by the
    appellant's husband that the minimum income  requirement  is  met,  the
    evidence required to establish that that  is  so,  is  not  before  the
    Tribunal.

34. In my judgment having taken all the evidence into account, the  refusal
    of leave to remain is proportionate to the legitimate aim of  enforcing
    immigration control.  It follows that the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

35. The appeal by the SSHD against the decision of FtT Judge Abebrese is
    allowed, and the decision of FtT Judge Abebrese is set aside.

36. I remake the decision and dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds.


Signed        Date 28th January 2019


       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and there can be no fee award


Signed        Date 28th January 2019


       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

