
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/23994/2014
                                                               IA/23998/2014
                                                               IA/24002/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 1st October 2015                  |On 6th October 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             Mr ANDRIY DMYTRENKO
                                                            First Respondent
                             Mrs OLHA DMYTRENKO
                                                           Second Respondent
                       Miss BOHDANA SHASHOK DMYTRENKO
                                                            Third Respondent
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms N Nnamani (counsel), instructed by AH Law Ltd.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  brings  this  appeal,
but, in order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as  they  were
in the First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State
against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Swaniker, promulgated on  12
May 2015, which allowed the third Appellant's appeal under  the  Immigration
Rules, and allowed the  appeals  of  the  first  and  second  appellants  on
Article 8 ECHR grounds.

Background

3.    The first and  second  appellant  are  husband  and  wife,  the  third
appellant is their daughter. The first appellant  was  born  on  28  October
1979. The second appellant was born on 13 April 1978.  The  third  appellant
was born in the UK on 20 February 2008.

4.    The first appellant entered the UK on 16 August  2002  as  a  seasonal
worker with an employment visa valid to 30 November 2002.  He  has  remained
in the UK since then. The second appellant entered the UK  clandestinely  on
21 September 2003. The third appellant was born  in  the  UK  is  only  ever
lived in the UK.

5.    On 5 October 2010 the appellant submitted applications  for  leave  to
remain in the UK outside the  immigration  rules.  Those  applications  were
refused without  the  right  of  appeal  4  November  2010.  The  appellants
submitted an application for reconsideration of that decision,  and,  on  14
may 2014, the respondent adhered to the decision dated 4 November 2010,  and
decided to remove each of the appellants from the UK.

The Judge's Decision

6.     The  Appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Swaniker ("the Judge") allow  the  third  appellant's  appeal
under the immigration  rules  and  allow  the  first  and  second  appellant
appeals on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

7.    Grounds of appeal were lodged, and on 9 July  2015  Judge  Lever  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "The grounds assert that the judge erred  on  the  application  of  the
    relevant part of para. 276 ADE, and did not adequately conduct the test
    of reasonableness of return home.

    "It is arguable that at [15] the  judge  erroneously  found  the  third
    appellant child to be a qualifying child by reference to  qualification
    at the date of hearing and that decision then infected the decision  in
    respect of the adult appellants."

The hearing

8.    (a) Ms Brocklesby-Weller, for the respondent, told me that  there  are
two challenges to the decision and that she would rely on the  cases  of  EV
Philippines, and Zoumbas. She argued that the first  challenge  was  to  the
judge's decision to allow the appeal of the third appellant under  paragraph
276 ADE (iv), because at the date of application  the  third  appellant  had
not yet reached her seventh birthday.  Even  though  the  third  appellant's
seventh birthday passed at the date of hearing, the length of residence  had
to be calculated by reference to the date of application only.

    (b) Ms A Brocklesby-Weller told  me  that  the  judge's  assessment  of
proportionality (when considering Article 8 out-with the rules)  was  flawed
because its foundation rested  on  the  incorrect  finding  that  the  third
appellant  satisfied  the  requirements  of  the  immigration  rules.  Ms  A
Brocklesby-Weller was critical of the balancing exercise carried out by  the
judge because it focused almost entirely  on  the  interests  of  the  third
appellant (a young child) and ignored the immigration history the first  and
second appellants. She told me that an  inadequate  balancing  exercise  had
been carried out by the judge so that the decision was tainted  by  material
errors of law.

9.    Ms N Nnamani for the appellants adopted the terms of the rule 24  note
and urged me to dismiss the appeal and to allow the decisions to  stand.  Ms
Nnamani argued that the  decision  was  a  careful,  well-reasoned  decision
setting out careful consideration of all material  factors  before  reaching
findings and conclusions which were well within  the  range  of  conclusions
available to the judge. Ms Nnamani conceded that the judges  application  of
paragraph 276 ADE (1)(iv) is incorrect, but  argued  that  that  is  just  a
mistake and is not a material error of law. She told  me  that  a  full  and
fair  reading  of  the  judge's  decision  demonstrates  that  all  material
considerations have  been  taken  fully  into  account,  that  there  is  no
material error of law and that the decision should stand.

Legal Framework

10.   In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC)  the  Tribunal  held  that
when the question posed by s117B(6) is the same question posed  in  relation
to children by paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv), it must be  posed  and  answered  in
the proper context of whether it was  reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to
follow its parents to their country of origin; EV (Philippines). It  is  not
however a question that needs to be posed and answered in relation  to  each
child more than once.

11.   The error  that  the  judge  made  is  that  his  starting  point  was
considering the third appellant's appeal in isolation. The judge is  correct
that the third appellant is a qualifying child for the purposes  of  Section
117B(6) of the 2002 Act, but the consideration  of  whether  or  not  it  is
reasonable for the third appellant to leave the UK did not take  account  of
the facts and circumstances  of  all  family  members.  The  judge  did  not
adequately consider the immigration history of each of  the  appellants  nor
did he consider the position of  the  first  and  second  appellants  before
coming to the conclusion that the second appellant  faced  the  prospect  of
return alone.

12.   At paragraph 13 of the rule 24 response,  and  in  Ms  Nnamani's  oral
submissions, it is conceded  that  the  judges  interpretation  of  276  ADE
(1)(iv) is incorrect, and that the  third  appellant  does  not  fulfil  the
requirements of that subsection of the paragraph. Although it is argued  for
the appellants that that error is not material. I find that it is, in  fact,
a material error of law. The fulcrum of the decision can be found  at  [16],
in the middle of which the judge  says  "I  accordingly  conclude  that  the
third appellant meets the requirements of paragraph 276  ADE(iv)".  That  is
the basis on which the  third  appellant's  appeal  was  allowed  under  the
immigration rules. It is common ground that the appellant has not  meet  the
requirements of paragraph 276 ADE(1)(iv). The crucial part of  the  decision
in the third appellant's case is fundamentally flawed. When that one  quoted
sentence is taken out of the decision, the third  appellant  cannot  succeed
under the immigration rules.

13.   It is only once the judge decided that the outcome of the  appeal  for
the third appellant that she moved on  to  consider  the  first  and  second
appellants. The flawed decision in  relation  to  the  third  appellant  was
determinative of the appeals of the first and second appellants.  The  judge
effectively made the first and second appellants dependent upon  the  appeal
of the third appellant, which is an incorrect approach.

14.   Although it is clear from  the  decision  that  the  judge  considered
Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, it is not clear  that  she  considered  the
other balancing factors set  out  in  Section  117B  of  the  2002  Act.  It
therefore  appears  that  an  inadequate   balancing   exercise   has   been
undertaken. I therefore find that the decision contains material  errors  in
law and requires to be remade.

My Findings of Fact

15.   The first and second appellant are spouses.  The  third  appellant  is
their daughter. The first appellant entered the UK as a seasonal  worker  on
16 August 2002. His visa expired on 30 November 2002.  He  has  remained  in
the UK since then. Before coming to the UK the first appellant  married  the
second appellant. The second appellant entered the UK  clandestinely  on  21
September 2003.

16.   On 5 October 2010 the appellants submitted applications for  leave  to
remain in the UK outside the  immigration  rules.  Those  applications  were
refused without  the  right  of  appeal  4  November  2010.  The  appellants
submitted an application for reconsideration of those decisions, and  on  14
May 2014 the respondent adhered to the decisions dated 4 November 2010,  and
decided to remove each of the appellants from the UK.

17.    Between  2002  and  2007  the  first  appellant  was  employed  as  a
carpenter. He was made redundant in 2007 and started to  trade  on  his  own
account. He continues to trade as a carpenter. In or about  2007  the  first
and second appellants invested all of their savings and some borrowed  funds
in an energy company. That investment was unsuccessful  and  has  left  them
both with debts which they continue to repay. The first appellant  maintains
a bank account with Halifax Bank of Scotland. There  is  normally  a  credit
balance in that account.

18.   The second appellant's brother is a naturalised  British  citizen.  He
lives in the UK with his wife and child. There is  regular  contact  between
each of the appellants and the second appellant's brother's family.

19.   The third appellant did not speak English until  she  started  nursery
school. After starting nursery  school  she  quickly  mastered  the  English
language and was speaking it  fluently  by  the  time  she  started  primary
school. The third appellant attended a local primary  school  where  she  is
doing well. She is a promising pupil and has a good circle of friends.

20.   The appellant's live in a two bedroomed flat which they rent.  Neither
the first nor the second appellants have claimed DWP benefits whilst in  the
UK. All of the appellants bilingual and speak fluent English.

The Immigration Rules

21.   The first & second appellants cannot succeed under Appendix FM of  the
Immigration Rules because they do not meet the requirements of  E-LTRPT  1.2
to 1.12 & 2.1; it is beyond dispute that all three  appellants  are  present
in the UK in breach of immigration laws. The respondent  correctly  goes  on
to consider whether or not Paragraph EX.1 applies.

22.   It is a matter of concession that the first & second  appellants  have
a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  the  third  appellant,
but at the date of application and the date of  reconsideration,  the  third
appellant had lived in the UK for less  than  seven  years.  The  appellants
cannot satisfy the requirements of paragraph EX.1 (a) (cc).  The  appellants
cannot satisfy the requirements of appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules.  I
look beyond the immigration rules to consider  what  interference  would  be
caused to family life by the respondent's decisions.

23.    The  respondent's  decisions  would  cause  upheaval  for  all  three
appellants. The effect of the respondent's decision would be that all  three
appellants would return to Ukraine as one family unit. They will have  their
own mutual support but, on return to Ukraine, they will  enter  the  country
without a home to go to and without a source of  income  and  will  have  to
start from the very beginning.

24.   There is, however, no evidence  before  that  any  of  the  appellants
would face anything more than a period of upheaval.  There  is  no  reliable
evidence placed before me to indicate that any of the appellants would  face
destitution on return  to  Ukraine.  The  first  &  second  appellants  have
already demonstrated that they are sufficiently resourceful to  travel  from
Ukraine to the UK and to  establish  themselves  in  the  UK.  There  is  no
evidence placed before me to indicate that the first  &  second  appellants'
resourcefulness has diminished with the passage of time.

25.   The third appellant is a child. I am mindful  of  Section  55  of  the
Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009,  and  the  case  of   ZH
(Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4.

26.   I remind myself of the cases of  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions
affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197.  It is the  intention
of the SoS to ensure that the Appellants remain together. It has  long  been
established that it is in the interests of children  to  remain  with  their
parents. The Respondent's decision maintains the unity of  this  family  and
does not separate the third appellant from her  parents.  The  interests  of
the child are served because  the  integrity  of  the  family  unit  is  not
challenged.

27.   There is insufficient evidence to enable me to make a finding in  fact
that it would be unreasonable for the  third  appellant  to  return  to  the
Ukraine. That therefore reinforces my conclusion that the appellants  cannot
succeed under Appendix FM.

Paragraph 276ADE

28.   Because of the ages of each of the appellants and the length  of  time
they  have  been  in  the  UK,  none  of  the  appellants  can  fulfil   the
requirements of Paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) to (v) of  the  Immigration  Rules.
In order to succeed under  Paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),  the  appellants  would
have to demonstrate that they have no ties (including  social,  cultural  or
family) with Ukriane.

29.   The first appellant has been in  the  UK  for  13  years.  The  second
appellant has been in  the  UK  for  12  years.   No  reliable  evidence  to
indicate either that that cultural ties to Ukraine have been broken or  that
there are insurmountable obstacles to return to  Ukraine  is  placed  before
me. I can only therefore come to the conclusion that the  appellants  cannot
fulfil the requirements of Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  The  appellants  cannot
succeed under the Immigration Rules.

Article 8 ECHR

30.   In Zoumbas v SSHD  2013  UKSC  74  it  was  held  that  there  was  no
"substance in the criticism that  the  assessment  of  the  children's  best
interests was flawed because it assumed that their parents would be  removed
to the Republic of Congo. ... It was legitimate for  the  decision-maker  to
ask herself first whether it would have been  proportionate  to  remove  the
parents if they had no children and then, in considering the best  interests
of the children in the proportionality exercise,  ask  whether  their  well-
being altered that provisional balance. When one has regard to  the  age  of
the children, the  nature  and  extent  of  their  integration  into  United
Kingdom society, the close  family  unit  in  which  they  lived  and  their
Congolese citizenship, the matters  on  which  Mr  Lindsay  relied  did  not
create such a strong case for the children that their interest in  remaining
in the United Kingdom could have outweighed the considerations on which  the
decision-maker  relied  in  striking  the  balance  in  the  proportionality
exercise (paras 17 and 18 above). The  assessment  of  the  children's  best
interests must be read in the context of the decision letter  as  a  whole."
that there was no "irrationality in  the  conclusion  that  it  was  in  the
children's best interests to go  with  their  parents  to  the  Republic  of
Congo. No doubt it would have been  possible  to  have  stated  that,  other
things being equal, it was in the best interests of the children  that  they
and their parents stayed in the United Kingdom so  that  they  could  obtain
such  benefits  as  health  care  and  education  which  the  decision-maker
recognised might be of a higher standard than  would  be  available  in  the
Congo. But other things were not equal.  They  were  not  British  citizens.
They had no right to future education and health care in this country.  They
were part of a close-knit family with highly educated parents  and  were  of
an age when their emotional  needs  could  only  be  fully  met  within  the
immediate family unit. Such integration as had occurred into United  Kingdom
society would have been predominantly in the context of  that  family  unit.
Most significantly, the decision-maker concluded that they could be  removed
to the Republic of Congo in  the  care  of  their  parents  without  serious
detriment to their well-being".

31.   In the case of EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  874
Lord Justice Lewison, stated that the best interests of  the  children  must
be made on the basis that the facts are as they are in the  real  world  and
if neither parent has the right to  remain,  then  that  is  the  background
against which the  assessment  is  conducted.   Thus  Lord  Justice  Lewison
thought that the ultimate question was whether it was reasonable  to  expect
the child to follow the parent who had no right to remain to the country  of
origin.`

32.   The respondent's decisions will not separate this family.  It  is  the
respondent's intention to ensure that this  family  remain  together.  There
cannot therefore be any interference with family life as  a  result  of  the
respondent's decisions.

33.   Section 117 is a factor  to  be  taken  into  account  in  determining
proportionality. I appreciate that as the  public  interest  provisions  are
now contained in  primary  legislation  they  override  existing  case  law,
Section 117A(2) requires me to have regard to the considerations  listed  in
Sections 117B and 117C.  I am conscious of my statutory duty to  take  these
factors into account when coming to my conclusions.  I am  also  aware  that
Section 117A(3) imposes upon  me  the  duty  of  carrying  out  a  balancing
exercise. In so doing I remind  myself  of  the  guidance  contained  within
Razgar.

34.    Section  117B(1)  provides  that   the   maintenance   of   effective
immigration control is in the public interest. I  consider  Section  117B(6)
because the third appellant is now a qualifying child, but  I  have  already
found that it would not be unreasonable to expect each of the appellants  to
leave the UK. I therefore have to find that the  third  appellant  does  not
benefit from the operation of Section 117B(6).

35.   The appellants all speak English and so the public interests  set  out
in Section 117B(2) are met. The first and second appellants are  financially
independent, but the evidence demonstrates  that  the  third  appellant  has
access to health care and free schooling,  services  to  which  she  is  not
entitled, and so she cannot be said to be financially independent. At  best,
section 117B(3) is neutral in effect.

36.   The appellants are all in the UK unlawfully. Section 117B(4)  operates
against them. Section 117B(5) operates against the appellants for  the  same
reason.

37.   There are therefore more factors  in  Section  117B  weighing  against
each of the appellants than in their favour.

38.   The effect of the respondent's decision  would  be  that  the  private
life that the appellants have established in the UK would come  to  an  end.
They would have to move from their home, they would be separated from  their
friends, the third appellant would be removed from the UK  education  system
and would have to start afresh in Ukraine. However, that  private  life  has
been established almost by stealth whilst the appellants have  been  in  the
UK illegally. The first & second appellants have already  demonstrated  that
they  are  resourceful  healthy  adults.  The  third  appellant  is   young,
intelligent and able. The appellants face a big change  in  their  life  but
there is nothing before me to indicate that it is a  change  to  which  they
cannot adapt.

39.    I  therefore  find  that  the  respondent's   decision   is   not   a
disproportionate breach of any of the appellants' Article 8 ECHR rights.

Conclusion

40.   I therefore have to find that  the  respondent's  decision  is  not  a
disproportionate breach of any rights that  the  appellants  might  have  in
terms of Article 8 ECHR.

Decision

41.   The decision promulgated on  24  November  2014  contains  a  material
error of law. I therefore set it aside.

42.   I remake the decision.

43.    The  appeals  of  all  three  appellants  are  dismissed  under   the
Immigration Rules.

44.   The appeals of all three appellants are dismissed on  Article  8  ECHR
grounds.

45.   There is no need for an anonymity direction.


                           Signed  6th October 2015

                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

