
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/23957/2013
                                                               IA/23946/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 May 2014                                |On 29th May 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

              MR MANISHKUMAR RAVJIBHAI PATEL (first Appellant)
             mRS MANISHKUMAR KAVITABEN PATEL (second Appellant)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
NO ANONYMITY ORDER

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr J Trussler (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The first appellant whose date of birth is 8 June 1981 is a citizen  of
    India.  The second appellant is his wife, her date of birth is 15  July
    1985 and she is also a citizen of India.

2.   This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in the  decision  made  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Caswell who  dismissed  the  appellants'  appeals  in  a
    determination on the papers promulgated on 9 December 2013.

Background

3.   The appellants were granted leave to enter the UK as Tier  4  (General)
    Students on 10 February 2011 until 7 July 2012.

4.   On 6 July 2012 the appellants made a combined application for leave  to
    remain in the UK as Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrants  under  the  points-
    based system (PBS) and for a biometric residence permit.

5.   In a letter dated 5 June 2013 the respondent  refused  the  application
    on the grounds that three letters from Allahabad Bank referring to  the
    accounts belonging to Mr Rutul Maheshkumar Jani, Mr Tejesh  Maneshkumar
    Pandya and  Mrs  Abada  Mohammad  Umar  were  found  unsatisfactory  as
    evidence to establish the requirements  for  an  award  of  points  for
    having access to funds as required.  The  respondent  stated  that  she
    sought to verify the documents detailed  using  "standard  procedures".
    The application was refused under paragraph 322(1A) and 245DD(a) of the
    Immigration Rules.  Further, directions were made under Section  47  of
    the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

6.   In a short determination dated 2  December  2013  First  Tier  Tribunal
    Judge R Caswell dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

7.   The substance of the determination is set out below :

         "There are few documents before me for the appeal.  On the evidence
         before me I cannot be satisfied that the appellants have shown  the
         funds in the bank accounts are genuinely available for the  purpose
         claimed.  Although I have what appear to be bank letters  from  the
         Allahabad Bank, I do not have the statements themselves and I  have
         nothing at all to show that the account holders have any connection
         with the appellants.  It is noticeable that the grounds  of  appeal
         do not set out any grounds and simply say 'pls see enclosed'.  From
         the papers before me nothing appears to have been enclosed.   As  I
         have set out, the only documents before me from the appellants  are
         the bank letters which appear to have been  sent  in  August  2013.
         The  appellants  have  failed  to  explain  the  relevance  of  the
         statements, the relationship of the account holders to them, or the
         reasons why the sums in the account are  available  to  them.   The
         letters do not accompany bank statements and so are of very  little
         limited relevance.  On the evidence  before  me  I  find  that  the
         appellant has not shown that the statements are genuine or that she
         has the funds available to her which would entitle her  to  the  75
         points claimed for attributes.  The  respondent's  decision  is  in
         accordance with the law and the Immigration Rules and I dismiss the
         appeal."


Grounds for Permission

8.   In undated and unsigned grounds for permission it was argued  that  the
    Immigration Judge erred in law for the following reasons;

    (1)  The  appellant  was  refused  leave  based  on  an  allegation  of
         deception in which case the burden  shifts  to  the  respondent  to
         prove.  The Immigration Judge materially erred in law in failing to
         apply the  correct  burden  of  proof.   In  the  determination  no
         reference is made to the burden on the respondent who  was  relying
         on the exclusionary grounds under paragraph 322(1A).  (JC  (part  9
         HC 395 - burden of proof) China [2007] UKAIT 00027).


    (2)  The Immigration Judge erred by  not  considering  the  appellant's
         appeal under Article 8 ECHR.  Reliance is placed on  the  Court  of
         Appeal judgment in Pankina v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 719 and CDS (PBS:
         available: Article  8)  Brazil  [2010]  UKUT  00305  (IAC)  and  MB
         (Article 8 - near miss) Pakistan [2010] UKUT 282 (IAC), Chikwamba v
         SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 and ZN (Afghanistan) [2010] UKSC 21.

Permission to Appeal

9.   The application for permission to appeal was  considered  initially  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Easterman who refused to grant permission  on
    22 January 2014.  His reasoning was that the matter had been determined
    by the judge with reference  to  minimal  papers  which  included  some
    letters from the Allahabad Bank.  Judge Easterman took  the  view  that
    the respondent was not suggesting that the  documents  were  false  but
    merely that they had been unable to verify them.  No Article 8 case was
    put before the judge.  It is for the appellants to show they  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules and the  judge  has  given  reasons  why  she
    believed on the very limited documents before her  the  applicants  did
    not meet the Rules.  He added, "She  has  not  looked  at  deception  I
    suspect because she read the refusal in the same way that I did."

10.  The appellant appealed to the  Upper  Tribunal  in  grounds  of  appeal
    dated 18 March 2014 relying on Ahmed  (General  grounds  of  refusal  -
    material non-disclosure) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 351 (IAC)  "in  order  to
    have made false representations or submitted false documents so  as  to
    attract a mandatory refusal under part 9 of the Immigration  Rules,  an
    applicant must have deliberately practised 'deception', as  defined  at
    paragraph 6".  Failing to disclose a material fact is also  classed  as
    "deception".  It follows that such a failure also  requires  dishonesty
    on the part of the applicant  or  by  someone  acting  on  his  behalf.
    Reliance is also placed on  AA (Nigeria) v SSHD [2010] EWCA.

11.  Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Chalkley  on
    10 April 2014 in the following terms,

         "I have granted this application because it appears, from the  very
         little information supplied by the respondent that  the  respondent
         is alleging that the third party bank  documents  supplied  by  the
         appellants in relation to their application were not genuine.   The
         respondent does not, however, explain why she  says  the  documents
         are not genuine, merely that they cannot verify the documents.


         The documents may well not be genuine, but the respondent does  not
         give any  reason  for  having  reached  this  conclusion.   It  is,
         therefore, properly arguable that the  First-tier  Judge  may  have
         erred in law by simply accepting an allegation that  the  documents
         were not genuine without requiring the Secretary of State  for  the
         Home Department to discharge the burden on her."

Hearing

12.  At the hearing before me submissions were made by Mr  Trussler  and  by
    Mr Bramble, the  details  of  which  are  set  out  in  the  Record  of
    Proceedings and which I  have  taken  into  account.   In  summary,  Mr
    Trussler submitted  that  there  was  no  evidence  either  before  the
    Tribunal or presently available to support the respondent's  case  that
    the  documents  were  not  genuine.   It  was  unclear  what  financial
    documents were before the First-tier Tribunal Judge who gave no reasons
     why the documents submitted  were  not  reliable.   The  bank  letters
    produced were dated August 2013 and  incorporated  a  declaration  that
    funds were available to be paid out to the appellants.

13.  Mr Bramble confirmed that the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  relied  on
    paragraph  322A  and  accepted  that  the  body  of  the  determination
    referred to the documents as being "not genuine".  He accepted that the
    Tribunal did not engage with 322(1A) which amounted to an error of law.
     The question  was  whether  or  not  this  error  was  material.   The
    application  was  also  refused  under  paragraph  245DD(a)   requiring
    evidence of access to the  required  funds.   The  appellants  had  the
    opportunity to furnish further evidence for the  Tribunal  to  consider
    but elected a paper determination ; the Tribunal made a decision on the
    limited evidence before her.  Mr Bramble submitted  that  the  Tribunal
    found that  the  appellants  failed  to   show  that   the  funds  were
    available/accessible to them as required under 245AA. This part of  the
    decision should stand.  The onus remains on the appellants to show that
    they meet the requirements of the Rules.  No other  evidence  has  been
    adduced simply the bank letters.

14.  Mr Trussler responded that the evidence  of  the  bank  letters  showed
    that funds were available to the appellants.   The  Tribunal  ought  to
    have given reasons not to accept those documents.  The  fact  that  the
    word "genuine" is used by default brings into play  paragraph  322(1A).
    He argued  that  the  judge  erred  by  failing  to  engage  with  that
    paragraph.



Discussion and Decision

15.   The  relevant  provisions  are  set  out  in  paragraph  245D-Tier   1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrants.  Reference is made to Appendix  A  which  sets
    out the Attributes required..  Paragraph 41 states  an  applicant  will
    only be considered to have  access  to  funds  if:  (a)  the  specified
    documents to show cash money to the amount required; (b) the  specified
    documents to show that the applicant has permission to use the money to
    invest in a business in the UK and (c) the money is either held in a UK
    regulated  financial  institution  or  is  transferable  to   the   UK.
    Paragraph 41-SD; (a) the specified documents to show  evidence  of  the
    money available to invest are one or more of  the  following  specified
    documents; (1) a letter from each  financial  institution  holding  the
    funds, to confirm the amount of money available to  the  applicant  (or
    the entrepreneurial team).   Each  letter  must:  (i)  be  an  original
    document and not a copy, (ii) be on the institution's  official  headed
    paper, (iii) have  been  issued  by  an  authorised  official  of  that
    institution, (iv) have been produced within  three  months  immediately
    before the date of the application,  (v)  confirm  the  institution  is
    regulated by the appropriate body, (vi) state the applicant's name  and
    his team's partner's name if the applicant is applying under  paragraph
    52, (vii) state the date of the document, (viii) confirm the amount  of
    money available from the applicant's own funds that are  held  in  that
    institution, (ix) confirm the amount of money provided to the applicant
    from any third party that is held in that institution, (x) confirm  the
    name of each third party and their  contact  details,  including  their
    full address including postal code, land  line  phone  number  and  any
    email address and (xi) confirm if the money is not  in  an  institution
    regulated by the FSA, the money can be transferred into  the  UK.   The
    paragraph also requires where an applicant is using money from a  third
    party that he must provide all of the following specified documents set
    out in paragraph (b) to include  an  original  declaration  from  every
    third  party  that  they  have  made  the  money  available  containing
    specified  information  and  a  letter  from  a  legal   representative
    confirming the validity of  signatures  on  each  of  the  third  party
    declarations.

16.  Paragraph 322(1A) sets out mandatory grounds on which leave  to  remain
    and variation of  leave  to  enter  are  to  be  refused,  where  false
    representations or false documents have been submitted.

17.  I am satisfied that the respondent in the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter
    relied on paragraph 322(1A). Accordingly the burden of  proof  lies  on
    the Secretary of State to show that documents are not genuine,  to  the
    required standard, if that is what is alleged.  There was some argument
    before me as to whether or not the respondent was  in  fact  suggesting
    that the documents were false or rather that they had  been  unable  to
    verify them.  It is not sufficient for an unsubstantiated allegation to
    be made and accepted at face value  without  more  in  the  event  that
    paragraph 322 is relied  on.  The  word  "genuinely"  is  used  in  the
    determination when considering whether the evidence of the bank letters
    establishes that the  funds  are  genuinely  available.   There  is  no
    enquiry into evidence  to  support  a  claim  or  allegation  that  the
    documents are genuine or not.  The Tribunal made no reference to either
    paragraph 322 nor that the burden and standard  of  proof  lay  on  the
    respondent in this regard. I find that this amounts to an error of law.



18.  The Tribunal determined the appeal on the papers and the evidence  (the
    three bank letters)  produced  by  the  appellant  was  minimal.  I  am
    satisfied  that  the  Tribunal  correctly  found  that  there  were  no
    accompanying statements and no evidence of any connection  between  the
    account holders and the appellants and concluded  that  the  appellants
    failed to show evidence which would  entitle  them  to  the  75  points
    claimed for Attributes.  Clearly the issue of verification  comes  into
    play concerning paragraph 245 and  the  genuineness  of  the  documents
    comes into play specifically under paragraph 322(1A).  I  have  already
    decided that there was an error of law  and  that  the  decision  under
    paragraph 322(1A) cannot stand,  however,   I  am  satisfied  that  the
    decision under paragraph 245 can remain as it is correctly reasoned  on
    the available evidence.  The appellants failed to show that  they  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 245D  as regards the specified documents.
     Although the outcome is the same I find that the error is material  to
    the extent that the decision under paragraph 322A stands to be remade.

19.    The ground  under  Article  8  was  not  pursued  before  me  and  is
    dismissed.

20.  I find that there is an error of law in the judge's  determination.   I
    set aside that determination.  I remake the decision as follows.

Decision

21.  The appeal under paragraph 322(1A) is allowed.

22.  The appeal under paragraph 245DD is  dismissed.  The  decision  therein
    shall remain.

23.  The appeal under Article 8 ECHR is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date 28.5.2014
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black




No anonymity order was made or requested.
There is no award for repayment of fees.


Signed                                  Date 28.5.2014
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


