
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23065/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Determined without a hearing at Field House|Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 5 November 2014                         |On 5 November 2014             |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                             diane mary wallace
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Breytenbachs Immigration Consultants Limited
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of South Africa who appeals  a  decision  of
    the respondent on 8 May 2014 refusing to vary her leave  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom and to remove her by way of directions.

 2. The application was refused with reference to paragraph 192 of HC  395.
    The appellant had claimed, wrongly, that  she  came  from  an  "English
    speaking country" as defined in the  Rules  and  so  had  not  produced
    evidence of her competence in the English language.

 3. By the time the appeal came  to  be  heard  the  appellant  proved  her
    competence by an appropriate Pearson English Language Test  Certificate
    but the First-tier Tribunal Judge decided that  it  was  not  something
    that she could consider.

 4. The Grounds of appeal challenged this decision and permission to appeal
    was given by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kimnell who said:

         "The only issue is  the  admissibility  of  post-decision  evidence
         under s.85(4) and 85(A)(iii) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002.  The Judge proceeded as if this is a points  based
         case, which it is not."

 5. The Secretary of State produced a response under Rule 24 on 14  October
    2014. It is written by Ms Lee Ong of the Specialist  Appeals  team  and
    says at paragraphs 2 and 3:-

         "2.  The respondent does not oppose the appellant's application for
         permission to appeal as the application for  permission  to  appeal
         appears to have merit.   The  Judge  was  not  constrained  by  the
         legislation to  consider  evidence  appertaining  to  the  date  of
         decision.  This was not a PBS case and therefore the  judge  should
         have considered the evidence relating to the appellant's ability in
         English.  Had she done so, it is clear that she would have gone  on
         to allow the appeal.

         3.   It is therefore considered that having made  this  concession,
         the appeal will fall to be allowed, and that as such there  are  no
         reasons to have a further appeal  hearing  in  this  matter,  which
         should be resolved administratively."

 6. I have before me a letter from the appellant's  representatives  saying
    "we would like to withdraw the Appellant's appeal  from  the  tribunal"
    but the rules do not permit an appeal to be withdrawn from the Tribunal
    and so I refuse the  application.  I  could  permit  the  appellant  to
    withdraw her case but it seems to me that the better course is to allow
    the appeal.

 7. If, as I strongly suspect is the case, the Secretary of  State  intends
    to give effect to Miss Ong's reply then there is no disadvantage in the
    appeal being allowed.  If, improbably, for  some  extraordinary  reason
    there was a contrary intention then allowing the appeal should  correct
    that.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I  set  aside  its  decision  and
    substitute a decision allowing the appeal.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 5 November 2014                |








