
IAC-PE-AW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23412/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th June 2015                    |On 6th July 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                              mr shahid hussain
                          (ANONYMITY not retained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Iqbal of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 3rd March 1973 is a national  of  Pakistan.   The
    Appellant was represented by Mr Iqbal of Counsel.  The  Respondent  was
    represented by Mr Kandola a Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2.  The  Appellant  had  made  application  for  a  residence  card  as  a
    confirmation  of  a  right  to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  under
    Regulations 6 and 8(5) of the  2006  Regulations.  The  Respondent  had
    refused that application on  15th  May  2014  on  the  basis  that  the
    Respondent was not satisfied that the EEA family member was a qualified
    person or that the Appellant was in a durable relationship with the EEA
    national.

 3. The Appellant had appealed that decision and his appeal  was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore sitting at Taylor House on 2nd February
    2015.  The judge had found for reasons given that the EEA national  was
    exercising treaty rights in the UK as a worker and that  the  Appellant
    and the EEA national were in a durable relationship within the terms of
    Regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations. In his final heading  decision
    at paragraph 24 the judge had stated "I allow this appeal".

 4. The Respondent had made application for permission  to  appeal  on  the
    basis that the judge should  have  remitted  the  matter  back  to  the
    Respondent to exercise their discretion under Regulation 17(4)  of  the
    2006 Regulations.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cox on 1st April 2015 on the  basis  that  such  grounds
    disclosed an arguable material error of law and indeed stated that  the
    contention was not only arguable  but  irresistible.   Directions  were
    issued  and  the  matter  came  before  me  in  accordance  with  those
    directions to decide firstly whether an error of law had been made.

The Proceedings

 5. Mr Iqbal and Mr Kandola had properly and helpfully  agreed  in  advance
    that indeed an error of law had been made by the judge in allowing  the
    appeal outright rather than allowing the appeal to the extent  that  it
    should be remitted back to the Respondent.  I agree with that  decision
    that was reached by the  representatives  and  accordingly  I  found  a
    material error of law had been made by the judge in this case such that
    the decision in terms of allowing the appeal  outright  should  be  set
    aside and remade.  I now provide that decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 6. I make it clear that the judge's findings of fact in  relation  to  the
    EEA national exercising treaty rights in the UK as  a  worker  and  the
    fact there was a durable relationship existing  between  the  Appellant
    and the EEA national in accordance with Regulation 8(5) are  maintained
    and it has not been suggested that there was any error of law  made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal in reaching those conclusions.

 7. The Respondent having not been satisfied in the first instance that the
    Appellant came within the terms of Regulation  8(5)  had  at  no  stage
    considered  their  discretion  under  Regulation   17(4).    In   those
    circumstances and in accordance with case law the proper approach which
    I adopt is to allow the appeal to the extent that it is  remitted  back
    to the Respondent to make a lawful decision i.e. in terms of whether or
    not  to  exercise  discretion  under  Regulation  17(4)  of  the   2006
    Regulations.

Decision

 8. I find a material error of law was made by the judge in this  case  and
    set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.   In  remaking  that
    decision I allow this appeal to the extent that it is remitted back  to
    the Respondent to make a lawful decision by exercising their discretion
    one way or the other under the terms of Regulation 17(4)  of  the  2006
    Regulations.

 9. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable (adjusted where full  award
not justified) for the following reason



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

