
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
IA/23185/2015




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 20 July 2017                          |On 21 July 2017           |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between

                                KANWALJIT [K]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss U Dirie, Counsel
      (Instructed by Bhogal Partners Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS









      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  Designated
           First-tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy on 8 June  2017  against  the
           determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chana  who   had
           dismissed the appeal of the Appellant seeking settlement outside
           the Immigration Rules on Article 8 ECHR grounds.   The  decision
           and reasons was promulgated on 4 May 2017.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of India.  The Appellant had entered
           the United Kingdom  lawfully  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
           Migrant on 29 July 2009.  Subsequently the Appellant was granted
           leave to remain in Tier 1, valid to 5 May 2012.   The  Appellant
           said she used an  agent  to  make  the  visa  application.   She
           returned to India in 2011 where she said she married.  She  came
           back to the United Kingdom on her own.  The Appellant said  that
           she used the same agent to obtain a spouse visa for her husband,
           but the agent was  arrested  for  fraud  and  her  passport  was
           retained by the Home Office.  She was unable to  sit  her  IELTS
           tests in consequence.  The Appellant claimed that  her  marriage
           broke down.  She subsequently met an Indian man  in  the  United
           Kingdom and became pregnant by  him.   The  child  was  born  in
           November 2016.  She feared returning to  India  with  her  child
           because the child would be regarded as illegitimate.  She relied
           on Article 8 ECHR.


      3.    The judge found that the Appellant was not a witness  of  truth.
           Her  private  life  Article  8  ECHR  claim   was   modest   and
           insufficient to tip the proportionality balance on  her  favour.
           The Appellant had failed to prove that she  had  a  relationship
           with the father of her child or that he  had  contact  with  the
           child.  There were divorce proceedings  in  progress  in  India,
           which the Appellant had not described truthfully.  The Appellant
           could return to India with her child and would not be ostracised
           there.  Her family would support her as they  had  done  in  the
           past when financing her  studies.   There  were  no  exceptional
           circumstances and the Appellant  and  her  child's  return  were
           proportionate to immigration control  in  the  public  interest.
           The judge dismissed the appeal on that basis.


      4.    Permission to appeal was granted on the sole ground that it  was
           arguable that the judge had failed to consider the well being of
           the Appellant's child when assessing proportionality for Article
           8 ECHR purposes.  That may have been caused by  the  failure  of
           the Appellant to produce any evidence on the subject.
      5.    Standard directions were made by  the  tribunal.    No  rule  24
           notice opposing the appeal was filed by the Respondent,  however
           Mr Clarke confirmed at the hearing that the  appeal  was  indeed
           opposed.




      Submissions


      6.    Miss Dirie for the Appellant relied on the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal and grant.  In summary, counsel submitted that the  judge
           had engaged in speculation.  There were  no  proper  foundations
           for the judge's findings.  The fact that the Appellant's parents
           had been willing to educate her was not  a  sound  basis  for  a
           finding that her parents would accept  her  illegitimate  child.
           The judge had failed to consider the best interests of the child
           and there had been no reference to section 117B(6) NIA 2002  and
           the  reasonableness  of  the  child's  going  to  India,   where
           discrimination would be faced.   The determination should be set
           aside and remade.


      7.    Mr Clarke for the Respondent submitted that there was plainly no
           material error of law.   The onwards appeal should be dismissed.




      No material error of law finding


      8.    In the tribunal's view the grant of  permission  to  appeal  was
           generous, and had not taken account of the Appellant's  original
           grounds of appeal and  the  complete  absence  of  any  argument
           raised or evidence produced (beyond that addressed by the  judge
           as to consequences of illegitimacy in  India)  as  to  the  best
           interests of the very young child.  The Appellant's  grounds  of
           appeal were silent on the point, merely at [9] stating that "The
           Appellant gave birth to a healthy child in November 2016." It is
           axiomatic that a baby's best interests must be  to  remain  with
           its mother, absent any issues as to parental competence, or need
           for specialist medical attention.  There was none in the present
           appeal; indeed, the Appellant is qualified as nurse and  may  be
           thought to have qualifications  of  additional  benefit  to  the
           child.  That is an obvious and permissible  inference.   As  the
           judge  noted,  there  was  no  reliable  evidence  as   to   the
           involvement of the child's father, indeed nothing  from  him  at
           all.  It was a permissible if not inescapable inference that  he
           had no lawful status in the United Kingdom and  therefore  could
           return to India if he wished to  have  contact  with  the  child
           and/or the Appellant.


      9.    There was no suggestion that  the  very  experienced  judge  had
           misunderstood any of the evidence.  She had examined the  family
           situation with care despite the unreliable  and  generally  thin
           evidence and was entitled to find that the family life could  be
           continued in India without insurmountable obstacles because  the
           Appellant would be able to find work there and provide  for  her
           child.  It was a reasonable inference for the judge to draw that
           the Appellant's family would support her as they had done in the
           past, by financing her education in  a  foreign  country.   That
           plainly indicates a modern outlook.  Indeed, the  tribunal  adds
           that the Appellant's name indicates that she and her family (and
           indeed both of her male partners) are Sikh, a religion whose key
           tenets include equality between genders.  The Appellant had  not
           advanced a protection claim as to her  marital  status  and  the
           judge was entitled to find that neither the  Appellant  nor  her
           child were at risk of harm on return to India.


      10.   It is not easy to see what more the judge could have done, given
           the evidence before her.  Section 117B(6), part of the statutory
           public  interest  consideration  applicable  to  the  tribunal's
           consideration of Article 8 ECHR,  is in the following terms:


            "In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
           public interest does not require the person's removal where -


            (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
           qualifying child (defined in section 117D as a person under  the
           age of 18 and who is (a) a British Citizen or (b) has  lived  in
           the United Kingdom for a continuous period  of  seven  years  or
           more), and


            (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
           United Kingdom."


      11.   As the judge found as a fact by necessary  implication  that  it
           was reasonable for the child to leave the United Kingdom to live
           in India with her mother, the reasonableness issue  had  already
           been decided against the Appellant and her child and so did  not
           require to be examined a second  time.    As  noted  above,  the
           Appellant had accepted before the judge that she would  be  able
           to find work in India and  thus  provide  for  herself  and  her
           child: see [32] of the decision and reasons.  There was no  need
           for a separate discussion of section 117B(6).


      12.   Miss Dirie did not seek to argue that there were any exceptional
           circumstances applicable to the appeal which had been overlooked
           by the judge.


      13.   The tribunal finds that the onwards appeal has no  substance  or
           merit and that there  was  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
           decision challenged.


      DECISION


      The appeal is dismissed


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  a
material error on a point of law.  The decision stands unchanged.

      Signed                                  Dated 20 July 2017




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




