
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23510/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 4th August 2016                       |On 6th September 2016               |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                            MR NAQIBULLAH SARDAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan whose appeal to be  in  need
    of international protection was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Raymond in a decision promulgated on 8th December 2015.

 2. Grounds of application were lodged principally on the  basis  that  the
    judge had erred in his approach to the credibility  of  the  Appellant.
    He had re-visited the asylum claim of the Appellant from  2008  without
    taking into account his PTSD and depression diagnosis.  Furthermore the
    judge had made an irrational assessment of the medical evidence and the
    particular conclusions in paragraph 252 by the judge were wrong.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes found that the  grounds  disclosed  no
    arguable errors of law  and  permission  to  appeal  was  refused.   On
    renewal to the Upper Tribunal permission was granted by Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Allen on the basis of what was  said  in  the  grounds  and  also
    because it was a matter of concern that although the appeal  was  heard
    in May 2015 the decision was not promulgated until December 2015.  Thus
    the matter came before me on the above date.

 4. Notice of Hearing was duly sent to the  Appellant  and  his  solicitors
    although by letter dated 29th July 2016 the solicitors  indicated  they
    were withdrawing representation as they were without instructions.

 5. When the case called on 4th August the Appellant  did  not  appear  and
    there was no appearance by any solicitor or anyone else on his  behalf.
    Given that notice of the hearing appeared to have been properly  served
    I decided to proceed with the hearing.  For the Home Office  Mr  Tarlow
    said that the judge had dealt with the medical evidence as set  out  in
    paragraph 18 of his decision.  Reading the decision as  a  whole  there
    was nothing materially wrong with it.  It should be left standing.

 6. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 7. I agree with Upper Tribunal Judge Allen that it is a matter of  concern
    that it took the judge nearly seven months to promulgate his  decision.
    While it can be said that the decision is unnecessarily  lengthy  there
    is nothing in it to suggest that the mere delay in promulgation had any
    consequence which disadvantaged the Appellant.

 8. Contrary to the grounds  the  judge  dealt  very  thoroughly  with  the
    medical evidence; in particular see the findings at paragraph 253 where
    he acknowledged that Dr Walsh concluded  the  Appellant  was  suffering
    from PTSD and severe depression.  The judge  concluded  that  both  the
    Appellant and his brother were not credible and honest witnesses in the
    appeal - see paragraph 242.  Numerous reasons  are  given  for  such  a
    finding.

 9. In my view the judge's findings are clear, cogent and by definition  go
    a long way from being anything approaching perverse or irrational.

10. It follows that there is no material error  of  law  in  this  decision
    which must stand.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  involve  a
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

I cannot see there is any need for an anonymity direction.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

