
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA235922014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th May 2016                              |On 8th June 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                          Marlon Ian O'Neil Malcolm
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Vokes of Counsel instructed by Purnells
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge Obhi of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 8th July 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a male  Jamaican  citizen  born  6th  April  1979  who
    applied for further  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    Respondent refused the application on 15th May 2014 and made a decision
    to remove the Appellant.

 3. The reasons given for refusing the application were that the  Appellant
    had previously been granted discretionary leave to remain on the  basis
    of his family life with his British partner and his active role in  the
    upbringing of her three British children.  That relationship had broken
    down and the Appellant no longer played any role in the  upbringing  of
    the children, and therefore the Respondent decided that there had  been
    a  material  change  in  circumstances  and  the  Appellant  no  longer
    qualified for leave to remain.

 4. The appeal was heard by the FTT on 24th  June  2015.   The  appeal  was
    based upon Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention  on  Human  Rights
    (the 1950 Convention) outside the Immigration  Rules.   The  FTT  noted
    that the Appellant was in a new relationship with a British citizen and
    that he and his new partner had a child born on 22nd January 2015.

 5. The FTT noted that the Appellant had a previous conviction for wounding
    which resulted in 28 months' imprisonment and that  the  Appellant  had
    previously  successfully  appealed  against  the  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order.  The FTT did not have a copy  of  the  previous  FTT
    decision.

 6. The FTT balanced the private and family life of the  Appellant  against
    the public interest in relation to the safety of the public  at  large,
    and the importance of maintaining  a  fair  and  efficient  immigration
    policy and decided  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    Respondent's decision to refuse the Appellant's application  for  leave
    to remain was proportionate.

 7. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and initially permission to appeal was refused.

 8. The Appellant renewed the  application  relying  in  summary  on  three
    grounds which are summarised below.

 9. Firstly it was contended that the FTT had acted unfairly and had  erred
    in law in not considering the determination of the FTT  promulgated  on
    21st September 2012, in which the Appellant's appeal against the making
    of the deportation order was  allowed.   Counsel  who  dealt  with  the
    appeal before the FTT was  unaware  that  this  determination  was  not
    within the bundle of documents provided  to  the  FTT,  as  it  was  in
    Counsel's bundle.  It was contended  that  the  previous  determination
    should have been the starting point  in  the  decision  making  process
    following the guidelines in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 000702.

10. Secondly it was contended that the FTT had erred in assessing the  best
    interests of the child and the FTT had no evidential basis for making a
    finding that  the  Appellant's  history  of  parenting  was  poor,  and
    therefore concluding that the likelihood of him remaining  an  involved
    parent was not high.

11. Thirdly it was contended that the FTT had erred by failing to  consider
    section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    (the 2002 Act).  The Appellant was the father of a British  child,  and
    therefore the FTT should have considered whether it would be reasonable
    to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McWilliam.
    Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  contending  in  summary  that  the  FTT   had   directed   itself
    appropriately and had not erred in law.

13. Directions were issued that there should be an oral hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FTT had erred in law such  that
    the decision must be set aside.

Oral Submissions

14. Mr Mills accepted at the commencement of the hearing that the  FTT  had
    materially erred in law by failing to consider section 117B(6)  of  the
    2002 Act.

15. Mr Vokes submitted that the FTT had also erred by failing  to  consider
    the determination which had allowed the appeal against  the  making  of
    the deportation order  and  by  making  findings  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's parenting without there  being  any  evidential  basis  for
    those findings.

16. Mr Mills submitted that the  FTT  was  entitled  to  make  findings  in
    relation to the Appellant's parenting, and had not erred in failing  to
    consider the previous determination, as the  appeal  had  been  allowed
    based upon the Appellant's relationship with a previous partner and her
    children, and it was accepted that that relationship had ended, and the
    Appellant was now in a new relationship.

My Conclusions and Reasons

17. I announced at the hearing that the  FTT  had  erred  in  law  and  the
    decision must be set aside.

18. I agreed with both representatives, that the FTT had  materially  erred
    by failing to consider section 117B(6).  There was  specific  reference
    to this point in the skeleton argument that was before the FTT.  It was
    accepted that the Appellant was the father  of  a  British  child,  and
    therefore the FTT should have considered whether there  was  a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship,  and  whether  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.

19. I also found that the  FTT  erred  materially  by  making  findings  on
    matters that had been covered in the  previous  determination,  without
    having had sight of that previous determination.  I should mention that
    the Tribunal file does not include the bundle of documents submitted on
    behalf of the Appellant and which were before the FTT,  although  there
    is a copy of the skeleton argument.   In  my  view  the  FTT  erred  in
    paragraph 15 by concluding that no details had  been  given  about  the
    Appellant's offence, and the Appellant had provided no  explanation  or
    detail.  There were details, together with the explanation given by the
    Appellant, in the previous determination.

20. The FTT erred by finding in paragraph 15;

         "In the absence of information my starting point  is  the  offence,
         which was clearly serious, and the  period  of  imprisonment  which
         further confirms this."

21. The previous determination referred to the relatively low risk posed by
    the Appellant and the fact that the offence  was  an  isolated,  albeit
    serious, offence of violence, and found that the Respondent's  decision
    was not justified or proportionate.

22. I accept that the relationship considered by the previous Tribunal  was
    not the relationship that the FTT was being asked to  consider  in  the
    appeal against the Respondent's decision dated 15th May 2014.   However
    the  previous  determination  should  have  been  the  starting   point
    according to the  principles  in  Devaseelan,  and  the  FTT  has  made
    findings  on  matters  which  were   dealt   with   in   the   previous
    determination.

23. I find that for these reasons, with the main error being the failure to
    consider section 117B(6), the decision of the FTT is unsafe and must be
    set aside with no findings preserved.  It is therefore not necessary to
    go on and consider the submission that the FTT erred in making findings
    as to the Appellant's parenting abilities.

24.  Both  representatives  agreed,  that  because  no  findings  could  be
    preserved, it would be appropriate to remit the appeal back to the  FTT
    to be heard afresh.

25. I have considered  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements, and find that it is appropriate to remit the appeal back to
    the FTT because of the nature and extent of judicial fact-finding  that
    will be necessary in order for this decision to be remade.

26. The appeal will be heard at the FTT Birmingham Hearing Centre, and  the
    parties will be advised of the time and date in due course.  The appeal
    is to be heard by an FTT judge other than Judge Obhi.

27. If either party seeks to rely upon documentary evidence  that  has  not
    already been served, that evidence must be served upon the FTT and  the
    other party no later than fourteen days prior to the next hearing date.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with no findings of  fact  preserved.


Anonymity

There was no application made for anonymity and no anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             31st May 2016



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The issue of any fee award will need to  be  considered  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             31st May 2016
