
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23671/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Tower                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 June 2015                      |On 24 July 2015                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                   Between

                         LYDIA LAWRENCE MWARKYAMBIKI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss D Revill, Counsel, instructed by Peer & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. We see no need for, and do not make, an order  restricting  publication
    of the details of this case.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Tanzania who  was  born  on  18  February
    1986.  On 8 May 2013 the respondent refused her application  for  leave
    to remain. She said she was entitled to leave because she  had  accrued
    ten years' continuous lawful residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.   She
    appealed the decision and the appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge E M M Smith in a determination promulgated on 21 January 2014.

 3. The material facts are that the appellant entered the United Kingdom on
    18 October 2002 with permission as a student.  She extended  her  leave
    in stages so that her leave lapsed on 30 April 2008. The appellant gave
    birth to a daughter on 26 January 2008 and they left the United Kingdom
    on  25  July  2008  which  is  approximately  twelve  week  after   the
    appellant's leave ran out.  On 8 October 2008 the appellant  was  given
    further leave to enter the United Kingdom.  Her daughter  continued  to
    live with the appellant's parents in Tanzania. The appellant's leave to
    be in the United Kingdom was extended so that it was due to lapse on 19
    August 2012.  On 14 August 2012 she applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on the basis of ten years' continuous lawful residence.

 4. That application was refused.  The appellant appealed  and  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  was  persuaded  that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.  This  is  because,  the  judge  decided,  the
    Secretary  of  State  should  not  have  made  the   decision   without
    considering her  discretion  and  deciding  if  she  should  treat  the
    appellant as if she had continuous lawful  residence  since  she  first
    arrived.

 5. The judge said:

         "The appeal is allowed.  The decision of the respondent was not  in
         accordance with the law as it suffered from a defective  procedure,
         the effect of this determination, is accordingly that the  decision
         is quashed and that the application remains outstanding awaiting  a
         lawful decision."

 6. The application was refused for a second  time  on  8  May  2014.   The
    Reasons for Refusal Letter is detailed.  The letter says:

         "In deciding whether you meet the requirements  to  have  completed
         ten years' continuous lawful residence in the United Kingdom, it is
         considered that there are two separate  aspects  that  need  to  be
         taken into account.  One aspect is any period spent in  the  United
         Kingdom without 'lawful leave' and  the  other  aspect  relates  to
         breaks in 'continuous residence'.

         With regard to the 'lawful leave' aspect it is noted that you  were
         in the United Kingdom without lawful  leave  between  01  September
         2005 and 10 January 2006 and from 01 May 2008 to 25 July 2008."

 7. We note that Judge E M M Smith did  not  appear  to  have  noticed  the
    earlier period of presence without leave.

 8.  The  respondent  then  directed  herself  to  the  appropriate  policy
    described as the "Modernised Guidance Relating Ten Year Long  Residence
    Applications" and identified an  instruction  there  in  the  following
    terms permitting a decision maker to grant an application:

         "If an applicant has short gaps in lawful residence through  making
         previous applications out of time by no more than 28 calendar days,
         and meets all the other requirements for lawful residence.

         You can use your judgment and use discretion in cases  where  there
         may be exceptional reasons why a single application was  made  more
         than 28 days out of time.  For example, exceptional reasons can  be
         used for cases where there is: a postal strike, hospitalisation, or
         an administrative error made by the Home Office."

 9. The respondent then looked at the application dated  28  October  2005.
    It was rejected because it was submitted 58  days  out  of  time.   The
    explanation for that was that it was rejected because  of  "inadvertent
    human error". The appellant had not enclosed the correct fee.

10. The respondent noted that that was no explanation for  the  application
    being made 58 days late.  Neither did the appellant provide evidence to
    show there were  exceptional  reasons  why  the  discretion  should  be
    exercised in her favour.

11. The respondent then noted that the appellant had  been  without  lawful
    leave between 1 May 2008 and 25 July 2008 which was  calculated  as  86
    days.  According to the decision maker:

         "Your representatives stated in page 2 of  their  letter  dated  13
         August 2012 that you remained in the country without leave  due  to
         circumstances beyond your control.  They state that  your  daughter
         was born in the United Kingdom on 26 January 2008 and you  were  in
         not fit state to make an application at that time and you left  the
         country as soon as you and your child were in  a  fit  and  healthy
         state to do so."

12. The respondent commented that a different explanation  was  offered  in
    the  appeal  statement  where,  according  to   the   respondent,   the
    appellant's  explanation  for  being  without  leave  was  because   of
    difficulties in obtaining a travel document for her daughter.

13. The Secretary of State did not  regard  it  as  self-evident  that  the
    appellant was not in a fit state to make an application before 30 April
    2008 because she had given birth to her daughter in the previous  three
    months.  The assertion was not supported by any medical evidence.

14. The respondent found "no exceptional reasons to justify the exercise of
    discretion with regard to your failure to submit an in-time application
    for further leave prior to 30 April 2008".

15. The respondent then explained that because the appellant had  left  the
    United Kingdom on 25 July 2008, her leave having  lapsed  on  30  April
    2008, she had broken her period of continuous  residence  and  although
    the respondent had discretion to waive  periods  of  residence  without
    leave in certain circumstances "there is no such  discretion  in  cases
    where the period of "continuous residence" is considered to  have  been
    broken".

16. The letter shows that the respondent then took heed of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's findings and looked to see if there were circumstances
    justifying a decision to allow leave outside the Rules.

17. The letter then continues:

         "All your circumstances have been carefully considered and referred
         to a Deputy Chief Caseworker but it is concluded that there are  no
         compelling compassionate grounds to justify disregarding the  break
         in your continuous residence or granting you leave outside  of  the
         Immigration Rules."

18. The letter then went on to deal with human rights points.

19. The appeal then came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd-Smith.

20.  She  dismissed  the  appeal.   Paragraph  14  of  Judge  Lloyd-Smith's
    determination is important.  She said:

         "In considering whether the case needed to be remitted again I have
         taken into account the submissions of both parties.  It was  argued
         that the refusal under consideration was made by the author of  the
         first  refusal  letter  which  was  unsatisfactory.   This  is  not
         something that has been raised by the  appellant's  representatives
         prior to the hearing day.  The  skeleton  argument  states  that  a
         different  person   should   have   considered   the   case.    The
         determination of the previous judge  states  that  the  Immigration
         Officer should "seek guidance of a SEO. There is no  evidence  that
         such guidance was sought" which was said to amount to a  breach  of
         the guidelines and amounted to an error of law.  I have a copy of a
         previous file and first refusal letter.  Whilst it may be the  case
         that the same Immigration Officer considered the  application,  the
         basis of the refusal has been more fully set out  and  more  detail
         for the decision has been given.  On reading the refusal letter the
         author  states  in  two  different  places  that  the   appellant's
         'circumstances have been carefully considered and referred to by  a
         Deputy  Chief  Caseworker.  However,  despite  that  'it  has  been
         concluded that there are no  compelling  compassionate  grounds  to
         justify disregarding the break  in  your  continuous  residence  or
         granting you leave outside of the Immigration  Rules'.   I  do  not
         agree that by  remitting  the  matter  the  Immigration  Judge  was
         directing that a fresh decision  maker  take  over  the  case,  but
         rather that the matter should be considered by someone of authority
         to establish whether the discretion should have been  exercised  in
         the appellant's favour when considering  the  period  of  time  the
         appellant remained in the UK without valid leave in  2008.   Having
         read both refusals I am satisfied that the decision was  considered
         by both the author of the refusal and by someone of suitable senior
         authority who would have been authorised to exercise the discretion
         if  deemed  appropriate.   I  do  not  therefore  accede   to   the
         application that the matter be remitted again."

21. We summarise below the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

22. The first ground of appeal complains  that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law because the further consideration was given  by
    the same caseworker that decided the original application and this,  it
    was contended, was procedurally unfair.  Connected with this ground was
    the contention that the case was not examined  by  a  senior  executive
    officer as required and was therefore contrary to the law.

23. It was also said that the judge had failed to apply Devaseelan  (Second
    appeals -ECHR - extra-territorial effect) Sri Lanka* [2002] UKIAT 00702
    and had consequently made adverse credibility findings that  ought  not
    to have been  made.   Thirdly,  it  was  said  the  judge  had  wrongly
    considered authorities that had not been cited and therefore should not
    have been considered without giving notice to the parties and  inviting
    representations and that the Tribunal had wrongly  concluded  that  the
    appellant had  not  shown  serious  compelling  circumstances  so  that
    discretion ought to have been exercised in her favour.

24. Finally it was said that the decision to dismiss the appeal on  Article
    8 grounds was wrong.

25. We have a skeleton argument prepared by Miss Revill dated 24 June 2015.

26. Concerning the contention that it was procedurally wrong for  the  case
    to be decided again by the same caseworker, she relied on authority  to
    support the contention that  it  is  wrong  if  "the  fair  minded  and
    informed observer, having considered the  facts,  would  conclude  that
    there was a real possibility that [they were] biased."   She  supported
    this in part with reference to a  policy  document  saying  that  where
    there is an administrative review it should be conducted by a different
    officer  because  "this  will  make  sure  there  is  independence  and
    transparency in the review process".  The grounds  then  complain  that
    there was no evidence produced to show that a senior executive  officer
    had looked at the decision and that was wrong.

27. We heard submissions from both parties and asked questions.

28. Although we understand why permission was granted we find on reflection
    that there is no merit in the contention that the decision was unlawful
    because it was reconsidered by the same officer that had made the first
    decision.  It would have been different if the  officer  was  asked  to
    change his mind.  That is not the nature of the  complaint  here.   The
    criticism was that a stage was missed out of the process.  There should
    have been consideration of whether to allow the case outside the  Rules
    on policy grounds.  That was not done.

29. Far from being a ground of criticism it seems to us appropriate or even
    desirable that the file went back to an officer who was  familiar  with
    the case.  We find  that  the  criticism  suggesting  the  contrary  is
    misconceived.  The officer re-making the decision  was  not  under  any
    kind of possible pressure to justify the decision  that  he  had  made.
    He had forgotten to consider another route  by  which  the  application
    might have succeeded and he was addressing his mind to that route.

30. We agree with Judge Lloyd-Smith that the decision of Judge E M M  Smith
    did not order the respondent to have the case decided  by  a  different
    officer.  We are doubtful that such an order could have been  made  but
    it was not made. The effect of the decision was that the  Secretary  of
    State had to decide the case again which is what she has done.

31. It is regrettable that we are not told the status of the  Deputy  Chief
    Caseworker who considered the decision.  It would have been  very  easy
    to have provided evidence that  that  officer  is  a  senior  executive
    officer, if such be the case, and it is undesirable that  the  evidence
    was not given because its absence created an  illusion  of  unfairness.
    The illusion vanished when the point was considered  but  the  omission
    initially created an aura of unfairness even though there was none.

32. We have looked at the terms of the policy in our  papers  described  as
    valid from 11 November 2013. It states:

         "Discretion for breaks in lawful residence.

         You must always  discuss  the  use  of  discretion  with  a  senior
         caseworker. You must be satisfied the applicant has acted  lawfully
         throughout the whole ten year period and has made every  effort  to
         obey the Immigration Rules.  The decision  to  exercise  discretion
         must not be taken without consent from a senior  executive  officer
         (SEO) or equivalent."

33. The obligation under the policy is to discuss  the  use  of  discretion
    with a senior caseworker.  Judge E M M Smith had no power to  impose  a
    higher obligation nor do we think that he did.

34. It is also clear to us that a senior executive  officer  or  equivalent
    need only be involved if there is a decision to allow the  appeal.   In
    this context "exercise discretion" must  mean  exercise  discretion  to
    allow.  The obligation is to discuss  the  use  of  discretion  with  a
    senior caseworker but to only allow an application on  a  discretionary
    basis if a senior executive officer  (or  equivalent)  agrees.  We  are
    quite satisfied that a Deputy Chief Caseworker is a  senior  caseworker
    for these purposes.  We note that the phrase "senior  caseworker"  does
    not have any  capital  letters.   It  is  descriptive  of  a  role  not
    identifying a job title.  The  Secretary  of  State  has  followed  her
    policy.

35. We also accept Mr Smart's point it does not matter anyway.

36. The policy applies where there has been a break in lawful residence but
    there is no such discretion when there has been a break  in  continuous
    residence and that is one of  the  reasons  this  appellant  failed  to
    satisfy the Rules.   Any neglect to follow policy (and  none  has  been
    established) is  irrelevant  because  there  were  proper  reasons  for
    refusing the application under the Rules that were not affected by  the
    policy.

37. The challenge to the fact finding exercise is  irrelevant.  We  do  not
    agree that the judge has done anything wrong.  She has  identified  the
    early findings and built on them.  However there is no discretion under
    the Rules and it has never been the appellant's case that she satisfied
    the rules. The Devaseelan point does not arise even if it has merit and
    we find it does not. No version of events would permit the appeal to be
    allowed under the rules or support findings more favourable than  those
    that have been made.

38. Neither is there any criticism of the decision to  dismiss  the  appeal
    with reference to Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.
     There is no case made out under the Rules and no reason  to  allow  it
    outside the rules.

39. Putting all these things together we dismiss the appeal.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 20 July 2015                   |

