
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23407/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31 March 2014                              |On 4 April 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN



                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MUDASAR RAUF

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Nasim, Solicitor of Lee Valley Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge NNM Paul, who sitting at Taylor  House  on  5
    December 2012 and in  a  subsequent  determination  promulgated  on  10
    December 2012, allowed the appeal of the Respondent (hereinafter called
    the Claimant) a citizen of Pakistan born on 24 July 1984,  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State refusing his application  for  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work)  Migrant.
    The Secretary of State's  application  for  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Allen who  considered  the  grounds  to
    have "clearly arguable merit."

2.   It would be as well to set out below the Secretary of State's grounds:

         "Ground 1:  Material Misdirection of Law - Fixed Historic Timeline


         The Judge has misunderstood the reasoning in AQ  (Pakistan)  [2011]
         EWCA Civ 833.  AQ continues  to  distinguish  between  Rules  which
         require a fixed historic timeline and those  that  do  not  have  a
         fixed  historic  timeline.   Applications  under  a  Rule  with  an
         historic timeline must meet the requirements of the  Rules  at  the
         relevant timeline 'cut-off' point, usually the date of application.
          Applications without such a timeline must meet the  Rules  at  the
         date of decision.


         Immigration Rule 245FE and Appendix A Table 10 paragraph 66  to  72
         do provide a fixed historic timeline.  For 15  points,  Appendix  A
         Table 10 does employ a fixed timeline for  the  application  to  be
         made within twelve months of obtaining the award.  This appears  in
         the context of the rest of  Table  10  to  limit  consideration  to
         degrees obtained before the application was made.


         Ground  Two:   Material  Misdirection  of  law  and/or  failure  to
         adequately reason a departure from S85A


         The Judge erred in taking  into  account  evidence  which  was  not
         submitted  in  support  of,  or  at  the  time  of  making,  a  PBS
         application.  The Tribunal is prevented  from  doing  this  by  the
         Nationality, Asylum Immigration Act 2002 S85A.


         The  Secretary  of  State  seeks  the  setting  aside  of  the  FTT
         determination and a  further  decision  on  the  appeal  under  the
         correct legal principles."

3.   In his determination the First-tier Judge noted that the  Claimant  had
    claimed 15 points in relation to the date  of  obtaining  the  eligible
    award under Appendix A of the Rules and that the Secretary of State was
    not satisfied that the Claimant had provided the  specified  documents.
    As noted by the Judge at paragraphs 2 and 3 of his determination:

         "2.  The reason for this was that the (Claimant) had claimed points
             on  the  basis  that  he  had  been   awarded   his   eligible
             qualification no more than 12 months before the  date  of  the
             application.  The  application  was  made  on  5  April  2012.
             However, the award relied upon had been granted on 25 May 2012
             and therefore postdated the date of the application.


         3.   It was said, following the case of NO (Post-Study  Work-Award)
             needed by date of application) Nigeria  that  the  Immigration
             Rules required that the date of award must  be  within  twelve
             months directly prior to the date of application."

4.    The  Judge  noted  at  paragraph  4  of  his  determination,that   the
    Claimant's representative relied on the judgment in AQ in particular at
    paragraph 36 who had submitted that:

         "It was plain, following the concession made by  the  Secretary  of
         State, that the relevant date for the assessment of evidence is the
         date of the SSHD's decision and not (as  may  appear  from  earlier
         Tribunal decisions) the date of the application.  It followed  from
         that  that  the  Court  was  satisfied  that  the  question  to  be
         considered was whether the points had been accumulated at the  time
         of the SSHD's decision."

5.   The Judge continued:

         "This would, of course, include the requirement that  the  relevant
         degree  had  been  awarded.   The  application  was   therefore   a
         continuing application up and until the  stated  decision  and  the
         points to be accumulated were therefore to be assessed at the  date
         of the decision."

6.   The Judge thus concluded at paragraph 5 as follows:

         "It is plain, from the decision in AQ, that the relevant date to be
         considered is the date of the decision, and it is plain  then  that
         the award had been made within twelve months of that decision.   It
         follows, therefore, that the appeal must be allowed."


7.   Thus the appeal came before me on 31 March 2014  where  my  first  task
    was to  decide  whether  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Judge
    disclosed an error or errors on  a  point  of  law  such  as  may  have
    materially affected the outcome of the appeal.

8.   At the outset of the hearing I received  from  Mr  Melvin  his  written
    submissions and given that he relied on the grounds of application  and
    those submissions in support of his appeal, it would be as  well  if  I
    set them out below:

         "Mr Rauf was granted leave to enter as a Tier 4 (General  Student),
         the UK on 15 January 2011.  On 5 April 2012  Mr  Rauf  applied  for
         further leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)  (PSW)
         Migrant.  This application was refused on  17  September  2012  the
         Respondent not being satisfied that Mr Rauf met the requirements of
         the Immigration Rules  245FD(c)  and  (d)  as  his  eligible  award
         (Masters in Business Administration) was made on 25 May  2012  some
         eight weeks after his  application,  thus  the  application  failed
         under  Appendix  A:  Attributes,  where  the  Rule   requires   the
         (educational) award to be made within twelve months directly  prior
         to application (to be awarded 15 points).


         The Appellant appealed against this decision  and  his  appeal  was
         heard on 5 December 2012  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Paul  at
         Taylor House, Mr Rauf being represented  at  that  hearing.   In  a
         determination promulgated on 10 December 2012, Judge  Paul  allowed
         the Appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.  The Respondent
         made an application for permission to appeal the decision which was
         refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chambers on  4  January  2013.
         The Respondent renewed his application to the Upper Tribunal on  21
         January 2014 and was granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Allen  (to
         extended time given the circumstances) on 20 February 2014.

         Reliance will be placed on the application for permission to appeal
    the decision.

         In addition to those grounds, reliance will also be placed  on  the
         Court of Appeal decision in Raju and Others  EWCA  Civ  754  [2013]
         where the Court overturned the decision in Khatel and  Others  UKUT
         44 IAC [2013].  As this Appellant's situation is  squarely  on  all
         fours with the decision in Raju, it  is  submitted  that  the  FTT,
         where Khatel was relied upon materially misdirected  themselves  in
         law.  Reliance is also placed on  the  two  recent  Upper  Tribunal
         decisions in Nassim and Others (Raju)  UKUT  610  UKUT  [2013]  and
         Nassim and  Others  (Article  8)  UKUT  00025  [2014]  where  after
         considering the Supreme Court decision in Patel and Others UKSC  72
         [2013] held:


             'The judgments of the Supreme Court  in  Patel  and  Others  v
             Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2013]  UKSC  72
             served to re-focus attention on  the  nature  and  purpose  of
             Article 8 of the ECHR and, in particular,  to  recognise  that
             Article's limited utility in private life cases that  are  far
             removed from the  protection  of  an  individual's  moral  and
             physical integrity.


             A person's human rights are not  enhanced  by  not  committing
             criminal offences or not relying on public  funds.   The  only
             significance of such matters in cases concerning  proposed  or
             hypothetical removal from the United Kingdom  is  to  preclude
             the Secretary of State from pointing to  any  public  interest
             justifying removal, over and above  the  basic  importance  of
             maintaining  a  firm  and  coherent  system   of   immigration
             control.'

         If the Upper Tribunal are to find an error of law in  the  decision
         of the FTT it will be submitted  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  should
         proceed to a continuance hearing and determine the  appeal.   Given
         that there have been no further submission  documents/evidence  the
         Upper Tribunal is invited to consider the evidence before the First-
         tier Tribunal and find that the Immigration Rules cannot be met and
         the limited time spent by the Appellant in the UK studying/pursuing
         the appeal, does not reveal circumstances that engage Article 8(1).
          If the Tribunal is to find that private life is engaged it will be
         submitted that the decision is proportionate in the maintenance  of
         a firm/fair system of immigration control.

         The Upper Tribunal is invited to dismiss the appeal."

9.   As Ms Nasim most helpfully and realistically acknowledged before me:

         "The authorities are before you and I would ask you  to  deal  with
         the appeal as submitted by Mr Melvin.  My hands are tied."

10.  Ms Nasim did however explain to me that  on  the  instructions  of  her
    client the Claimant, she  wished  to  draw  to  the  attention  of  the
    Tribunal the delay by the  Secretary  of  State  in  dealing  with  the
    Claimant's application.  Whilst she acknowledged that there had been no
    cross-appeal in terms of Article 8, she was instructed to  submit  that
    the effect of the dismissal  of  the  Claimant's  appeal  would  be  to
    interrupt his educational progress.  She however also acknowledged that
    as pointed out by Mr Melvin in his  written  submissions,  the  Supreme
    Court in Patel and Others had made it unequivocally clear at  paragraph
    57 of their judgment that:

         "57. It is important to remember that Article 8 is  not  a  general
             dispensing  power.   It  is  to  be  distinguished  from   the
             Secretary of State's  discretion  to  allow  leave  to  remain
             outside the Rules, which may be  unrelated  to  any  protected
             human right.  The merits of a decision not to depart from  the
             Rules are not reviewable on appeal: Section 86(6).


              One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's  call  in  Pankina's  case
             [2011] QB 376 for 'common sense' in  the  application  of  the
             Rules to graduates who have been studying in the UK  for  some
             years: see para 46 above.  However such considerations do  not
             by themselves provide grounds of appeal under Article 8, which
             is concerned with private or family  life,  not  education  as
             such.  The opportunity for a promising student to complete his
             course in this country, however desirable in general terms, is
             not in itself a right protected under Article  8."   (Emphasis
             added).


11.  In Nassim and Others [2013] UKUT 00610 (IAC) it was  held  inter  alia,
    that the  date  of  'obtaining  the  relevant  qualification'  for  the
    purposes of Table 10 Appendix A to the Immigration Rules  as  in  force
    immediately before 6 April 2012 was the date on which the university or
    other  institution  responsible  for  conferring  the  award   actually
    conferred that award.

12.  In the present case the Secretary of State in her decision pointed  out
    that under paragraph 245FD, the date of the award had to be within  the
    twelve months directly  prior  to  the  date  of  application  and  the
    Claimant's date of award was after this date.

13.  Indeed as Mr Melvin rightly pointed out in his oral submissions  before
    me, the Claimant's application was made on 6  April  2012,  before  the
    closure of the Tier 1 window and the Secretary of State's decision  was
    not made until 15 December 2012.  The Claimant had to be awarded points
    as at the date of application.  There was in fact  an  eight  week  gap
    between the date of  application  and  the  Claimant's  MBA  award  and
    therefore in light of the regulations,  the  Claimant's  appeal  should
    have been seen to be doomed to fail.

14.   At  the  date  of   the   Claimant's   application   Table   A   under
    "Attributes"was clear that the Claimant had  to  make  the  application
    "within twelve months of obtaining the relevant qualification ..."   As
    held by the Supreme Court in Mahad UKSC 16 [2009] the Rules had  to  be
    interpreted on their plain meaning and in this case the requirement  of
    the relevant Rule simply could not have been clearer.

15.  Further and as was held in Raju [2013] EWCA Civ 754, the language  used
    in the fourth section of the  table,  that  set  out  the  "Attributes"
    required to qualify under the Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Scheme had to be
    construed in the context of the Table as a whole and the function  that
    it served in  the  administration  of  immigration  policy  (see  again
    Mahad).  Further, there was no room in the points-based  system  for  a
    near miss.  Viewed as a whole, qualification under  Table  10  required
    strict compliance.

16.  I find that it is therefore clear that as submitted  by  the  Secretary
    of State and for the above reasons, the First-tier  Judge  clearly  and
    materially erred in law such that his decision must be set aside.

Conclusions

17.  The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

18.  I set aside the decision.

19.  For the reasons to which I have above referred, I re-make the  decision
    in the appeal by dismissing it.


Signed                                  Date 2 April 2014



Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein

