
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/23677/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 25 November 2015                  |On 3 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                            VIJITHA RANMAL ALLES
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision dated 13  May
    2014 to refuse to vary and extend leave to remain to  settlement  as  a
    spouse and to curtail his existing leave to remain.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard considered the appeal on  the  papers
    without an  oral  hearing.  He  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 05 December 2014. The judge noted that  the  application
    was refused under paragraphs 194(vii) and 322(1C)  of  the  immigration
    rules relating to general grounds for refusal.  He  recorded  that  the
    respondent relied the fact that the  appellant  was  cautioned  by  the
    Metropolitan Police on 31 January 2014 for  a  domestic  incident.  The
    judge set out the wording to the general grounds for refusal  contained
    in paragraph 322(1C)(iv) of the immigration rules:

         "322(1C) where the person is seeking indefinite leave to  enter  or
         remain:

               i) they have been convicted of an offence for which they have
                  been sentenced to imprisonment for at least 4 years; or

              ii) (ii) they have been convicted of an offence for which they
                  have been sentenced to imprisonment for at least 12 months
                  but less than 4 years, unless a period  of  15  years  has
                  passed since the end of the sentence; or

             iii) they have been convicted of an offence for which they have
                  been sentenced to imprisonment for less  than  12  months,
                  unless a period of 7 years has passed since the end of the
                  sentence; or

              iv) they have, within the 24 months prior to the date on which
                  the application is decided, been convicted of or  admitted
                  an offence for which they have  received  a  non-custodial
                  sentence or other out of court disposal that  is  recorded
                  on their criminal record."

3.    The judge concluded that a caution involved admission  of  an  offence
    but was not a sentence. The question he had to determine was whether it
    was an out of court disposal that is recorded on a criminal record.  He
    found that the burden was on the respondent to show  that  the  caution
    forms part of the appellant's criminal record and  concluded  that  she
    had failed to discharge the evidential  burden  because  there  was  no
    evidence to show that the  appellant  had  a  criminal  record.  Having
    concluded that there was insufficient evidence to justify refusal under
    paragraph 322(1C) the judge went on to consider whether  the  appellant
    met the requirements for further leave to remain under  paragraph  194.
    He concluded that,  in  the  absence  of  evidence  to  show  that  the
    appellant's previous grant of entry clearance was as the  spouse  of  a
    work permit holder, the appellant did not  meet  the  requirements  for
    further leave to remain under paragraph 194(vi), or in the  alternative
    now that his wife had  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain,  under  paragraph
    196D(v).

4.    The appellant seeks to challenge the First-tier Tribunal  decision  on
    the following grounds.

    (i)    Having found in  the  appellant's  favour  in  relation  to  the
         general grounds for  refusal  issue  under  paragraph  322(1C)  and
         194(vii) the First-tier Tribunal should have allowed the appeal.

    (ii)   The First-tier Tribunal erred in  dismissing  the  appeal  under
         paragraphs that were not relied  upon  by  the  respondent  in  the
         reasons for refusal decision and on the ground that  there  was  an
         absence of evidence  in  relation  to  a  factual  issue  that  was
         accepted by the respondent (the fact that he entered the UK  on  10
         March 2008 with entry clearance as the dependent spouse of  a  work
         permit holder).

    (iii)  The First-tier Tribunal erred in  failing  to  consider  whether
         removal in consequence of the  decision  would  be  unlawful  under
         section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 as being  incompatible  with
         the appellant's right  to  family  life  under  Article  8  of  the
         European Convention.

5.    The respondent's response under rule 24 The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008  states:  "The  respondent  does  not  oppose  the
    appellant's application  for  permission  to  appeal  and  invites  the
    Tribunal to determine  the  appeal  with  a  fresh  oral  (continuance)
    hearing)."

Decision and reasons

6.    After a discussion with both parties at the hearing  it  was  apparent
    that the respondent did not oppose the appellant's grounds of appeal. I
    am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge ("the judge") erred  in
    seeking to go beyond the limited reasons for refusal in  this  case  by
    determining the appeal with reference to paragraphs 194 and 196 of  the
    immigration rules without giving notice  to  either  party.  For  these
    reasons I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision  involved  the
    making of a material error of law and I set aside the decision.

7.    The respondent did not seek to cross-appeal the First-tier  Tribunal's
    findings relating to the general grounds for  refusal  under  paragraph
    322(1C)(iv), which are sustainable and were open to the  judge  on  the
    evidence. This was the only reason given by the respondent for refusing
    the application for leave to remain. As such I  find  that  the  appeal
    should be allowed.

8.    I am told that the delay caused by the refusal of the application  and
    the subsequent  successful  appeal  has  caused  uncertainty  and  some
    difficulties for the appellant in his  professional  life.  As  such  I
    would urge the respondent to action the decision as soon as possible.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

I re-make the decision and ALLOW the appeal


Signed       [pic]     Date 26 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
