
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-LR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23196/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th November 2016                |On 4th January 2017                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                        yalu rosse marie umaday diaz
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Subramanian
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge R Sullivan, promulgated on 22nd June 2016 following a hearing  at
    Taylor House on 10th  June  2016.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, thereupon the Appellant  applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a woman born on 29th April 1958 and is  a  citizen  of
    Bolivia.  She appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 4th
    June 2015, refusing her application to remain in the UK on human rights
    grounds.  The basis of the decision is that the Appellant did not  have
    ten years' continuous lawful residence in the UK because she had in the
    past made applications for leave to remain which were more than 28 days
    out of time.  She had not passed the "Life in the UK" test.   Moreover,
    there were no  very  significant  obstacles  to  her  reintegration  in
    Bolivia.  There were no circumstances that would justify the  grant  of
    leave outside the Immigration Rules.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge found that the Appellant, had  arrived  in  the  UK  on  28th
    December 2000, did not have ten years' continuous lawful residence  for
    the following two reasons.  First, on  30th  April  2003  she  made  an
    application for leave to remain in the UK which  was  30  days  out  of
    time.  This meant that her leave was not extended by the  operation  of
    statute.  She then made two further applications which resulted in  the
    grant of leave to her on 21st June 2013.  This meant, however, that she
    was without leave for approximately  two  months  and  22  days.   This
    exceeded the period of overstay discounted by  paragraph  276B(iii)  of
    the Rules.  Second, on 6th November 2014, the  appellant's  application
    for leave to remain in the UK was made approximately three years  seven
    months and six days out of time.  This meant that  her  last  leave  to
    remain was not extended by statute.  She was without leave  in  the  UK
    and has been, since 31st March 2011.

The Hearing

 4. At the hearing before me on 24th November 2016, Mr  Subramanian  relied
    on the Grounds of Appeal  before  Judge  Sullivan  and  the  permission
    grounds for this Tribunal.  He submitted that  the  refusal  letter  is
    dated 4th June 2015, and although at the bottom of page 3 (of 8) it  is
    said that, "consideration has been  given  to  your  application  ...,"
    there is only one reference to the  2003  decision.   Even  though  the
    Appellant did not satisfy the "Life in the UK" test there was a failure
    by the Secretary of State to exercise a discretion.  The judge did  not
    express an opinion on the failure by the Secretary of State to  do  so.
    On the day  of  the  hearing  before  Judge  Sullivan,  the  Respondent
    authority  was  unrepresented.   However,  at  paragraph  21   of   the
    determination, the judge rightly considered the Home Office guidance of
    8th May 2015.  At page 22 of  this  guidance  it  is  made  clear  that
    periods without leave may be disregarded.  However, the judge  did  not
    decide whether the discretion was  exercised  rightly  or  wrongly  and
    should have done so.

 5. Second, Mr Sullivan submitted that once it is recognized that in  March
    2011 the Appellant had accumulated ten years of lawful leave, then page
    11 of the guidance comes into effect which states  that  once  the  ten
    years' continuous lawful residence has been built up then there  is  no
    limit afterwards on when a person can apply  for  further  leave.   The
    judge failed to appreciate the fact that the Appellant was ill and that
    was the reason  even  though  she  had  accrued  ten  years  of  lawful
    residence, for her failure to take further steps.  Indeed, at paragraph
    30 of the determination, the judge accepts that she is not an expert to
    assess medical evidence, and yet goes on at paragraph  33  to  conclude
    that the Appellant's condition was not serious.  Yet, there was  enough
    medical evidence, even in  the  Respondent's  bundle,  to  confirm  the
    Appellant's illness from 2011 to 2014.  These matters all went  to  the
    Appellant's favour.

 6. For his part, Mr Tufan submitted that there were a  bundle  of  out  of
    time applications made by the Appellant (see  page  2  of  the  refusal
    letter).  On 30th April the Appellant's application for leave to remain
    was 30 days out of time.  On 6th November  2014,  her  application  was
    over three years out of time.  Second, that left the matter of  whether
    discretion should be exercised, but there has to be  "serious  illness"
    and the threshold described for this is defined as being  "high".   The
    illness really has to be exceptional and even  though  the  Appellant's
    mother died that did not bring it within that definition.  Third,  even
    if everything was in perfect  order,  the  Appellant  still  would  not
    succeed because she had not satisfied the "Life in the UK" test, and it
    had still not been completed.  Any long term  illness  must  "seriously
    restrict" the ability to comply  with  the  Rules.   Finally,  as  with
    Article 8, any suggestion that the  judge  had  failed  to  follow  the
    Razgar test is now superseded by the fact that the position in Singh  &
    Khalid and in  SS  (Congo)  now  governs  so  that  there  have  to  be
    "compelling circumstances" before one can go  outside  the  Rules,  and
    there is nothing exceptional here.

 7. In reply, Mr Subramanian submitted that at page 8 of the guidance it is
    made clear that if the Appellant satisfies paragraph 276B(i), (ii)  and
    (v), then a further extension of leave must be granted on the basis  of
    long residence.  Second, as far as Article 8 is  concerned,  the  judge
    could not possibly have overlooked the fact that the Appellant had been
    in the UK for eleven years of lawful stay during  which  time  she  had
    built up a private life which must be taken into account.   Third,  the
    guidance makes it clear  that  if  the  Appellant  does  not  have  any
    criminal convictions then there is no public interest in requiring  her
    to return.  He asked me to make a finding on an error of law and  remit
    this matter back to the First-tier Tribunal again.

 8. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error of law such that I should set aside  the
    decision (see Section 12(1) of TCA 2007).  My reasons are  as  follows.
    First, it is simply not true that the judge did not have regard to  the
    exercise of discretion, or otherwise, by the  Respondent  Secretary  of
    State.   The  judge  expressly  refers  to  the  Home  Office  guidance
    published on 8th May 2015 (see paragraph 21).   Consideration  is  then
    given to the fact that the guidance refers  to  short  gaps  in  lawful
    residence of no more than 28 days, and it is observed  that  "this  was
    not such a case", before reference is  made  "to  the  availability  of
    discretion where there are exceptional reasons to explain why a  single
    application was more than 28 days out of time".

 9. The judge then goes on to  look  at  various  examples  of  exceptional
    reasons, such as a postal  strike,  hospitalisation  or  administrative
    error by the Home Office. What is important is the observation  by  the
    judge that, "there is nothing in the application form or  its  covering
    letter to suggest  that  when  making  her  application  the  Appellant
    offered any explanation for the  late  submission  of  the  April  2003
    application".

10. Indeed, there appeared to have been an attempt  by  those  representing
    the Appellant to gloss over matters that were clearly relevant  to  the
    late application in that the judge  notes  how  it  is  that,  "on  the
    contrary in the covering letter her  solicitors  represented  that  the
    Appellant 'entered on 28th December 2000 and has been legal without any
    break until 31st March 2011'" (paragraph 23).

11. Rather than not give any consideration,  the  judge  gave  the  fullest
    consideration to the  issue  of  the  exercise  of  discretion  by  the
    Respondent Secretary of State and cannot be faulted in her approach  to
    this matter.

12. Second, the Appellant has not satisfied  the  "Life  in  the  UK"  test
    requirement, and as Mr Tufan pointed out, if one has regard to page  10
    of 48 of the Home Office "knowledge of language and  life  in  the  UK"
    document it is made clear here that the Appellant's condition  must  be
    such as to amount to "long term illness  or  disability  that  severely
    restricts their ability to learn English or to prepare for life in  the
    UK test".  The judge dealt with this  matter  appropriately  given  the
    proper consideration towards all the relevant matters and there  is  no
    error of law in this respect either.

Notice of Decision

13. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    4th January 2017

