

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/23007/2014
                                                               IA/21313/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court    |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 6 January 2015                    |On 21 January 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                                 Lena opoku
                                ayeyie yeboah
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Mahmood, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co,
Harrow
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first appellant is the mother of the second  appellant.   Both  are
    citizens of Ghana.  The first appellant was born on 21 January 1968 and
    the second on 16 October 2007.

 2. The appellants appeal against the determination of First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  A  M  Baker  that  was  promulgated  on  14  August  2014.   The
    appellants'  had  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
    immigration decisions of 25 April 2014  to  remove  the  appellants  to
    Ghana after refusal of their human  rights  claims  and  it  was  those
    appeals that Judge Baker dismissed.

 3. The appellants appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the  grounds  that  the
    proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal were  flawed.   As  recorded  at
    paragraph 2 of the  determination,  Judge  Baker  was  aware  that  the
    appellant's legal representative had fallen ill on the day  of  hearing
    and was unable to represent.  Although the judge records that the first
    appellant was willing to proceed, it transpires that she thought  there
    was no option.  This is confirmed in her  witness  statement  submitted
    with the application for permission to appeal.

 4. Mr Mills informed me that the Secretary of State no longer opposed  the
    appeals despite what had been submitted in the  rule  24  notice  of  3
    October 2014.  This change in position arose  in  light  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal's reported case Nwaigwe (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT
    00418 (IAC).  It was accepted that the appellants would not  have  been
    in a position to understand  the  options  available  to  them  in  the
    absence of their legal representative.

 5. Mr Mills invited me to allow the appeals, to set  aside  Judge  Baker's
    determination and remit the appeals to be heard afresh  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  Mr Mahmood agreed.  As these suggestions are compatible
    with legal and procedural guidance, I concur  and  make  the  necessary
    decisions accordingly.



Decision and directions

The appellants' appeals to  the  Upper  Tribunal  are  allowed  because  the
determination of Judge Baker contains an error on a point of law.

The determination is set aside and nothing from it is preserved.

The appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  afresh  by
any judge other than Judge A M Baker.

Further directions may be set by the First-tier Tribunal.







                               Signed   Date 19.01.2015


                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
