

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Numbers: IA/23180/2014
                                                               IA/23186/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 4th March 2015                      |      On 9th March 2015             |
|                                       |                                    |




                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HARRIES

                                   Between

                            MR RICHARD APPIA-KUBI
                             MR AGYEMANG YEBOAH
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants: In person
For the Respondent: Ms E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. The first appellant was born on 22nd December 1984 and is  the  brother
     of the second appellant, born on 13th August 1990.  They are  nationals
     of Ghana.   They applied under the Immigration EEA Regulations 2006 for
     a residence card as confirmation of a right to  reside  in  the  United
     Kingdom as the family  member  of  their  mother,  a  German  national,
     exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom. The respondent  refused
     their  applications  on  9th  May  2014.  They  appealed  against   the
     respondent's decision at a hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge E M
     M Smith (the Judge) at Nottingham on 29th October 2014.


  2. The Judge dismissed the  appeals  under  the  EEA  Regulations  and  at
     paragraph 31 of his determination gave his reasons as follows  for  not
     considering any Article 8 issues:


         31. The grounds of appeal do not raise any article 8 issues. In  AS
         and SS (India) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 229 the Court of Appeal  held
         that the Judge had to address the case that was in  fact  presented
         to him.  In MB (Article 8 - near miss)  Pakistan  [2010]  UKUT  282
         (IAC) Article 8 was not mentioned in the Notice of Appeal or in the
         grounds, nor was it raised in a  section  120  notice.   Sedley  LJ
         indicated that, as the issue was not raised before  the  Judge,  he
         could not be said to have made an error of law.


  3. The appellants were granted permission to appeal against  the  decision
     of the Judge by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kamara on 2nd  February  2015
     for the following reasons:


         The  lengthy  handwritten   grounds   seeking   permission   argue,
         essentially, that the judge failed to apply the law, failed to take
         relevant evidence  into  consideration  and  reached  a  conclusion
         against the weight of the evidence.  Otherwise, the grounds restate
         the fact of the case.  As the appellants appear to be unrepresented
         I have read the decision  carefully  to  see  if  it  contains  any
         obvious errors of law.


         In an otherwise well  reasoned  determination  the  judge  arguably
         erred in law in concluding that the grounds of appeal did not raise
         Article 8 issues, given the  contents  of  the  grounds  of  appeal
         received by the IAC on 13th August 2014  which  made  a  number  of
         references to Article 8  jurisprudence.  Given  the  judge's  clear
         findings on the credibility of the appellants  and  their  witness,
         permission is refused in relation to the challenge to  the  judge's
         finding that the appellants were not dependent upon the sponsor  or
         vice versa.


  4. The matter accordingly came before me to determine whether  the  making
     of the Judge's decision involved the making of an error on a  point  of
     law. The appellants appeared before me without representation and  made
     oral submissions. They relied on their Upper Tribunal grounds of appeal
     citing the case of Marckx v Belgium - 6833/74 [1979] ECHR  2  (13  June
     1979) holding that "respect for family life" guaranteed  by  Article  8
     paragraph 1 (art. 8-1) of the Convention is not limited to  a  duty  on
     the part of the State to abstain  from  certain  interferences  by  the
     public  authorities  which  might  constitute  an   obstacle   to   the
     development of what is considered to belong to "family life";  it  also
     implies that the State has an obligation to prescribe in  its  domestic
     legal system rules which allow those concerned to lead a normal  family
     life.


  5. The appellants assert that the Judge erred in law by failing  to  apply
     these principles to their case; they state that they have clearly  made
     out family life between themselves and their mother, the sponsor in the
     proceedings.  They rely upon R (Mahmood) v SSHD [2001] 1  WLR  840  and
     state that the issue is whether there are "insurmountable obstacles" to
     family life continuing outside the United Kingdom. The appellants state
     that there are such obstacles and rely on the disability of  the  first
     appellant who has a congenital condition affecting  the  use  his  left
     arm; the first appellant demonstrated this to me  at  the  hearing  and
     said that his condition has worsened from over-reliance  on  his  right
     arm. The appellants assert that the Judge failed to mention this factor
     or its impact on Article 8  and  he  failed  to  pursue  to  a  logical
     conclusion his consideration of the emotional issues in the case.


  6.  In  their  grounds  of  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
     appellants referred to the cases set out above as  well  as  to  Sen  v
     Netherlands (2001) 36 EHRR 93 dealing with  the  difficulty  of  family
     life being developed  in  the  country  of  return;  they  state  their
     situation is similar and that they have been in a  stable  relationship
     with their mother since they joined her in the United Kingdom and  they
     cannot now return to Ghana. The appellants state that their mother is a
     single parent in need of their support. They cite further case  law  in
     additional First-tier grounds of appeal, including the case  of  Beoku-
     Betts.  Their submissions in their grounds  of  appeal  revolve  around
     family life between parents and children.

  7. In their oral submissions to me the appellants addressed the merits  of
     their Article 8 case on the  basis  of  their  emotional  and  physical
     dependency upon their mother and hers upon them. They claim that it  is
     impossible to resume their lives in Ghana where there  is  nothing  for
     them. They stated respectively that a decision  to  return  them  there
     would cause them to die or to commit suicide.  With  every  respect  to
     the  appellants  and  making  every  allowance  for   their   lack   of
     representation I find that their submissions challenging  the  decision
     of the Judge go considerably beyond the issue of an error  of  law  and
     amount to a continuing disagreement with his factual  findings.  Taking
     account of all the submissions, if the Judge has erred  by  failing  to
     consider Article 8 issues, or case law referred to in  the  grounds  of
     appeal, I find that  such  an  error  was  not  material  for  all  the
     following reasons.


  8. The appellants are now 30 and 24 years of age  respectively.   Much  of
     the case law on which they rely does not reflect their situation.  Much
     of it considers family life between parents and minor children but  the
     appellants are clearly not minors. The case of Sen on which  they  rely
     considered the position of children who had spent their entire life  in
     the Netherlands, which is far from the position of these appellants  in
     relation to the United Kingdom. The findings of the Judge  in  my  view
     show that  any consideration he might  have  undertaken  of  Article  8
     family life under the ECHR would not have shown family life  to  exist.
     He made clear findings about the relationships between  the  appellants
     and  their  mother  in  relation  to  which  permission  to  appeal  is
     explicitly refused. Those findings are in my view sound and I  have  no
     reason to go behind them in considering the matters before me.


  9. The Judge took into account that the appellants' mother  left  them  in
     Ghana shortly after the birth of the second appellant,  in  1990,  when
     she travelled to Germany where it took her  several  years  to  achieve
     refugee status. Neither appellant saw her thereafter  until  2005  when
     they lived with her in the United  Kingdom.   Each  of  the  appellants
     subsequently attended universities in different  parts  of  the  United
     Kingdom; one works and the other claims disability allowance. The Judge
     found  each  appellant  to  be  an  "unhelpful  historian";  they  gave
     differing accounts of key dates in their claim.


 10. The Judge in my view took full account of the disability of  the  first
     appellant in paragraph 27 of the determination where he found  that  he
     had coped remarkably well with it.  The Judge found that this appellant
     had no more of a relationship with his mother than that to be  expected
     between an adult child and parent.  He took account  of  the  voluntary
     years of separation between the family members and  he  fully  directed
     himself in law about the meaning of dependency for the purposes of  the
     issues before him under the EEA Regulations.


 11. Having considered  all  the  evidence  before  him  the  Judge  clearly
     concluded as follows in paragraph 30 of his determination:


         30. I am satisfied that neither appellant has established that they
         are dependent upon the sponsor either financially,  physically,  or
         emotionally.  I do not accept from the evidence before me that  the
         sponsor is dependent upon the  appellants  other  than  the  normal
         emotional dependence a mother has for her child.


 12. I find that the  appellants'  challenge  to  the  Judge's  decision  in
     relation to Article 8 depends entirely on  their  continuing  claim  to
     have  family  life  with  their   mother   in   the   United   Kingdom,
     notwithstanding their adult ages.  The findings of the Judge are to the
     contrary and show that an explicit consideration of Article  8  by  him
     could not have led to a finding that family life exists.  I  find  that
     the appeal could not have succeeded under Article 8 on the basis of the
     evidence before the Judge so that any failure by him to undertake  such
     a consideration was not material to the outcome of the appeal.


 13. There is no medical evidence to support any health aspect of the appeal
     under Article 8 and it was not apparently argued on such grounds before
     the Judge. My finding that  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  is
     endorsed by case law submitted and relied upon before me by  Ms  Savage
     on behalf of the respondent.  She  relies  on  the  case  of  Sarkar  v
     Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  195  (26
     February 2014), at paragraph 13 in particular as follows:


         13 ... an appellant before the First-tier Tribunal is entitled  to
         abandon any grounds of appeal that he does not wish to pursue.  If
         he does abandon  a  ground  of  appeal,  the  tribunal  cannot  be
         criticised for failing to deal with it. In  this  case  the  third
         appellant's argument that the Secretary of  State  had  failed  to
         consider his welfare as required by section 55 of the 2009 Act was
         not pursued and it was not subsequently argued that  the  tribunal
         should have dealt with it. Presumably it was accepted that it  had
         been abandoned. The article 8 claim was handled in the  same  way.
         No evidence or argument was placed before the First-tier  Tribunal
         in support of it and in my view the tribunal was entitled to treat
         it as having been abandoned, although it did not formally  do  so.
         Even if that were not the case, however, there was  no  evidential
         basis on which the First-tier Tribunal could have found that  that
         ground of appeal had been made out. It follows that if there  were
         an error of law in failing formally to dispose of it, it  was  not
         material and the Upper Tribunal was right to refuse permission  to
         appeal in respect of it.


 14. I find the case of Sarkar to be  of  direct  relevance  in  this  case.
     Taking account of the Judge's findings, there was no  evidential  basis
     on which the First-tier Tribunal could have found an Article  8  ground
     of appeal to be made out. It follows that if there was an error of  law
     in failing formally to dispose of it, it was not material. I find  that
     making of the Judge's decision did not involve the making of a material
     error on a point of law and it follows that  his  decision  stands  and
     this appeal in the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


 15. I find that making of the Judge's decision did not involve  the  making
     of a material error on a point of law. It follows that decision of  the
     First-tier Tribunal stands and this appeal in  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
     dismissed.

Anonymity


    The position remains that the First-tier  Tribunal  made  no  anonymity
    order.

Signed: J Harries


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date: 7th March 2015


Fee Award


    The position remains that there is no fee award.

Signed: J Harries


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date: 7th March 2015





