
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/23568/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 January 2016                   |On 3 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                              FAYCAL BENOTMANE
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kerr of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. The Respondent refused the Appellant's  application  for  leave  to
         remain on the basis  of  his  private  and  family  life,  and  the
         decision requiring him to leave the United Kingdom, on 16 May 2014.
         His appeal against the refusal of that was dismissed by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Malik ("the Judge") following a hearing  on  1  July
         2015.

The grant of permission

      2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle granted permission  to  appeal  (12
         November 2015) on the grounds that it is arguable that the Judge;

          1) misdirected himself in law by  referring  to  the  Immigration
             (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 where they were  not
             relied on,

          2)  made  no  specific  reference  to  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
             Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules HC395 ("the rules"),

          3) made no findings as to the length of his residency, and

          4) made no findings as to whether there would be very significant
             obstacles to his re-integration into Algeria.

Appellant's position

      3. Mr Kerr submitted in relation to [2 (1)] that by referring  to  the
         wrong regulations, this indicated a less than forensic approach  to
         the case even though no further reference to them was made  in  the
         Judge's  analysis  of  the  evidence   within   his   reasons   and
         deliberations. The Judge should have  considered  paragraph  276ADE
         rather than just by reference to the rules introduced in July  2012
         at [3] of the determination. The lack of findings referred to in [2
         (3)  and  (4)]  above  should  have  been  considered  within   the
         assessment of paragraph 276AED.

Respondent's position

      4. The Judge mentioned but did not apply the  wrong  regulations.  The
         appeal could not have  succeeded  under  paragraph  276ADE  as  the
         appellant only came here in 2003 when he  was  33  years  old.  The
         findings were adequate.

The Judge's findings

      5. In the determination the Judge said;

         "[1]      The  Appellant  ...  appeals  against  the  decision  ...
         refusing him leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  the
         Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

         [2]      I have read this refusal notice carefully and  have  taken
         into account its text  in  assessing  this  case,  paying  specific
         attention to the justifications advanced for the negative  decision
         appealed against.

         [3]      I put on record that in considering  the  appeal  I  shall
         bear in mind the legal provisions of  relevant  paragraphs  of  the
         Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended).
         They are detailed  but  I  have  borne  every  provision  of  these
         paragraphs in  mind  meticulously  during  the  assessment  of  the
         Appellant's case. I am also taking into account the new changes  in
         the Rules brought into  force  on  9  July  2012  which  materially
         changed the application of Article 8 of the ECHR. The provisions of
         the Immigration Act 2014 are also taken into account.

         ...

         [6]      To make this Determination comprehensive, I have carefully
         read all of the documents in the bundle including the Statement  of
         the Appellant and the representations from his friends etc. I  also
         took into account the oral  evidence  of  the  Appellant  who  gave
         evidence with the help of his friend, Mr Moudjeb. However,  bearing
         in mind the dictum of ex parte Gondolia [1991]  Imm  A.R.  519  ...
         which advises junior judges not to give reasons for  every  finding
         of fact and waste paper in detailing obvious  reasons,  it  is  the
         story told on behalf of the Appellant and  I  shall  determine  the
         admissibility of various assertions in my deliberations below.

         ...

         [9]      It is not incumbent upon me to isolate every single  piece
         of evidence and indicate whether I have found it  relevant  to  the
         issue. I am  only  obliged  by  the  superior  precedents  to  give
         "sufficient and adequate" reasons and I am  not  under  a  duty  to
         refer to each and every piece of evidence and it therefore does not
         follow that because I have not referred to certain specific  facts,
         they have not been taken into account.

         [10]     In this Determination I am confining  my  reasons  to  the
         dispositive aspects of the case ...

               a) The Appellant has acknowledged that he  is  receiving  NHS
                  treatment  and  this  cannot  be  continued  in   Algeria.
                  Unfortunately the UK at this moment  is  going  through  a
                  fiscal  crisis  and  cannot  afford  to  show  a  lot   of
                  compassion  to  people  of  other  nationalities  who  are
                  obviously in need.

               b) Ms Turnbull in her submissions asked me to show compassion
                  to the Appellant who is unlikely to be  able  to  continue
                  his treatment in Algeria.

               c) The Appellant has all his key family in Algeria and, as he
                  would appreciate, sadly his plight is not different  (sic)
                  other Algerian people with disabilities.

         ...

         [14]     ...The new Immigration  Rules  will  reform  the  approach
         taken as a matter of public policy  towards  ECHR  Article  8,  the
         right to respect for family and private life in  immigration  cases
         ... The failure to meet the requirements of the rules will normally
         mean failure to establish an Article 8 claim.

         [15]     The evidence persuades me that this Appellant will not  be
         able to receive the appropriate treatment in Algeria  because  that
         country is not so advanced. However the NHS in the UK  is  regarded
         to be under pressure. In this context the  Respondent  is  refusing
         immigration status to persons who cannot afford advanced  treatment
         in their own countries.

         [15]      I  am  fully  conscious  of  the   "legal   requirements"
         stipulated by law. It is incumbent upon me to  advert  to  the  new
         Rules giving respect to the animus legis dictated by the  supremacy
         of Parliament. The legitimate aim of "immigration  control"  cannot
         be forgotten. The Appellant is correctly asked by the Respondent to
         leave the UK which has a fiscal crisis itself.

Discussion

      6. The heart of the Appellant's case as explained in  his  Solicitor's
         letter (22 December 2010) was that he came here illegally in  2003,
         worked under a false name,  now  sought  to  regularise  his  stay,
         feared the authorities in Algeria, and had  made  friends  and  put
         down roots. The subsequent Solicitor's letter (7  May  2014)  added
         that he had a private and family life with his cousin and  friends.
         He has a  cleft  palate  and  suffers  from  hearing  loss.  He  is
         receiving treatment for his speech impediment and hearing loss, and
         restorative dentistry. He has  intestinal  complications.   In  his
         statement (23 June 2015) he added that he had left Algeria in  1999
         and spent time in France, Germany, Switzerland  and  Sweden  before
         coming here. His mother lives in Algeria and has Alzheimer's. His 3
         sisters and brother live in Algeria and are all married. He had  an
         operation in Algeria for his cleft palate in 1999 and almost  died.
         He works as a comis chef. Various  medical  letters  and  documents
         regarding his employment were produced. None of these  facts  could
         be gleaned from Judge Malik's determination.

      7.  It  is  clear  that  having  wrongly  identified  the  Immigration
         (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, the Judge ignored  them.
         He said he would "bear in mind the  legal  provisions  of  relevant
         paragraphs" of those regulations. None of them were relevant and he
         did not apply the regulations. He has plainly adapted  a  different
         determination and not  proof  read  it.   In  those  circumstances,
         despite the lack of forensic analysis and shoddy work, there is  no
         material  error  of  law  arising  from  the  references   to   the
         Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

      8. There is no merit  in  the  argument  that  specific  reference  to
         paragraph 276ADE of the rules should have been  made.  The  key  is
         whether it was applied or could have applied. In this  case,  given
         the facts identified at [6] above, even taken at its  highest,  his
         appeal could not possibly have succeeded under paragraph 276ADE for
         all the following reasons.

      9. The Appellant lived in Algeria until he was 33 which was  12  years
         before the hearing. The Judge did not  have  to  find  the  precise
         length of  time  he  had  been  here  as  it  was  on  any  account
         significantly less than 20 years.

     10. The Appellant has immediate family  in  Algeria  namely  4  married
         siblings, speaks the language, and has been  well  enough  to  work
         here for many years. His medical conditions fall so  far  short  of
         the thresholds identified in cases such  as  N  v  UK  (Application
         26565/05) ECtHR Grand Chamber, J v Secretary of State for the  Home
         Department  [2005]  EWCA   Civ   629,   GS   (Article   3-   health
         exceptionality) India [2011] UKUT 35 (IAC), GS (India) &  others  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 40,  and
         Akhalu (health claim: ECHR Article  8)  [2013]  UKUT  00400  (IAC),
         that, when combined with his extensive family there, his linguistic
         ability, and his  ability  to  work  he  could  not  possibly  have
         succeeded in showing that there would be significant  obstacles  to
         his integration into Algeria let alone very significant obstacles.

     11. In my judgement, despite the obvious glaring  inadequacies  in  the
         judgement, the Appellant's claim was  so  weak,  that  the  Judge's
         incompetence and lack of attention to detail did not draw him  into
         a material error of law.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision.


Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
31 January 2016
