



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23146/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                    |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7th May 2014                                 |On 22nd May 2014           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                         mr osamuyi dickson osaghae
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No attendance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State, but for ease of  reference
    I will refer to her as "the Respondent"  and  the  Respondent  as  "the
    Appellant" as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Nigeria  born  21st  January  1977.  He
    applied for an EU Residence Card as the husband of Sonia Myriam  Kerras
    (the Sponsor), a French national who, it is accepted by all parties, is
    exercising Treaty rights in the UK.

 3. As evidence that the Appellant and his Sponsor are married,  there  was
    submitted to the Respondent a Ghanaian Customary  Marriage  certificate
    dated 15th November 2011 together with a  Statutory  Declaration  dated
    25th January 2013 stating that the marriage took place by proxy.

 4. The Respondent noted that the Appellant was born  in  Nigeria  and  his
    Sponsor in Boulogne Billancour, France. Neither party, were known to be
    of Ghanaian descent; further the Respondent was not satisfied that  the
    Registration of Marriage Certificate nor the Statutory Declaration were
    credible documents. The Respondent concluded therefore  that  they  had
    not been  lawfully  issued  as  claimed  and  refused  the  Appellant's
    application for a Residence Card by a decision dated 1st June 2013.

 5. The Appellant appealed that decision and the appeal came before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Devittie, as a paper  hearing  at  the  Appellant's
    request. In a determination promulgated on 27th January 2014 he allowed
    the Appellant's appeal. The Judge made findings that he  was  satisfied
    about the documentary evidence submitted showing that the parties  were
    validly married in compliance with Ghanaian  law.  Further  he  made  a
    finding that the parties are a durable relationship.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ford  on
    this basis,

         "The Respondent seeks permission to  appeal,  in  time,  against  a
         decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Devittie  dated  27  January
         2014  whereby  he  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against   the
         Secretary of State's decision to refuse to issue a  Residence  card
         to the Appellant as the family member of an EEA national.

         It is arguable that Judge Devittie may have materially erred in law
         in failing to follow the guidance  given  in  the  case  of  Kareem
         (Proxy marriage - EU law) 2014  UKUT  00024  (IAC)  and  failed  to
         consider whether the Appellant had established  that  her  marriage
         was valid under French law. The case was  reported  on  16  January
         2014.

         There is an arguable material error of law".

 7. Thus the matter comes before me to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge materially erred in law, and if so, whether the decision
    should be remade.

The Hearing Before Me

 8. Mr Jack appeared on behalf of the Respondent. No one attended on behalf
    of the Appellant. The Appellant had however, written to  the  Appellate
    Authority a letter date stamped 1st May 2014, stating  that  he  wanted
    his case to be heard in his absence because "everything I  had  to  say
    has already been put before the Tribunal". I confirm that I  gave  full
    consideration to the written submissions forwarded by the Appellant.

 9. Mr Jack essentially relied on the grounds seeking permission but  added
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred in his assessment  of  the
    documentary evidence. He had incorrectly given too much weight  to  the
    validity of those  documents.  Likewise  when  assessing  the  evidence
    concerning the durability of the marriage the Judge  had  relied  on  a
    bare statement contained in a letter from the Sponsor.

10. He emphasised that in accordance with paragraph 18  of  Kareem,  it  is
    clear that the First-tier  Tribunal  materially  erred  because,  other
    considerations aside, there was no evidence placed before it  that  the
    marriage between the Appellant and his Sponsor was in  accordance  with
    the legal system  in  place  in  France.  He  asked  that  I  find  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law  of
    such gravity that the decision must be set aside. He asks that I remake
    the decision and dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Has the Judge Erred?

11. I am satisfied  that  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    discloses an error of law such that it needs to be set  aside  and  the
    decision remade. The first issue which the Judge  was  tasked  to  deal
    with is clearly set out in the Respondent's reasons for refusal letter.
    When relying on a proxy marriage in Ghana, it is for the  Appellant  to
    demonstrate that the marriage is valid. The marriage certificate  dated
    ..... claims that the marriage took place in Ghana  on  .....  A  proxy
    marriage may be recognised as valid, provided  that  the  marriage  was
    valid  in  the  country  in  which  it  took  place,   satisfying   the
    requirements of the law.

12. The marriage was governed by the  PNDC  (Provisional  National  Defence
    Council) law 112, and the Customary Marriage and Divorce (Registration)
    Law 1985, as amended in 1991 to remove  the  mandatory  requirement  of
    registration of marriage.

13. Whilst registration is no longer mandatory, if the marriage is in  fact
    registered,  the  registration  must  comply  with  section  3  of  the
    Customary Marriage and Divorce (Registration) Law 1985. The  burden  of
    proving that  was  done  rests  with  the  Appellant.  In  the  refusal
    decision,  the  Respondent  points  out   that   an   application   for
    registration must be accompanied by  a  statutory  declaration  stating
    certain mandatory matters set out in  section  3,  including  that  the
    conditions  essential  to  validity  have  been  complied   with.   The
    Respondent considered the statutory declaration invalid as it  did  not
    state the place of residence at the time of marriage  for  neither  the
    Appellant nor the EEA Sponsor.

14. Added to this, the  appellant  submitted  a  Nigerian  decree  absolute
    document, but the marriage certificate itself contained  irregularities
    since it did not mention 'divorce' in the conditions column and the 'by
    proxy' were added using a different pen.

15. In his determination the First-tier Tribunal Judge makes a  finding  at
    paragraph 8 that he is satisfied that there is  substantial  compliance
    with the relevant statutory provision as the place of residence of  the
    parties at the time of the marriage is expressly stated. In my judgment
    this is where the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  fallen  into  error.  The
    marriage took place by proxy, it is said, on 15th  November  2011.  The
    marriage certificate records only  'UK'  for  residence.  It  does  not
    identify the residence of the parties at the time of the marriage.  The
    statutory declaration does not assist  on  this  point  because  it  is
    framed in terms of what happened after the marriage took place.

16. Further in paragraph 8 the Judge noted  that  that  the  entry  in  the
    condition column on the marriage certificate did not  indicate,  as  it
    should have done, that the Appellant is divorced. In dealing with  that
    point the Judge says this;  I  do  not  agree  that  this  in  any  way
    undermines the validity or authenticity of  the  marriage  certificate.
    It is hard to see where the Judge has formulated reasons for coming  to
    that conclusion. The need to give adequate reasons enabling a party  to
    the proceedings, why a judge has come to a  particular  conclusion  has
    been set out by the Upper Tribunal in the decision of MK(duty  to  give
    reasons) Pakistan 2013UKUT))00641.

17. Likewise the Judge concluded in Paragraph 10 o his  determination  that
    there is a durable relationship between the sponsor and the  appellant.
    I find that the judge erred in the weight he has  placed  on  a  letter
    apparently sent to the tribunal  from the sponsor and dated 5th October
    2013.The Judge  simply  reproduces  the  text  of  the  letter  in  his
    determination and says;

         "The tone and content of the above  letter  serve  in  my  view  to
         reinforce the conclusion that the marriage between the  parties  is
         genuine and valid".



18. The letter in question comprises a  bare  statement  in  an  unattested
    document. It is hard to see why the judge placed any weight at  all  on
    it. Certainly the determination discloses a  lack  of  reasons  for  so
    doing.

19.  For  the  foregoing  reasons  I   find   the   First-tier   Tribunal's
    determination discloses an error of law such that it must be set  aside
    and the decision remade.

Remaking the Decision

20. It I am satisfied I am in a position to remake the decision as  I  have
    before me all the evidence  produced  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    together with the letter date stamped 1st May 2014 from the  Appellant.
    I note in any event  that  throughout  these  proceedings  neither  the
    appellant nor his sponsor have ever sought to attend a hearing and give
    oral evidence.

21. I start my consideration by returning to the documents provided by  the
    appellant in support of his proxy marriage. No explanation has been put
    forward by the appellant dealing with the issue of validity  raised  by
    the respondent. There  is  no  evidence  explaining  why  the  marriage
    certificate and  statutory  declaration  do  not  properly  record  the
    Appellant's residence or why there is no entry concerning his  divorced
    status. I cannot be satisfied therefore that the evidence points to the
    registration of marriage or statutory declaration  submitted  as  being
    valid and lawfully issued.

22. The evidence of utility bills and payslips in the names of the  sponsor
    and the  appellant  sent  to  the  same  address  is  limited  and  not
    sufficient to show that the relationship is  genuine.  I  have  already
    found that the letter produced in the name of the  sponsor  carries  no
    weight. It would have been open to the parties had the appellant chosen
    to do so to have elected to have an oral hearing in which  evidence  of
    the genuineness of the relationship could have been given and tested in
    cross -examination. They chose not to do so.

23. Since this is was the only evidence submitted my findings above  should
    be sufficient to dispose  of  this  appeal.  I  do  record  however  no
    evidence was placed before this Tribunal to establish  that  the  proxy
    marriage which the appellant  claimed  to  have  contracted  was  valid
    according to the national law of the Appellant's Sponsor which in  this
    case is France.

24. It  is  self  evident  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination
    contains no reference to any evidence identifying  the  relevant  legal
    provisions in France.  The  written  submissions  which  the  Appellant
    provided for the hearing add nothing to this issue. The  Appellant  was
    made fully aware that what was in issue under Kareem  was  whether  the
    proxy marriage was legally valid and recognised in France. He  has  not
    sought to address that issue at all, nor provide evidence to show  that
    the Ghanaian proxy marriage which he  says  he  and  the  Sponsor  have
    contracted, is legally valid and recognised in France.

25. In these circumstances, I am satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge has erred in law such that the decision must  be  set  aside  and
    remade. I am satisfied that the Appellant has failed to  discharge  the
    burden on him of proving that he is a family member of an EEA  national
    exercising  free  movement  rights   within   the   Immigration   (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 and that therefore he is not entitled to  a  Residence
    Card as the spouse of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights.

DECISION

26. The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

27. Appeal dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made


Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signature                                             Dated

