
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23149/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 June 2015                        |On 6 July 2015                       |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                               daljinder singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Sufian, Counsel instructed by Strand Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant, Mr Singh, against the  decision  of
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Boyd)  (the  FtT)  who  in   a   decision
    promulgated on 13 January 2015 dismissed his  application  against  the
    respondent's decision to refuse to grant him further leave.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of India.  He applied under the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006, Regulation 8, as an extended family member  for
    a residence card to reside in  the  UK.   He  claimed  that  he  was  a
    dependent relative of his cousin, a German national  exercising  Treaty
    rights in the UK.

3.   The FtT found that the appellant was not financially supported  by  his
    cousin in India and was not dependent  on  him  in  the  UK.  It  found
    neither the appellant nor his  cousin  to  be  credible  and  that  the
    appellant's account  entirely  fabricated.   The  FtT  found  that  the
    sponsor was self employed and met Regulation 6.

4.   In the grounds of application the  appellant  contended  that  the  FtT
    erred in law by failing to consider Article 8 ECHR and  wrongly  stated
    that it was not  relied  on.   Permission  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Andrew on 3 March 2015 on the limited  ground  that  the
    Tribunal wrongly stated Article 8 was not relied on when in fact it was
    [32].

Error of law hearing

Submissions

5.   I heard from Mr Sufian who submits that the FtT  erred  by  failing  to
    consider Article 8 and that oral evidence was given at  the  First-tier
    hearing as to private and family life between the appellant and his EEA
    national relative's children.  Article 8 was relied on in  the  grounds
    of appeal.  Mr Whitwell opposed the appeal,  arguing  that  absent  any
    removal directions,  it  was  not  necessary  to  consider  Article  8.
    Alternatively, there was no evidence from the appellant to support  his
    claim that at  the  First-tier  hearing  there  was  evidence  engaging
    Article 8 or otherwise, to establish precisely what evidence was  given
    as to family life or indeed private  life  at  the  hearing.   The  FtT
    decision confirmed that no submissions were made by Counsel on  Article
    8. Accordingly the matter was not proceeded with at  the  hearing.   Mr
    Whitwell further submits that any error by failure to consider  Article
    8 was not material. The facts found by the FtT was that  there  was  no
    dependency or financial dependency as between the relatives.   As  such
    those findings would inform any consideration under the Article 8.  The
    findings made in  the  decision  failed  to  establish  Article  8  was
    engaged.  The error was not material to the outcome of the decision.

Discussion and decision

6.   The focus of this error of law hearing is whether or not the FtT  erred
    by failing to consider Article 8 ECHR. The appellant firstly  complains
    that the FtT wrongly stated that Article 8 was not relied  on  when  it
    was.  I am satisfied that this is  correct  as  the  Ground  of  appeal
    clearly refer to Article 8. The decision is to that  extent  incorrect.
    I find that this does not amount to a material error of  law.  However,
    the FtT went on to state that Article 8 was not argued  in  submissions
    put by  the  appellant's  representative  [32].   This  suggested  that
    although raised Article 8, it was not pursued.   Unfortunately  it  has
    not been possible to read the handwriting  of  the  FtT  Judge  to  get
    further assistance in this matter. There is  no  criticism  as  to  the
    FtT's consideration and  decision of the substantial issue under appeal
    with reference to the EEA Regulations and made  findings  of  fact  [26
    -29].  Relying on those findings of fact I am satisfied that there  was
    no evidential basis on which to establish any Article 8 claim.  The FtT
    found no evidence of financial dependence as between the appellant  and
    the sponsor.  It found no evidence of any dependency  above  or  beyond
    normal family ties as between adults. There  was  no  evidence  of  any
    relationship as between  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor's  children.
    Although it is argued that oral evidence was given on  this  issue,  no
    detailed information has been put before me to support this claim,  for
    example there is no  extract  of  the  Proceedings  or  statement  from
    Counsel confirming what oral evidence was adduced before the First-tier
    Tribunal.  I find that there  is  no  reference  made  in  the  witness
    statements relied on to any relationship as between the  appellant  and
    his cousin, and/or his cousin's children as is now  claimed.   It  must
    also be recognised that the FtT  found  the  appellant's  claim  to  be
    fabricated and that it could not rely on any oral evidence given by him
    [26].  The FtT found the evidence consistent with a conclusion that the
    appellant was working and supporting himself.

7.   I conclude that the FtT  mistakenly  stated  that  Article  8  was  not
    relied on in its decision. I am satisfied that the  grounds  of  appeal
    did rely on Article 8 in general terms. I observe in  passing  that  no
    formal application was made under Article 8 and it was  not  considered
    in the Reasons for Refusal Letter.  Should the FtT gone  on  to  assess
    the appeal under Article 8?  Firstly, I am satisfied that Article 8 was
    not pursued at the hearing, as indicated at  [32].   This  position  is
    strengthened by the fact that no evidence has been put forward to  show
    what oral evidence was given  at  the  hearing  to  engage  Article  8.
    Alternatively, there has been no challenge of the findings made by  the
    FtT under the EU Regulations and such findings would be relevant to and
    inform any consideration of Article 8. I conclude that procedurally  or
    otherwise there was no error of law. There was  no  unfairness  to  the
    appellant as a result of the failure  to  consider  Article  8  and  it
    cannot be argued that the outcome  would  have  been  different.  I  am
    satisfied that any claim under Article 8  would  fail.  Accordingly,  I
    find no material error of law in the decision which shall stand and the
    appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

There no material error of law and the decision shall stand.

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 4.7.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Date 4.7.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

