

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: ia 23429-13

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   24.01.2014|
|on    24.01.2014                              |sent out:                    |
|                                              |28.01.2014                   |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                               hassan ali khan
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Nayyera Hashmi  (counsel, by direct access)
For the respondent: Miss E Martin


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge  Patricia  Carroll),  sitting  at  Taylor  House  on  3
    September 2013, to  a long residence  appeal by a citizen of  Pakistan,
    born 30 June 1980. The  appellant  claimed  to  have  arrived  in  this
    country on a false passport on 6 February 1998: while the judge did not
    accept that, for reasons she gave, I shall proceed for the  time  being
    on the assumption that he has been here ever since then.

 2. Under the 'new Rules' (in force from 9 July 2012), the appellant  could
    not satisfy the long residence provisions of paragraph 276B.  The  'new
    Rules' also made it necessary for cases which did not satisfy  them  to
    be 'exceptional' for article 8  to  be  successfully  invoked:  see  MF
    (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192. The fact that the  appellant  made  his
    application on 5 July 2012, before the change in the Rules, cannot help
    him: see Odelola  [2009] UKHL 25.

 3. That leaves the challenges to the judge's article 8 findings: on these,
    permission was given on the basis that she hadn't taken into account "a
    bundle of photographs and wage slips" which the  permission  judge  had
    found in the file. Assuming again that these were there to be seen when
    the judge heard the case, I have considered them for myself.

 4. Even assuming in the appellant's  favour  that  he  has  been  in  this
    country since 1998,  before  he  was  18,  there  is  nothing  arguably
    exceptional about his private and family  life  here,  except  for  his
    claimed relationship with Katarzyna Szelazek, a Polish citizen, and the
    child born to her, he says by him, on 29  October,  since  the  hearing
    before the judge.

 5. The judge had before her evidence about hospital appointments for  Miss
    Szelazek, relating to her expected confinement; but,  for  reasons  she
    gave, she did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  had  "a  genuine  and
    committed relationship" with her. It is not for me  to  say  whether  I
    agree with those reasons or not; it is enough to note  that  they  were
    based on  the  evidence  before  the  judge,  including  a  handwritten
    document, referred to as Miss Szelazek's NHS pregnancy notes.

 6. The question is whether the evidence the judge did not  consider  would
    have been reasonably likely to affect the result she  reached,  and  in
    particular her  negative  findings  on  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and Miss Szelazek. Since Miss Hashmi had to concede that none
    of the other material, apart from the pregnancy notes, established  any
    connexion between the two of them that could not have done so.  As  for
    the notes, the judge correctly noted that Miss Szelazek had ticked  the
    box marked 'single': while that might have been explained  by  her  not
    being married to the appellant, she had also left blank the  space  for
    'partner's details'.

 7. I do not consider that there is anything in  the  material  before  me,
    whether dealt with by the judge or not, which could realistically  have
    led her to a different  conclusion  than  the  one  she  reached.  Miss
    Szelazek was not present before me, the appellant said because she  was
    looking after their child. If they are in a 'durable relationship', and
    especially if they have a  child  together,  then  an  EEA  application
    should be made as soon as possible. However for the present, the  judge
    cannot be regarded as arguably wrong in law in dismissing this  appeal,
    both under the Rules and on article 8.

Appeal



                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



