
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23536/2012
                                                               IA/23538/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 June 2013                                |On 7 June 2013               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                            Ojutule kennedy edeni

                             helen melekwe edeni


                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Plaess, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Not represented

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. Both respondents are citizens of Nigeria. The first respondent was born
    on 20 June 1974. The second respondent was born on  3  June  1974.  The
    respondents are married.

 2. For this purposes of this determination I refer to the  respondents  as
    the appellants and to the Secretary of State for the Home Department as
    the  respondent,  reflecting  their  positions  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. I also refer only to the case of the first appellant as  that
    of the second appellant, his dependent in this matter, is on all fours.



 3. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mulvenna dated 11 March 2013 which allowed the appeal of
    the appellant for leave to remain as Tier 1 (Post Study Work) Migrant.

 4. Mr Edeni was present at the hearing. I  explained  the  nature  of  the
    hearing to him.  He  asked  some  preliminary  questions  and  provided
    additional evidence which was copied for Ms Plaess. Ms Plaess relied on
    the grounds of appeal. Mr Edeni set out his view of the history of  his
    application and his degree thesis. Where relevant, I refer to  what  he
    said below.

 5. I was then in a position to make a decision on the error of law.

 6. I was satisfied that the decision of Judge Mulvenna disclosed an  error
    on a point of law. It was my view that as of the date of  the  decision
    on 11 October 2012, Mr Edeni had not been awarded his MPhil  degree,  a
    requirement of paragraph 245F of HC 395 (the Immigration Rules).  There
    was no dispute that minor corrections had been required  in  order  for
    the degree to be awarded. There was also no dispute that  the  external
    examiner had not checked the minor amendments as of  11  October  2012.
    This was only confirmed in an email from the University  of  Birmingham
    dated 24 October 2012.

 7. Mr Edeni sought to argue that he could still be  considered  as  having
    been awarded the degree by 11 October 2012 as it was as certain  as  it
    could by that time that he would be awarded the degree as  the  changes
    required were minor. He also maintained that it was not his fault  that
    the external examiners' checks had not taken place by that date. I  did
    not find that the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  allowed  for
    anything other than the degree  having  been  formally  awarded  by  11
    October 2012, the date of the decision (taking into  account  that  the
    case of Khatel & Others (s85A: effect of continuing application)  Nepal
    [2013] UKUT 44 (IAC) extends the "date of  application"  up  until  the
    time that the respondent makes a decision  on  that  application).   Mr
    Edeni had not been awarded his degree by 11  October  2012.  The  email
    from the University of Birmingham dated 24  October  2012  stated  that
    "the degree of MPhil can now be awarded" and  "I  have  sent  an  award
    letter ... today".

 8. I therefore found that Judge Mulvenna made an error on a point  of  law
    at [12] in finding that the Immigration Rules were met  and  that  this
    error was such that the decision had to be set aside and re-made.

 9. For same reasons, I had to refuse  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules for leave as a Tier 1 (Post Study Work) Migrant. Mr Edeni had  to
    show that as of the date of application that he had  been  awarded  his
    degree. Even taking the date of application as extending  up  until  11
    October 2012, he had not been awarded  his  degree  by  that  date.  He
    therefore could not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  245F.  The
    respondent was not required to wait until the degree had  been  awarded
    before making a decision. The respondent had already delayed  making  a
    decision for 6 months by 11 October 2012. The respondent did not act in
    any way unfairly in making a decision that date.

10. I considered the appeal brought under Article 8 of the ECHR. Mr and Mrs
    Edeni have a family life together in the UK, having come here  in  2008
    and lived together since then but I did not find that the  respondent's
    decision amounted to an interference with that  family  life  that  met
    even the low threshold required to engage Article 8 further. The couple
    can return to Nigeria together and continue their family life  together
    there as they have in the UK. Mr Edeni drew my attention  to  the  fact
    that Mrs Edeni has had  surgery  in  the  UK  in  connection  with  the
    couple's wish to have children. There was nothing to suggest that  they
    could not continue such medical procedures in Nigeria. I did  not  find
    that matter indicated that there would be an  interference  with  their
    family life on return to Nigeria such that Article 8 was engaged.

11. I also did not find that it had been shown that the  appellants  had  a
    private life that engaged Article 8. As conceded by Ms Plaess, they are
    highly impressive people. The appellant has obtained an  MPhil  related
    to the treatment of whiplash injuries  and  is  working  in  a  related
    field. His wife is studying. Both  have  undertaken  a  great  deal  of
    voluntary  work  here  through  their  church  and  in  the  community,
    assisting prisoners and others. It remains the case that they both came
    with limited leave, that essentially being in order  for  Mr  Edeni  to
    obtain his MPhil. Those studies have been  completed.  They  could  not
    have had a reasonable expectation of further leave in order for him  to
    obtain relevant work experience or for Mrs Edeni to  study.  At  beset,
    that would always have had to have been dependent on the law and  their
    circumstances at the time that any further application  was  made.  The
    studies for  which  Mr  Edeni  came  to  the  UK  have  ended  and  the
    possibility of a private life that might arise for a  student  that  is
    set out in CDS (PBS: "available": Article 8) Brazil [2010]  UKUT  00305
    (IAC) does not arise here.

12. I refused the appeals under Article 8 of the ECHR.


13. I should  add  that  the  respondent's  decision  of  11  October  2012
    contained an order under Section 47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.  It has been  found  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Adamally and Jaferi (section 47 removal decisions: Tribunal Procedures)
    [2012] UKUT 00414 (IAC) that such an order made in these  circumstances
    is not in accordance with the law but that the  unlawfulness  does  not
    infect the decision to refuse to vary leave to remain. I found that the
    First-tier Tribunal made an error on a point of law in failing to  find
    the Section 47 removal decision to be not in accordance with the law. I
    also set aside that part of the decision and re-make  it,  finding,  in
    line with Adamally and Jaferi, that the removal  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law. If the respondent wishes to remove Mr and  Mrs
    Edeni, she will have to re-make that  decision.  I  can  only  suggest,
    notwithstanding my formal legal findings under  the  Immigration  Rules
    and Article 8, that she think seriously about whether she wishes to  do
    so, rather than inviting the couple to make fresh  applications,  given
    the concession from Ms Plaess that they are highly  impressive  people,
    the potential benefits to the UK  of  their  continued  presence  being
    obvious.

Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside.

15. I remake the appeals as follows:

      i) The appeals under the Immigration Rules for further leave to remain
         as a Tier 4 Student are refused.

     ii) The appeals under Article 8 of the ECHR are refused.

    iii) The Section 47 orders are not in accordance with the law.



Signed                                  Date: 6 June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
