
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/23377/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 31 October 2017                           |On 10 November 2017            |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                           Mr Adeyemi Moses Ajayi
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Adeolu, Counsel, instructed by David Vine
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  10  December  1972.   He
    claimed to have entered the UK in April 2000 as a visitor.  He  applied
    for leave to remain on 26 February 2015.  The application  was  refused
    on 9 June 2015 under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE  of  HC  395  and
    Article 8 ECHR and the respondent decided to remove him to Nigeria.

2.   The appellant appealed and his appeal came before  a  First-tier  Judge
    on 1 February 2017.

3.   The judge noted the respondent's claim in summary  in  paragraph  2  of
    her determination.  The appellant did not meet the Rules to  remain  on
    the basis of family or private life  in  the  UK.   He  was  not  in  a
    relationship with a  partner  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  his  three
    children were not British citizens or settled in the UK and at the time
    of the application they had not lived in the  UK  for  at  least  seven
    years although it was accepted by the respondent that the appellant had
    a genuine relationship with them.  The  appellant  did  not  have  sole
    responsibility for the children as he stated that he lived with his ex-
    partner, who was not a British citizen or settled in his country.   She
    was a citizen of Nigeria.  He  had  not  shown  that  there  were  very
    significant obstacles to his integration in  Nigeria.   The  respondent
    took into account the children's best interests and found there were no
    exceptional circumstances under Article 8 or outside the Rules to grant
    leave to remain.

4.   The judge records the following matters were canvassed before her:

         "4.   It  was  agreed  at  the  outset  of  the  hearing  that  the
             appellant's twin boys were 7 years at the date of the decision
             and had lived in the  UK  continuously  since  birth  and  the
             respondent  had  failed  to  consider  whether  it  would   be
             reasonable to expect them to  leave  the  UK  (276ADE(iv)  and
             Appendix FM and EX.1.).   Mr  Briant  relied  on  the  refusal
             letter  and  Treebhawon  and  Others  (NIA  2002  Part  5A   -
             compelling circumstances test) (2017) UKUT  00013  (IAC).   He
             submitted that the appellant had not shown that he had  family
             life with his children and his ex-partner and in any event  it
             was reasonable to expect  the  children  to  return  to  their
             country of nationality, Nigeria and in  the  public  interest.
             He asked that the appeal be dismissed.


         5.   Mr Adebayo accepted that the appellant did not meet the  Rules
             but asked that the appeal be allowed under article 8 ECHR as a
             disproportionate interference with the appellant's  rights  to
             respect for family life  with  his  children  and  their  best
             interests  under  s55  of   the   Borders,   Citizenship   and
             Immigration Act 2009  (the  2009  Act).   He  referred  to  MA
             (Pakistan) & ors (2016) EWCA Civ 705.  I indicated in response
             to his submission that the appeal could not be allowed as 'not
             in accordance with the law' since this was  not  a  ground  of
             appeal  under  the  2014  Act  and  that  in  any  event   the
             jurisprudence was that the Judge could assess  the  children's
             best interests where the respondent had failed to do  so.   At
             the end of the hearing I reserved my decision."


5.   Having correctly addressed herself on the burden and standard of  proof
    the judge noted that the appellant claimed to live with his  ex-partner
    and their three children - twins born in 2008 and his son born in 2010.
     The children had all been born in the United Kingdom and had lived  in
    this country for over six years.  It was claimed that  it  was  not  in
    their best interest for them to be removed from the UK.

6.   The judge did not find the appellant to be a truthful witness.  At  the
    hearing he claimed to have been in a relationship with  his  ex-partner
    and stated that she was living at his address.

7.   The determination continues:

         "9.  Upon my seeking clarification of the evidence in  his  Council
             Tax bill that he enjoyed the single  person  discount  as  the
             only adult occupier his response was that he had never noticed
             this which I found not credible  given  that  he  has  been  a
             business man since 2005 and has his own house.   Under  cross-
             examination about his relationship with  his  ex-partner,  his
             evidence was that the HO had  not  asked  her  to  attend  the
             hearing, which, given that he was legally represented was  not
             credible.  He did not  in  his  appeal  take  issue  with  the
             respondent's  view  that  he  did  not   have   a   subsisting
             relationship with a partner in the UK and Mr Adebayo  did  not
             seek to argue the appeal on the basis that the  appellant  has
             family life with the  children's  mother  but  rather  on  the
             residence of the twins in the UK for the previous 7 years.


         10.  Apart from his assertion and a school letter as long ago as  2
             June 2015 there was scant  evidence  that  the  children  were
             living with him.  He produced only 2 photographs with him  and
             the children who are now 8 and 6 years old.  One was taken  in
             2015 and another he claimed, in summer 2016.  He claimed  that
             he had photos of  his  ex-partner  on  his  mobile  telephone.
             Though I do not doubt that the appellant may see his  children
             occasionally and as their father has a relationship with  them
             I was not satisfied that it was other than tenuous.  There was
             scant evidence of time spent with them or of money expended on
             them or of meetings attended at their school in the  nearly  2
             years since they were enrolled.  I was satisfied that his  ex-
             partner and his children did not live with him."

8.   The judge went on to summarise the appellant's oral evidence  in  which
    he said that his ex-partner had been at home with the children  on  the
    day of the hearing  although  "he  had  no  recent  evidence  that  the
    children were living with him".  He was aware that the Home Office  was
    seeking to remove his ex-partner and the children.

9.   Reference was made to a fraud conviction  in  2009  and  the  appellant
    said  he  was  now  rehabilitated.   There  had   been   various   visa
    applications from Nigeria in his name but  the  appellant  denied  they
    were made by him.  He denied that his original passport, which  he  had
    lost, was false.

10.  The judge's determination concludes as follows:

         "13. The appellant and  the  mother  of  his  3  children  and  the
             children are all Nigerian nationals.  He does  not  live  with
             them nor has he shown on balance that  he  has  other  than  a
             tenuous family life with his children.  Even assuming that  he
             has, they are now 8 years old and 6 years old.  They have been
             attending primary school for  the  previous  2  years.   Their
             private life is with their parents or if that is not possible,
             with their mother.  In  assessing  their  best  interests  and
             welfare under s.55 of the 2009 Act I have  borne  in  mind  EV
             (Philippines) and others (2014) EWCA Civ 874 and MA (Pakistan)
             above.


         14.  The duty applies to all  children  whether  or  not  they  are
             lawfully present.  The best interests  are  to  be  determined
             without reference to the  immigration  history  or  status  of
             either parent and by reference to such factors as  their  age,
             length of residence in the UK, how  long  they  have  been  in
             education etc.  As a starting  point  the  best  interests  of
             children are,  on  the  whole  (and  not  simply  educational)
             including their physical and emotional  welfare,  to  be  with
             their parents and if not their mother, wherever  they  may  be
             Azimi-Moayed  &  ors  (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
             appeals) (2013) UKUT 00197 (IAC).


         15.  The appellant's children are young and at an  age  where  they
             are likely to be adaptable.  They  are  likely  to  have  some
             familiarity with the  language,  food  and  customs  of  their
             country of nationality though  they  have  never  been  there.
             They are not at a crucial stage of their education.   Although
             their presence in the UK  is  at  least  7  years  and  is  of
             significant weight it is not a  determinative  factor.   Their
             best interests are a primary but not the primary consideration
             and are subject to countervailing factors.  It cannot be  said
             on  the  evidence  looked  at  holistically  that  their  best
             interests require them to be in the UK.  In my view their best
             interests are to be with both  parents  and  if  that  is  not
             possible with their mother.  It appears that  they  live  with
             her.


         16.  It was not claimed  nor  did  I  find  that  there  were  very
             significant obstacles  to  the  appellant's  reintegration  in
             Nigeria (or in so  far  as  his  private  life  comprised  his
             children, or to their integration into  Nigeria)  as  required
             under 276 ADE(vi) of the Rules  given  his  circumstances  and
             that he lived  for  the  majority  of  his  life  in  Nigeria.
             Neither was  it  claimed  nor  did  I  find  that  there  were
             insurmountable obstacles to continuing  family  life  overseas
             assuming the existence of family  life  with  his  ex-partner.
             They are all Nigerian nationals.


         17.  In light of the offences for which he  was  convicted  (fraud,
             obtaining a false passport and apparatus for making  false  ID
             cards, the proliferation of visa applications and that he  was
             generally untruthful I was not  satisfied  that  he  had  even
             entered the UK in 2000 as he claimed.


         18.  I find it reasonable in all the circumstances for the children
             to leave the UK and/or for the appellant alone to leave the UK
             under the Rules.  The respondent's decision is lawful  because
             the appellant and/or his children did not satisfy  the  Rules.
             That is sufficient to dispose of the appeal.  I have not found
             'compelling reasons'  -  Rhuppiah  (2016)  EWCA  Civ  803  and
             Treebhawon above - to conduct an article 8 assessment but I do
             so in the light of Mr Adebayo's submissions.


         19.  Turning to the proportionality of the decision under article 8
             I took into account the Rules, the children's  best  interests
             and the public interest factors in s117A-C of the 2014 Act.


         20.  The appellant has been in the  UK  unlawfully  throughout  his
             residence in the UK on his evidence for 16 years though it was
             doubted that he came in 2000.  He has a very poor  immigration
             history and was not a credible witness.  He has worked in  the
             UK but there was not evidence on  balance  that  he  has  paid
             taxes or that he currently owns a business or is working.   He
             has paid business rates from 2005-2008.   He  and  his  family
             would have had  access  to  free  education  and  free  health
             services on the NHS.  Looking at the factors in s117B  of  the
             2014 Act while he speaks and understands English, that and his
             purported financial independence are neutral factors.  I  have
             found that it  is  not  necessarily  in  the  children's  best
             interests to be in the UK and reasonable  to  expect  them  to
             leave.


         21.  There are not factors in this case to outweigh the maintenance
             of effective immigration control which has been deemed  to  be
             in the public interest by Parliament.  I do not find  anything
             'compelling' or weighty in the appellant's and/or his family's
             circumstances  which,  would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
             consequences if the respondent's decision was maintained.


         22.  I find that it is reasonable for him alone or for he and  them
             to return to Nigeria  even  having  regard  to  the  practical
             possibilities of relocation -  R  (application  Patel)  (2014)
             EWHC 2583 (Admin) of which there was scant evidence.


         23.  The respondent's  decision  is  proportionate  in  the  public
             interest.  It does not prejudice the article 8 rights  of  the
             appellant and/or his children in a manner sufficiently serious
             to amount to a breach of the fundamental rights  protected  by
             article 8 - Huang [2007] UKHL  11.   The  human  rights  claim
             fails.  The appeal is dismissed."


11.  The appellant applied for permission to appeal.  Reference was made  to
    the  concession  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with the children in the decision letter.  The  judge  had
    ignored substantial evidence such as a GP letter and the school reports
    and a letter from the school stating that the appellant was often  seen
    on the school playgrounds.  The appellant should have been  allowed  to
    adduce further evidence if the respondent were seeking to go behind the
    concession.  The judge should have given the appellant the  opportunity
    to adduce further evidence as he had  been  effectively  ambushed.   In
    paragraph 6 it was argued in  the  light  of  the  judge's  finding  in
    paragraph 11 that the  appellant's  children  did  not  live  with  the
    appellant that  a  parent  could  maintain  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a child without living with them and the severance of
    such a relationship might not be in the best interests  of  the  child.
    It was further argued that the judge had determined  the  fate  of  the
    children by reference to the appellant's conduct only and had erred  in
    so doing.  Permission to appeal was granted on 8 September 2017.  On 18
    September the respondent filed a response submitting  that  the  First-
    tier Judge had directed herself appropriately and her approach  was  in
    keeping with the conclusions set out in the refusal letter.  The  judge
    had in any event considered  the  position  of  the  children  and  the
    existence of a genuine and subsisting relationship did not guarantee an
    appellant success unless the evidence showed it was not reasonable  for
    the family to return to Nigeria.

12.  Mr Adeolu submitted that in the decision letter the Secretary of  State
    having carefully considered the matter had found that the appellant had
    a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his children.   The
    Home Office Presenting Officer had at the same time as relying  on  the
    refusal letter submitted that the appellant had not shown that  he  had
    family life with his children and ex-partner.  Mr Adeolu confirmed that
    his supervisor, Mr Adebayo, had appeared for the appellant at the  time
    of the hearing.  Mr Adeolu sought to take additional points such as the
    judge had referred in paragraph 8 to the  sponsor  when  there  was  no
    sponsor but I am not satisfied that the arguments put forward have  any
    substance or merit.  Mr Adeolu confirmed that the grounds of appeal had
    been settled by his supervisor and I am confident that any grounds with
    any merit would have been put forward initially and not raised  halfway
    through  the  hearing.   Mr  Adeolu  submitted  that  the   judge   had
    concentrated on the bad behaviour of the appellant and had  misdirected
    herself in referring to the children being of an  age  when  they  were
    likely to be adaptable.  While the judge had referred in  paragraph  14
    to the fact that  the  best  interests  of  the  children  were  to  be
    determined without reference to the immigration history  or  status  of
    the  parents,  the  judge  had  contradicted  herself  in  the  ensuing
    paragraph.   The  children  had  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    substantial number of years and it would be difficult for them to adapt
    to life in Nigeria where they had  never  lived.   There  had  been  no
    effective consideration of Article 8.

13.  Mr Bates submitted that this was a case in which it had  been  conceded
    that the Rules were not met and the  judge  had  considered  Article  8
    outside the Rules as at the date of hearing.  The burden of  proof  was
    on the appellant.  The concession had been made by  reference  to  what
    the appellant had said at the date of decision but  there  had  been  a
    material change of circumstances since.  The concession that  had  been
    made was obsolete.  Up-to-date evidence had not been  provided.   There
    were no compelling circumstances and the judge had referred to that  in
    paragraph 18 of her decision.

14.  The children's mother had not got settled status and her situation  was
    precarious.  She had not been called  as  a  witness.   The  judge  had
    applied MA (Pakistan) and had referred to Azimi-Moayed in paragraph  14
    of her decision.  It would be reasonable  to  expect  the  children  to
    return to  Nigeria  with  their  parents.   Mr  Bates  referred  to  AM
    (Pakistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 180.  The issues inside or outside the Rules
    would be the same and the findings had been open to the  judge.   There
    had been  no  witness  statement  from  the  mother  of  the  children.
    Notwithstanding the  Secretary  of  State's  concession  the  test  was
    reasonableness inside or outside the Rules.  Mr Bates  referred  to  EV
    (Philippines) and MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

15.  In reply Mr Adeolu referred to the circumstances as at the date of  the
    decision.  Time had passed by.  He accepted  that  there  had  been  no
    application by Mr Adebayo, then  representing  the  appellant,  for  an
    adjournment in the light of what the Home Office Presenting Officer had
    said.  He submitted the judge had not considered the evidence properly.

16.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  decision.   I  have
    carefully considered all the material before me.  I remind myself  that
    I can only interfere with the decision if it was flawed in law.

17.  The refusal letter  records  that  the  appellant  had  stated  in  his
    application form that he currently lived with his  ex-partner.   As  Mr
    Bates points out, that represented the  position  as  at  the  date  of
    decision in June 2015.  By the time of the hearing  matters  had  moved
    on.

18.  In the grounds  of  appeal  it  was  said  that  the  withdrawal  of  a
    concession at the  hearing  was  unfair  and  the  appellant  had  been
    effectively ambushed.

19.  However, there was no application for an  adjournment  of  the  hearing
    after the submission had been made by the respondent's  representative.
    What is recorded in the determination is that Mr Adebayo accepted  that
    the appellant did not meet the Rules.  I detect no  unfairness  in  the
    procedures in this appeal and the appellant was  not  disadvantaged  in
    the way he presented his case and indeed no further evidence  has  been
    put in since the hearing.

20.  Points were taken in the grounds that the judge  had  not  referred  to
    the evidence before her.  The judge does  make  reference  to  evidence
    adduced such as a school letter and scant evidence  that  the  children
    were living with him and a mere two photographs.  It was not  incumbent
    on the judge to refer to each and every item of  material  before  her.
    It is clear in paragraph 9 of the determination that the appeal was not
    advanced on the basis that the appellant had a subsisting  relationship
    with his partner and the appeal was not argued on the basis that he had
    family life with the children's mother.  He had no recent evidence that
    the children were living with him.

21.  I am not satisfied that the judge overlooked any material  matter  when
    considering the evidence in relation to the children.

22.  It is plain that the judge took a very poor  view  of  the  appellant's
    general credibility and was not even satisfied that he had entered  the
    UK when he claimed.  He had been throughout in this country  unlawfully
    and had a very poor immigration history.

23.  As Mr Bates points out, the judge found, and indeed it was accepted  at
    the hearing, that the case did not come within the Rules but  she  went
    on to conduct an Article 8 assessment in  the  light  of  Mr  Adebayo's
    submissions as she records  in  paragraph  18  of  her  decision.   She
    applied the test of reasonableness and it was open to her  to  conclude
    that the decision was proportionate and in  the  public  interest.   In
    relation to the taking into account of wider public interests Mr  Bates
    referred me to AM (Pakistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 180, in which judgment was
    given on 22 March 2017, shortly after the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Judge.  The judge did not err in law in referring  to  the  immigration
    history  of  the  appellant  in  the  context  of  reasonableness  (see
    paragraph 27 of AM (Pakistan). She had expressly  reminded  herself  in
    paragraph 14 of her determination - set out above - that the children's
    best interests were to be  determined  without  regard  to  immigration
    history.

24.  However, the judge did remind herself that the children's  presence  in
    the UK for at least seven years was of significant weight though not  a
    determinative factor.  In paragraph 26  of  AM  (Pakistan)  Elias  L.J.
    noted  that  the  First-tier  Judge  had   recognised   that   "greater
    significance is likely to be attached to time spent in this country  by
    a child when they are of school age and therefore developing  ties  and
    attachments outside the immediate family unit".  This reflects what  is
    said in Azimi-Moayed.  In paragraph (iv) of the head note it is  stated
    that:

         "Apart from the terms of published policies and Rules, the Tribunal
         notes that seven years from age 4 is likely to be more  significant
         to a child than the first seven years of life.  Very young children
         are focused on their  parents  rather  than  their  peers  and  are
         adaptable."


25.  The judge in  paragraph  15  of  the  determination  remarks  that  the
    children

         "are young and at an age when they  are  likely  to  be  adaptable.
         They are likely to have some familiarity with  the  language,  food
         and customs of their country  of  nationality  although  they  have
         never been there.  They  are  not  at  a  crucial  stage  of  their
         education.  ..."

26.  I am satisfied that the judge had  very  carefully  in  mind  the  best
    interests of the children and that she directed  herself  appropriately
    on legal issues and her decision was satisfactorily reasoned and  based
    on the  authorities  to  which  she  refers.   I  see  no  evidence  of
    procedural unfairness in the circumstances of this case.   The  grounds
    of appeal raise no material error of law and insofar as it  was  sought
    to depart from the grounds the points raised had no merit or substance.


Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed


Anonymity Order

The First-tier Judge made no anonymity order and I make none.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.



Signed                                  Date: 8 November 2017


G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal









