
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/23116/2015
                                                               IA/23124/2015
                                                               IA/23125/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 May 2017                                |On 13 June 2017               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS


                                   Between

                           [M S] (FIRST appellant)
                          [S S] (SECOND appellant)
                           [M N] (THIRD appellant)
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Karim of Counsel, instructed by Liberty Legal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Judge  Gillespie
    given on 28 June 2016 whereby he refused the appeals of the father, his
    wife and one of their two children.   The  child  in  question  is  the
    important focus of the issues which  were  raised  and  it  is  equally
    important to bear in mind that he was a separate appellant and was  not
    there purely as the dependant of his father.

2.   The appellants are nationals of Bangladesh.  The  third  appellant  was
    born on [ ] 2006 and that is important for the purposes of  the  issues
    that were raised in this  appeal.   The  first  appellant  entered  the
    United Kingdom in May 2007, having entry clearance as a  student  which
    was valid until the end of June 2011.  The other two appellants entered
    the United Kingdom as his dependants on 28 August 2008.  His leave  was
    extended from time to time, he having made application properly  within
    time and the final leave granted would  have  expired  on  28  February
    2015.  He made an application within time and it is  that  application,
    or rather its refusal, which has been the subject of these appeals.

3.   The father was apparently a practising  lawyer  in  Bangladesh  and  he
    came here to obtain an LLB.  The third  appellant  was  thus  nearly  2
    years old when he arrived with his mother in this  country.   The  case
    put by  the  appellants  was  that  he  was  discovered  to  have  been
    profoundly deaf and his deafness had not been appreciated until he came
    to this country.  There was an issue raised by the Secretary  of  State
    before the First-tier Tribunal that the father had decided to come here
    in order in part to obtain treatment for his son but  that  the  First-
    tier Judge was not prepared to accept.  He was treated in 2009 at Great
    Ormond Street Hospital and received a cochlear implant and he is  still
    under care in the sense that his development of  his  hearing  and  the
    effect of the implants is considered on an ongoing basis.  Nonetheless,
    he is still suffering from the effects of his hearing loss and  he  has
    special needs at the school which he attends.  Indeed, the  school  has
    special equipment in place and this enables him  with  the  appropriate
    support and therapy to advance in his learning but he does have  severe
    language and speech difficulties and he  needs  what  is  described  as
    communication software in order to be able to join in properly with his
    education and he needs what is said to be a high level of  support  and
    one-to-one therapy.  So it is not a question that he is simply deaf  or
    hard of hearing because there are needs for special treatment in  order
    that he is able to pursue his education and obviously to have a  proper
    life in the future.

4.   The evidence produced before the  judge  was  that  the  facilities  in
    Bangladesh and the continuation of his therapy are  extremely  limited,
    and of course there would be a serious lapse in the support that he  is
    obtaining,  and  further  there  was   concern   that   children   with
    disabilities who are stigmatised by society in Bangladesh and the third
    appellant would be excluded from mainstream education.  The  First-tier
    Judge dealt with that, having referred to the evidence in paragraph  24
    of his decision where he said this:


         "He said that the third appellant would be seriously disadvantaged.
          Reports pertaining to the child show that he enjoys in the  United
         Kingdom most advantageous conditions for learning in rooms and with
         equipment devised to facilitate as far  as  possible  communication
         with teachers and also maintenance of his cochlear implants.   They
         show that he benefits from his circumstances  and  his  ability  to
         communicate both initiating speech and using an  electronic  tablet
         is improving.  There is evidence of the sort of facility  available
         in Bangladesh.  It is true that the  facilities  are  by  no  means
         favourably comparable with those which the appellant enjoys in  the
         United Kingdom.  There would appear to be very  limited  access  to
         tuition in Bengali sign language and to other support for  therapy.
         There can be  little  doubt  the  third  appellant  will  lose  the
         substantial benefit which he enjoys in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
         question remains whether his best interests would be so  materially
         adversely affected by  removal  such  that  his  removal  would  be
         unreasonable".


5.   The important further consideration in relation to the third  appellant
    is that by the time of the hearing before the First-tier Judge  he  had
    been resident here for over seven years  and  that  is  of  fundamental
    importance because of the provisions of  Section  117B  and  D  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Section 117B deals  with
    public interest considerations applicable  to  Article  8  and  117B(6)
    provides:


         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -


         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and


         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom".


6.   That leads to consideration of the recent  decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in MA (Pakistan) and Others v the Upper  Tribunal.   It  is  now
    reported in the Immigration and Nationality Reports,  but  the  neutral
    citation number is [2016] EWCA Civ 705.  That was a case or a number of
    cases brought  together  where  there  was  an  issue  in  relation  to
    deportation of parents and the effect on the child.  The misdeeds of  a
    parent which were material in the MA cases are not of  course  material
    here because there is no suggestion of any such question but  what  the
    court decided in paragraph 49 was as follows:


         "Although this was not in fact a seven  year  case,  on  the  wider
         construction of Section 117B(6), the same principles would apply in
         such a case.  However, the fact that the child has been in  the  UK
         for seven years would need to be given significant  weight  in  the
         proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first, because of
         its relevance to determining the nature and strength of the child's
         best interests; and second, because it establishes  as  a  starting
         point that leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful
         reasons to the contrary".


7.   With respect to the First-tier Judge he has got, in paragraph 24  which
    I have cited, the matter the wrong way round.  The starting point where
    a child has been here for seven years, is that there should be leave to
    remain which will mean leave for the parents  to  remain  in  the  vast
    majority of cases.  I say the vast majority because one can  imagine  a
    case where the child is under 18, but very nearly 18 and it is possible
    in such a case it would not be necessary for the parent to  be  allowed
    to remain with the child but that of course is not  a  situation  which
    applies at all in circumstances of this case.  The child is  I  imagine
    due to start secondary education fairly soon.  It seems to me in  those
    circumstances that it is quite impossible having regard to the evidence
    of the way in which he has to be dealt with at school that he would  be
    other than seriously disadvantaged were  he  to  have  to  go  back  to
    Bangladesh.

8.   The point that is often relied on and appears to underlie the  decision
    reached was that provided a family can be  returned  together  then  it
    must be not unreasonable to expect the child to go as well.   But  this
    is a disabled child and a child who clearly has required the aids  that
    he receives in teaching in order to be able to  be  educated  properly.
    It is not appropriate to believe that he would receive such care if  it
    were not necessary for the purposes of  furthering  his  education  and
    thus enabling him to live a sensible, proper life.   The  relevance  of
    the Bengali point is that the evidence is of course clear; at school he
    learns English, he grows up learning English and  the  facilities  that
    are provided for him are to enable him to learn English and  the  fact,
    if it be a fact, that his parents may speak Bengali at home and he  may
    be able to understand some Bengali is really not the point.

9.   The First-tier Judge was concerned that there had been  use  of  public
    funds in paragraph 27 in which he decided that albeit  there  would  be
    much reduced professional support and therapy in Bangladesh,  he  would
    enjoy the support of the parents and their wider extended family  which
    has not put the matter I deal with in the proper way for the reasons  I
    have already given.  He concludes his  reasons  in  that  paragraph  by
    saying it comes at a cost to public funds in this country and that is a
    factor that he has taken into account, and it is within Section 117B  a
    matter that is referred to in 117B(3) where it is said:

         "It is the public interest, in particular in the interests  of  the
         economic wellbeing of the United Kingdom that persons who  seek  to
         enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  financially  independent
         because such persons -


         (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and


         (b)  are better able to integrate into society".


10.  The point that is being made is that public funds  are  dealt  with  in
    guidance from the Secretary of State and of course are  a  factor  that
    are referred to specifically in the Immigration Rules and the  guidance
    indicates that school and medical treatment are not to be  regarded  as
    public funds for the purpose of the Rules.  It seems  to  me  in  those
    circumstances that it was wrong for the First-tier Judge  to  give  any
    weight to that factor in all  the  circumstances.   I  appreciate  that
    there are certain instances in which that can be appropriate but  where
    one is dealing with a child who has been here  for  seven  years  since
    Section 117B(6) indicates that the public interest does not  require  a
    removal in such a case, then what is set out in sub-Section  (3)  which
    refers to the interests of the economic wellbeing of the United Kingdom
    is a matter that is to be regarded in the context of what  was  in  the
    public interest cannot apply here.

11.  It is also to be noted that the First-tier Judge approached the  matter
    on the basis of focusing on the father as the  appellant  and  treating
    the child's appeal really as a Section 55 approach.  Whether that  will
    have made any significant difference I am not sure,  but  unfortunately
    he did make the serious error in that he said that lesser weight was to
    be accorded to private and to family life; that is simply wrong because
    Section 117B(4) and (5) provide:

         "(4) Little weight should be given to -


             (a)  a private life, or


             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious".


    Thus private life can properly be given less weight but not the  family
    life and of course family life here was an issue.  Nevertheless,  again
    that is to be considered in the light of the main point  which  I  have
    referred to, namely the fact that the child has  been  here  for  seven
    years, has the disabilities in question and I have  no  doubt  whatever
    that if one adopts the approach the Court of Appeal said is the correct
    approach, the starting point being that leave should be granted  unless
    there are quite apart from there  being  no  powerful  reasons  to  the
    contrary, there are powerful reasons why leave should be granted in the
    light of the disability of the third appellant.


12.  In those circumstances it seems to me that this appeal must be  allowed
    and there is no need for me to remit.  I am satisfied that  I  can  re-
    make the decision and allow the appeals of all three appellants.  It is
    not for me in terms to indicate the nature of the leave that should  be
    granted.  I only draw attention to the fact that father has now been in
    this country for  over  ten  years  and  has,  I  understand,  made  an
    application based on his ten year residence  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.  In the light of that, and in the light of  the  need  for  the
    third appellant to be here at least until he  reaches  the  age  of  18
    while he still remains a minor and is certainly  undergoing  treatment,
    it seems that it will be  difficult  to  justify  anything  other  than
    permanent leave to remain but it is, as I say, I think not  for  me  to
    direct that that should be the case and I only indicate that  it  would
    be in my judgment difficult, if not impossible  for  the  Secretary  of
    State to justify anything else.

No anonymity direction is made.



[pic]


Signed                                  Date: 7 June 2017


Mr Justice Collins


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD



I was not asked to make a fee award.

[pic]


Signed                                  Date: 7 June 2017


Mr Justice Collins

