


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/24514/2015
                                                               IA/24517/2015
                                                               IA/24519/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 19 December 2016                    |On 27 January 2017                     |
|                                       |                                       |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

|                         |Harjit Singh             |First Respondent         |
|                         |Baljit Kaur              |Second Respondent        |
|                         |Jasmin Kaur Bhangu       |Third Respondent         |


                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr J Plowright, Counsel, instructed by HSBS Law
Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Although this appeal touches on the welfare of a child  no  concerns  for
  the safety of the respondents. I see no need for, and  do  not  make,  an
  order restricting publication about this case.

2. The  appellant,  hereinafter  "the  Secretary  of  State",  appeals  with
  permission given by the Upper Tribunal against a decision of  the  First-
  tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the  respondents,  hereinafter  "the
  claimants", against a decision of the Secretary of  State  refusing  them
  leave to remain  on  human  rights  grounds  on  16  June  2015.      The
  claimants are all citizens of India.  The  first  claimant  was  born  in
  December 1976 and the second claimant in June 1977.  They are married  to
  each other.  The third claimant is their daughter, who  was  born  on  16
  August 2006 in the United Kingdom.

3. The first claimant says that he entered the United  Kingdom  in  2001  by
  train from France.  He applied to remain on human rights grounds in April
  2011.  That application  was  refused  in  July  2011  and  the  decision
  maintained in September 2011.  His appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  was
  dismissed  in  November  2011  but  following   various   representations
  including an application for  judicial  review  the  Secretary  of  State
  agreed to reconsider the circumstances of the claimants.

4. The second claimant arrived in the United Kingdom from  the  Republic  of
  Ireland in December 2004 with a valid visit  visa  and  appears  to  have
  remained without permission.  The third claimant was born in  the  United
  Kingdom.

5. The judge was not particularly concerned about the  earlier  decision  to
  dismiss appeals on ostensibly similar facts.   Since  that  hearing  more
  persuasive evidence has been produced to show that the first  and  second
  claimants have been living in the United Kingdom at least since 2005 and,
  at the risk of being trite, the third  claimant  is  significantly  older
  than she was in 2011.

6. The judge considered the Rules and directed himself, correctly,  that  in
  order to decide if the appeal should be allowed under the Rules he had to
  decide if it was "reasonable" for the third claimant to leave the  United
  Kingdom.  The judge  identified  the  correct  legal  test  and  reminded
  himself, appropriately, of  the  decisions  in  Azimi-Moayed  and  others
  (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013]  UKUT  00197  (IAC)
  and EV (Philippines) & Ors v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

7. The judge also had regard to a medical report from a Dr S Ratra dated  18
  August 2014 reporting  some  of  the  difficulties  faced  by  the  third
  claimant and expressing the view that it would "be a  disaster"  for  the
  child  to  be  uprooted  and  removed.   The  judge  said  that  he  gave
  "appropriate weight to the expert report" but  also  found  it  would  be
  "overwhelmingly in the best interests of the third [claimant]  to  remain
  in the UK with her parents".

8. He went on to conclude that it was not reasonable  to  expect  the  third
  claimant to leave the United Kingdom and in the circumstances allowed the
  appeals of all the claimants.

9. The criticism of the judge is  not  that  he  failed  to  direct  himself
  correctly but to his alleged failure  to  follow  those  directions.   In
  fairness to the judge, I have an advantage that he did not have.  I  have
  been able to read the decision of the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan)  &
  Ors, R (on the application of) v Upper Tribunal (Immigration  and  Asylum
  Chamber) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705 promulgated on 7 July 2016  and  also
  The Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  AJ  (Zimbabwe)  [2016]
  EWCA Civ 1012.

10. These decisions make clear that it is too simple to  say  that  a  child
  who has lived in the United Kingdom for seven years should be allowed  to
  remain, and, more significantly, the proper  enforcement  of  immigration
  control is a weighty matter in an Article  8  or  Rules  based  balancing
  exercise.  There are aggravating features here that were  not  considered
  adequately or at all by the First-tier Tribunal.  In particular, there is
  the long period in which both parents have lived in  the  United  Kingdom
  without permission, which shows a disregard for immigration  control  and
  that is something which should not easily overlooked, even for  the  sake
  of the child.

11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was  somewhat  critical  in  his  findings
  about Dr Ratra's evidence, which, I have no hesitation in saying, did not
  justify the conclusions given.  It would be surprising if a child who has
  lived all its life in the  United  Kingdom  would  not  be  unsettled  by
  removal to India but she is a  national  of  that  country  and  has  the
  advantage  of  loving,  educated   parents.    There   was   no   medical
  justification offered in the report for the conclusion that it  would  be
  "a disaster" for the child to be removed.  Medical evidence can justify a
  range of decisions that would not otherwise be permissible  but  it  does
  not justify this decision.

12. I have no hesitation in saying that the First-tier Tribunal went  beyond
  the range of permissible possibilities.  It did not show in its  decision
  proper regard for important factors in favour of removal and I  therefore
  set aside its decision.

13. Mr Plowright  asked  to  serve  additional  evidence.   He  had  clearly
  discussed this before the hearing with Mr Kotas, who was not in  any  way
  taken by surprise but, properly, neither of them had indicated that to me
  before the error of law  arguments  had  been  presented.   Mr  Plowright
  accepted readily that there had  only  been  one  significant  change  of
  circumstance since May 2016  but  it  was,  he  submitted,  an  extremely
  significant  change  of  circumstance,  although  one  suggested  in  the
  Decision and Reasons of the First-tier Tribunal.  The third  claimant  is
  now a British citizen.  She became a British citizen on 12 December 2016.
   This has an immediate impact on the appeal.  Clearly the appeal  in  her
  case has to be allowed  when  it  is  remade.   She  cannot  lawfully  be
  required to leave  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  question  of  what  is
  reasonable has to be revisited.

14. Mr Kotas referred me to a passage in MA supporting the  contention  that
  a child with more than seven  years'  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom
  should be treated in many ways like a United Kingdom national.  He argued
  that this was an endorsement of the view that a United  Kingdom  national
  can be removed.  I reject that interpretation of MA.  The Court of Appeal
  was acknowledging the that the rules  elevating  the  rights  of  a  non-
  British citizen child with seven years' residence to something  close  to
  the rights of a British citizen child.  It was not diminishing the rights
  of a British citizen and suggesting  that  a  British  citizen  could  be
  expected to leave.

15. I am quite satisfied that as a matter of European law a British  citizen
  cannot be required to leave the Union  and  I  understand,  although  the
  necessary documents were not produced before me, that there is  a  policy
  in force and published by the Secretary of State showing that  she  would
  not expect a British citizen to leave the  United  Kingdom.   It  follows
  therefore that the third claimant cannot be removed or expected to  leave
  and, in my judgment, it must follow that the appeals  of  the  first  and
  second claimants are allowed.  This is not because of any great merit  on
  their cases.  Indeed, if  the  child  was  not  a  consideration  then  I
  consider their cases to be hopeless even  though  they  have,  no  doubt,
  established themselves in the United Kingdom  during  the  long  unlawful
  residence.

16. However the rights of the child are more than a relevant  consideration.
   They are a primary consideration. Even if I am wrong and I  have  missed
  the point in MA, I have to give considerable weight to the  rights  of  a
  child who is not only entitled to remain in the United  Kingdom  but  who
  has lived there for all of her life that is now for more than 10 years.

17. Further, it would clearly be unduly harsh to require her  to  leave  the
  United Kingdom, even if that was lawful, and it would be unduly harsh  to
  expect her to remain without her parents. She cannot be expected to  lose
  daily contact with her parents for the sake of  immigration  control  and
  although overstaying is to be criticised it is the extent of the parents'
  misbehaviour. There are no other significant aggravating features.

18. It follows that for  the  sake  of  the  child  the  appeals  should  be
  allowed.

Notice of Decision

It follows therefore that although I allow the Secretary of  State's  appeal
I substitute  the  decision  allowing  the  claimants'  appeal  against  the
decision of the Secretary of State.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 27 January 2017                |





