
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24677/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 November 2015                  |On 17 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               KAREN HO MAN AU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Johnstone, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilford, instructed by Doyle Clayton, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and to the  respondent
    as the appellant (as they appeared respectively before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).

 2. The appellant, Karen Ho Man Au, was born on  5  March  1990  and  is  a
    citizen of New Zealand.  She appealed against the decision dated 13 May
    2013 to refuse her application  for  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of ten years' long residence (paragraph 276B of HC
    395 (as amended)).  She appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Khawar) which, in a decision promulgated on 16 February  2015,  allowed
    the appeal on Article 8 ECHR  grounds.   The  Secretary  of  State  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The appellant is an organist at Blackburn Cathedral.   Previously,  she
    read music at Cambridge University where she was an  organ  scholar  at
    Corpus  Christi  College.   Judge  Khawar  considered  the  appellant's
    private life in some detail and concluded that, although she could  not
    succeed under the  Immigration  Rules  (neither  party  to  the  appeal
    suggests that she can do so), her appeal should be allowed on Article 8
    ECHR (private life) grounds.  The respondent challenges  that  decision
    on the basis that the judge inter alia failed to give adequate reasons.
     The respondent asserts that the judge placed too great a weight on the
    appellant's role within the Anglican Church.   The  respondent  submits
    that,

         "... the UK cannot be said to be both 'secular and divine'.   Human
         rights jurisprudence is to be neutral as between those of differing
         religions and those who eschew religion altogether.  The  religious
         value, or otherwise, of the  appellant's  activities  as  an  organ
         scholar is accordingly an irrelevant consideration."

    The respondent accepts [5] that "it could in principle  be  permissible
    to  find  the  appellant's  activities  affected  the   proportionality
    calculus by virtue of their objective value to society ... but not,  as
    in the instant determination, on the basis of their religious  values".
    The respondent relied upon the judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    McFarlane v Relate Avon Ltd [2010] EWCA Civ 880.

 4. I am not persuaded that the judge has allowed this  appeal  because  he
    has  attached  excessive  weight  to  the  contribution  made  by  this
    appellant to the lives of Anglicans as opposed to those espousing other
    religions  (or  no  religion).   The  grounds  of  appeal  indicate   a
    misreading of the judge's decision.  The judge  stressed  the  cultural
    importance of the appellant's activities to the community  as  a  whole
    ("the English Heritage" (sic)); the fact the appellant is  an  organist
    in an Anglican Church was clearly less relevant to the judge  than  the
    fact that she was contributing to the musical and cultural life of  the
    community; there is no suggestion that one denomination of Christianity
    or indeed that Christianity itself is to be given  special  preference.
    The judge refers to the "Anglican choral tradition"  [10]  but  not  on
    account of its having any particular religious worth but because it  is
    a "British cultural heritage  which  is  sadly  on  the  demise".   The
    grounds submit that the judge has shown a preference towards a follower
    of the Anglican Christian tradition by way  of  discriminating  against
    those of other religions or no religion  at  all.   That  assertion  is
    simply not borne out in the decision of the  judge.   It  is  also  not
    apparent that the judge has placed excessive weight on the  established
    status of the Anglican Church in England  and  Wales  [6].   The  judge
    found  that  the  appellant's  activities  contributed  to  the  United
    Kingdom's wider cultural heritage and achievement.

 5. Having said that, it is of some concern that the judge  has  chosen  to
    allow this appeal on Article  8  ECHR  grounds.   He  was  entitled  to
    consider the fact that the appellant has lived in  the  United  Kingdom
    for a long period of time (her absences from the  country  led  to  the
    failure of her application under the Immigration Rules).  The fact that
    she is a highly-talented, well-educated woman of  impeccable  character
    may be factors within the analysis but should not  be  given  excessive
    weight.  It could be said, having looked at the facts before the judge,
    that the appellant was fortunate that the judge has chosen to allow her
    appeal.  Another judge, faced with the same factual  matrix,  may  well
    have reached a different decision.  However, that  is  not  the  point.
    The respondent's grounds  of  appeal  challenge  the  decision  not  on
    grounds of perversity, but upon a  basis  which  I  have  found  to  be
    invalid.  Indeed, I asked Miss Johnstone, for the respondent,  whether,
    on these facts, any decision to allow the  appeal  would  be  perverse.
    She did not submit that it would be.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge was
    charged with considering all the evidence both  written  and  oral  and
    with robustly analysing that evidence in reaching findings of fact.  He
    did not err in law in the manner asserted by the  respondent's  grounds
    of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   The  judge  supported  the  findings
    which he reached  with  clear  and  cogent  reasoning.   His  decision,
    although perhaps generous, was not  obviously  perverse  nor  does  the
    respondent claim that it is.  In the circumstances, the Upper  Tribunal
    should refrain from tinkering with the decisions of First-tier Tribunal
    Judges which have been reached after  a  proper  consideration  of  the
    relevant facts and application of the appropriate legal principles.  In
    the circumstances, I dismiss the respondent's appeal.

Notice of Decision

 6. The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 2 December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

