
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/24053/2015
                                                               IA/24054/2015
                                                               IA/24055/2015
                                                               IA/24056/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 October 2016                   |On 15 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                       NARAHARI [R] (FIRST APPELLANT)
                        NISHA [R] (SECOND APPELLANT)
                           [N R] (THIRD APPELLANT)
                          [S R] (FOURTH APPELLANT)
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms S Akinbolu, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Rose promulgated on 1 February 2016 dismissing the linked appeals of Mr
    Narahari [R] (date of birth 28 November 1964), Mrs Nisha [R], his wife,
    (date of birth 13 November 1971), and their two children [NR] (date  of
    birth 24 June 2004) and [SR] (date of birth 29 January 2010).

2.   The Appellants' immigration histories are set out in  the  Respondent's
    'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 17 June 2015 and I  do  not
    propose to repeat those histories in detail.  Suffice to say  that  the
    First Appellant entered the United Kingdom in May  2001  as  a  Tier  4
    Student.  The Second Appellant entered the United Kingdom in July  2007
    accompanied by the Third Appellant, who at that stage would have been a
    little over 3 years old, with visas as dependants of a Tier 4  Student.
    The Fourth Appellant was born in the United Kingdom in 2010. The  First
    Appellant applied for successive grants of leave as a student up  until
    31 October 2007.  However, in 2006 on 23 November he was served with an
    IS151A document on the basis that he was considered to  be  working  in
    breach of his conditions of leave to enter as a student.

3.   It follows that at  the  time  that  the  Second  Appellant  and  Third
    Appellant entered the United Kingdom premise of their visas - that  the
    principal family member was a person  with  valid  leave  -  no  longer
    pertained.  Indeed it transpires that when an attempt was made to serve
    removal papers on the First Appellant and he informed  the  Immigration
    Officer of the circumstances of his  wife  and  son's  arrival  in  the
    United Kingdom, some surprise was expressed by the relevant case worker
    and removal of the First Appellant did not take place.

4.   The Second and Third Appellants did not  seek  to  extend  their  visas
    after expiry, and it was not then until  2015  that  applications  were
    made by the family to remain in the United Kingdom - essentially on the
    basis of family and private life established over the  period  of  time
    that they had been in the UK.

5.   The application was refused by way of a RFRL dated 17 June  2015.   The
    Appellants appealed to the Immigration and Asylum Chamber.  The essence
    of the Appellants' case before the First-tier Tribunal is summarised at
    paragraphs 20 and 21 of the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rose.
     Reliance was placed on Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human
    Rights and the Judge observed this at paragraph 21:

         "As noted above the Appellants did not maintain that they  met  the
         requirements of Appendix FM. They relied on paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)
         and (vi), on the basis that it would not be  reasonable  to  expect
         the third Appellant to  leave  the  UK  and  there  would  be  very
         significant obstacles to the integration by the  first  and  second
         Appellants into Nepal.".

6.   Before this Tribunal it is only the first of those  arguments  that  is
    now pursued - that is to  say  in  respect  of  the  reasonableness  of
    expecting the Third Appellant to leave the UK, and  there  is  no  live
    argument or issue before me in respect of 'significant  obstacles'  for
    the First and Second Appellant in terms of reintegration to the country
    of their nationality.

7.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed  the  Appellants'  appeals  for
    reasons set out  his  Decision  and  Reasons.   The  Appellants  sought
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal which was initially  refused
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Woodcraft on 12 July 2016 but subsequently
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam on 8 September 2016.

8.   The focus of challenge relates to the Third Appellant and is  expressed
    in this way in the grant of permission to appeal by Judge McWilliam "It
    is arguable that the judge did not adequately reason the decision  that
    it would be reasonable (Section 117B(6)) for the eldest child to return
    to Nepal with his parents".  In fact as I have  already  indicated  the
    particular focus before the First-tier Tribunal was not  such  much  on
    Section 117B(6) but on paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv), but as is  acknowledged
    by both representatives before me, and was  identified  by  Judge  Rose
    with reference to the case of AM (Section 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT  260
    (IAC), both Section 117B(6) and 276ADE(1)(iv) raise the  same  question
    which need only be answered once, (see paragraph 32 of the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal).

9.   The evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  related  to  the
    circumstances of the Third Appellant consisted of a number of documents
    in relation  to  his  educational  progress  which  were  substantially
    similar or the same as the documents that had been submitted  with  the
    application, together with  some  amplification  of  his  circumstances
    provided in the witness statement of the First Appellant (signed on  19
    January 2016).   The  circumstances  of  the  Third  Appellant  are  in
    particular referenced at paragraphs 11,  12  and  16  of  that  witness
    statement.  In essence, emphasis was placed on the length of time  that
    the Third Appellant had been in the United  Kingdom  and  the  progress
    that he had made in the education system here wherein he had also built
    up friendships.  The remainder  of  the  witness  statement  sought  to
    address the circumstances of the other family members and  also  sought
    to address matters raised in the Respondent's RFRL in  respect  of  the
    issue of integration in Nepal which, as I have said,  is  no  longer  a
    live issue before me.

10.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge, in my judgment, adequately set  out  the
    background to the case and the evidence in his  Decision  and  Reasons,
    and also, in my judgment, traversed such evidence in his findings - not
    just in respect of the Appellants generally but specifically in respect
    of both children, and necessarily therefore the  Third  Appellant.   In
    this context it is appropriate that I say a little bit more  about  the
    structure of the decision because some aspects of the challenge that is
    now pursued seek to impugn elements of that structure.

11.  As I have noted the Judge identified the key issues  at  paragraphs  20
    and 21.  At paragraph 22 he then identified the length of time that the
    First Appellant had been living in the  United  Kingdom  and  also  the
    slightly shorter length of time that  the  Second  Appellant  had  been
    present in the  United  Kingdom.   Over  the  following  paragraphs  he
    focused primarily - although given the inevitable interlinking  of  the
    family unit not exclusively - upon the circumstances of the  First  and
    Second Appellants.  At paragraph 23, having considered  what  had  been
    said on their behalf, the Judge concluded that he had no reason to find
    it probable that the First Appellant would be unable to find employment
    in Nepal, and similarly with regard to the Second Appellant  there  was
    no need to believe that she would be unable  to  work  in  Nepal  as  a
    teacher as  she  had  done  previously.   At  paragraph  24  the  Judge
    identified that there were still close family members of  each  of  the
    First and Second Appellants living in Nepal.  At paragraphs 25  and  26
    the Judge considered the particular  circumstances  of  a  relative  by
    marriage  of  the  Second  Appellant  who  had  been  responsible   for
    accommodating and providing a degree of support to the Second Appellant
    prior to her coming to the United Kingdom when the First Appellant  had
    already been in the United Kingdom.  That  relative  had  indicated  in
    support of the Second Appellant's earlier appeal in  respect  of  entry
    clearance, a willingness to continue to support  the  Second  Appellant
    upon her return to Nepal - it being said at that time that she was only
    coming to the United Kingdom for a limited period of time  pending  the
    First Appellant's recovery from what appears to have been minor surgery
    on his ear.  The Judge concluded that there was no  reason  to  believe
    that the financial position or the relationship  had  deteriorated,  or
    that the relative would not continue to be prepared to provide  support
    to the Second Appellant and her family if they were now  to  return  to
    Nepal.

12.  At paragraphs 27 and 28 the Judge considered the question of  a  recent
    earthquake in Nepal and concluded that this in itself did  not  provide
    any obstacle to  return,  or  to  seeking  assistance  in  establishing
    themselves through relatives whose properties had not been destroyed in
    the earthquake.

13.  Having considered all of these matters - which as I have indicated  are
    in effect a traverse  of  the  matters  raised  by  the  Appellants  as
    potential obstacles to return and reintegration - the  Judge  concluded
    that he was not satisfied that there were significant obstacles to  the
    integration into Nepal of the First and Second Appellants.

14.  The Judge then says this at paragraph 30 "Accordingly  I  consider  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules in relation to the
    Third Appellant on that basis".  It seems to me absolutely  clear  that
    what the Judge means by 'on that basis' is that the  Third  Appellant's
    parents would be able to reintegrate into Nepal.  It seems to  me  that
    that was a perfectly legitimate approach to take.

15.  The Judge then indeed went on to  consider  the  circumstances  of  the
    Third Appellant.  At paragraph  31  he  identified  the  age  that  the
    Appellant had been when he arrived in the United Kingdom, the length of
    time that he had been living in the United Kingdom; at paragraph 32 the
    Judge considered some relevant case law, as indeed he did at paragraphs
    33 and 34 observing the observations  in  AM  (Malawi)  in  respect  of
    interruption to education being at times no more significant than  that
    faced by any child forced to move from one country to another by virtue
    of the careers of their parents.  At paragraph 35 the Judge had  regard
    to the Supreme Court case of  Zoumbas  and  then  at  paragraph  36  he
    considered  what  the  First  Appellant  had  said  about   the   Third
    Appellant's Nepalese language skills.  The Judge  did  not  accept  all
    that had been said by the First Appellant in this regard, and concluded
    that it was probable that the Third Appellant  has  some  knowledge  of
    both Nepalese language and Nepalese culture, and with the help  of  his
    parents would be able to build on that knowledge so as to  be  able  to
    integrate and participate fully in his  schooling  in  Nepal.   It  was
    noted that the Third Appellant's school report  did  not  indicate  any
    particular educational difficulties or requirements.

16.  The Judge took this analysis forward to paragraph 37 and observed  that
    it was to be expected that the Third Appellant if required to leave the
    United Kingdom would return to  Nepal  with  his  parents  and  younger
    brother and said this "There will inevitably be some disruption to  his
    education, since he will have to adjust to different  education  system
    in a different country and a different language.  However, he  will  be
    able to continue to live with his parents and, as I  have  found,  they
    can reasonably be expected  to  be  able  to  work  in  Nepal  and,  if
    necessary, to be able to obtain  some  financial  support  from  family
    members.  He may also have the  opportunity  to  develop  relationships
    with his grandparents and uncles and aunts living in Nepal.  No  health
    issues have been raised".

17.  The Judge  at  paragraph  38  considered  the  question  of  the  Third
    Appellant's own views.  A complaint had been made  by  the  Appellants'
    representative that the Respondent did not canvas  these  or  otherwise
    take them into account.  The Judge observed comments made by the  First
    Appellant as to the  Third  Appellant's  observations  in  this  regard
    following a visit from Immigration Officer, and explicitly stated  that
    he took into account that the Third Appellant would prefer to  continue
    living in the UK.

18.  The Judge reached his conclusion in  respect  of  the  Third  Appellant
    under the Immigration Rules at  paragraph  39  in  these  terms  "I  am
    satisfied that the third Appellant can be removed to Nepal in the  care
    of his parents without serious detriment  to  his  wellbeing.   In  the
    light of the matters to which I have referred I find that it  would  be
    reasonable to expect him to leave the UK".

19.  Thereafter the Judge went on to consider the cases  of  the  Appellants
    under Article 8 - from  paragraph  40  onwards.   At  paragraph  44  in
    respect of Section 117B(6) the Judge reminded himself of the finding he
    made in respect of the Third Appellant  under  276ADE(1)(iv),  and,  no
    doubt mindful of his earlier direction in respect of AM (Malawi), found
    it was unnecessary to go into that question a second time but  observed
    again that it would be reasonable to  expect  the  Third  Appellant  to
    leave the UK.

20.  At paragraph 49 the Judge concluded that  he  did  not  consider  there
    were any compelling circumstances to warrant a grant of leave to remain
    outside the requirements of the Rules and found that  the  decision  to
    refuse   the   Appellants'   applications   did   not   constitute    a
    disproportionate interference with the exercise of their  rights  under
    Article 8.

21.  The Appellants raised two grounds of challenge in the  application  for
    permission to appeal submitted to the Upper Tribunal and considered  by
    Judge  McWilliam  in  granting  permission  to  appeal.   There  is  an
    introductory paragraph to the grounds of challenge which  is  in  these
    terms:

         "First-tier Tribunal Judge Rose dismissed the appeal of  the  First
         Appellant, his wife and his two children by first deciding that the
         parents did not qualify under paragraph 276ADE and 'on that  basis'
         )para 30) that it would be reasonable for the [Third Appellant]  to
         go to Nepal 'in the care of his parents without  serious  detriment
         to his welling' (para 39)".

22.  I pause to note that in my judgment it is not  appropriate  to  make  a
    direct connection between the findings in respect of  the  parents  and
    the suggestion that the  third  Appellant  lost  his  appeal  "on  that
    basis".  There is an ambiguity about  that  paragraph  which  might  be
    taken to suggest that the drafter  was  of  the  view  that  the  Third
    Appellant had lost his case simply because his parents had  lost  their
    cases.  If that was the intention of the drafter  -  as  I  say  it  is
    ambiguous rather than clear that was the intention of the drafter -  it
    seems to me that that  was  inappropriate  and  not  justified  by  the
    careful analysis of the decision in the round.  Be that as it may it is
    clear that the introductory paragraph is raising some issue in  respect
    of the order in which the Judge approached  the  consideration  of  the
    appeal; this then finds its force in the way in which the first  ground
    of challenge has been drafted.  Indeed the first ground of challenge is
    drafted under the heading "Failure to determine the best interest first
    (per NA (Pakistan))".  The grounds go  on  in  these  terms  "The  best
    interest of children must be considered first, and without reference to
    the immigration status of either parent: (EV Philippines v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department  [2014  EWCA  Civ  874  at  para  33  per
    Christopher Clark LJ (with whom  Jackson  LJ  agreed);  ZH  Tanzania  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] 2 AC 185 per Hale  B.
    at 33; best interest of a child primary  consideration,  and  "must  be
    considered  first"."   The  grounds   continue   "The   argument   that
    'reasonableness' includes consideration of the conduct and  immigration
    history of the parent was rejected most recently in MA Pakistan v  SSHD
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at 36 per Elias LJ"; then "By not  considering  the
    best interest of the children first it is respectfully  submitted  that
    it is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law".

23.  Looking at those paragraphs,  the  following  preliminary  observations
    may be made.  The first  paragraph,  citing  EV  (Philippines)  and  ZH
    (Tanzania) is no more than  an  assertion  of  principle.   The  second
    paragraph referring to MA (Pakistan) does  not,  as  Ms  Akinbolu  very
    properly acknowledges, represent a correct statement of the  law  given
    that the observations of  Lord  Justice  Elias  were  premised  by  his
    observation that they were being made in a vacuum, as  it  were,  "free
    from authority" (see paragraph  36  of  MA  (Pakistan)),  and  that  he
    acknowledged in due course that he was not free from authority and  did
    not think it appropriate to depart from what was said in  MM  (Uganda).
    In any event in this context it seems to me that the ground as  drafted
    suffers  from  a  lack  of  focus  on  the  distinction  between  'best
    interests' and the 'reasonableness' test under 276ADE(1)(iv) or section
    117B(6).  'Best interests' may inform, and must be taken  into  account
    in, the evaluation of 'reasonableness', but they are not the same thing
    and  they  are  not   determinative   one   way   or   the   other   of
    'reasonableness'.

24.  The final part of the Ground referring to the supposed failure  in  not
    considering the best interests of the children first, in  my  judgment,
    is a reference to the order in  which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    addressed the issues in the appeal.  What the ground does not in  terms
    do is to submit that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to  have
    regard to the best interests of the children: although Ms Akinbolu  has
    sought to make such a contention, or develop such a point,  during  the
    course of submissions it  clearly  is  not  rooted  in  the  Ground  as
    drafted, or, therefore, the Grounds upon which permission to appeal was
    given.

25.  Insofar as 'best interests' are concerned it  seems  to  be  absolutely
    clear that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had in mind the best interests
    of both children, and necessarily therefore the Third Appellant.   Most
    of the case that was advanced before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, and
    to which he refers specifically, was based on case law  that  had  very
    detailed consideration to the concept of best interests.  It  is  plain
    that the Judge had regard to all such matters as were being advanced on
    behalf of the child Appellants with regard to  their  circumstances  in
    the UK and the potential detriment to them if  they  were  required  to
    leave the United Kingdom.  The  idea  that  the  circumstances  of  the
    children were anything other than at the forefront of the consideration
    of those paragraphs in the Decision  where  the  Judge  considered  the
    children seems to me to be unfounded. This indeed throws the focus back
    on whether there was anything wrong with the order in which the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge approached the issues.

26.  In this  regard  the  suggestion  in  the  grounds  seems  to  be  that
    essentially that it was incumbent upon the First-tier Tribunal Judge to
    reach a conclusion in respect of the children  before  considering  the
    adults.  I do not find that to be the case. It seems  to  me  that  the
    parents' position is inextricably linked to those of the  children  and
    inextricably linked to the children's welfare and best  interests.   In
    particular in the context of considering the circumstances upon  return
    to Nepal, whilst I entirely accept  that  an  evaluation  of  the  best
    interests of a child is exactly that - i.e. an evaluation of  the  best
    interest of the child - when then considering  the  wider  question  of
    reasonableness in  immigration  terms  it  is  entirely  artificial  to
    consider only the circumstances of the child  as  it  were  as  a  sole
    independent unit and not to have regard to the  absolute  reality  that
    the child would be returning in the company of  a  parent  or  parents.
    Indeed this seems to  be  the  very  issue  that  was  the  subject  of
    consideration at the end of the case of Zoumbas.  At  paragraph  25  of
    that case the Supreme Court observed as follows:

         "Finally we see no substance in the criticism that  the  assessment
         of the children's best interest was flawed because it assumed  that
         their parents would be removed to the Republic of Congo.   It  must
         be recalled that the decision maker began by stating the conclusion
         and then set out the reasoning.  It was legitimate for the decision
         maker to ask herself first whether it would have been proportionate
         to remove  the  parents  if  they  had  no  children  and  then  in
         considering  the   best   interest   of   the   children   in   the
         proportionality exercise ask whether their wellbeing  altered  that
         provisional balance.  ...  The assessment of  the  children's  best
         interest must be made in the context of the decision as a whole".

27.  In the light of that in my judgment it  was  entirely  appropriate  for
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge to consider  whether  the  parents  could
    establish a basis to remain in the United Kingdom first. After all,  if
    the parents could establish such a basis then it would likely  lead  to
    all of the Appellants succeeding without a need to go  into  any  great
    analysis in respect  of  the  particular  circumstances  of  the  Third
    Appellant.  However, having found on the facts of this  case  that  the
    First and Second Appellants could not establish a basis  to  remain  in
    their  own  right,  it  seems  to  me  that   when   looking   at   the
    'reasonableness' question in respect of  the  Third  Appellant  it  was
    entirely appropriate to look at it on the premise that in the event  of
    removal the Third Appellant would be in the c company of his parents.

28.  I am of course aware of the dichotomy between the cases  MA  (Pakistan)
    and MM (Uganda), but this really  relates  to  the  appropriateness  or
    otherwise of  offsetting  the  poor  immigration  history  against  the
    private life of a child.  In essence in considering Section 117B(6) the
    case of MM considers that it is appropriate  that  an  'in  the  round'
    consideration be given not only to the particular circumstances of  the
    child  but  also  any  countervailing  factors  including  the  adverse
    immigration history of the parents; whereas in MA  Lord  Justice  Elias
    was of the view that the wording of Section 117B(6) was  such  that  it
    excluded a consideration of any adverse immigration history on the part
    of the parents and that the focus should only be on the  reasonableness
    of the child, with there being no validity  in  looking  at  extraneous
    factors  in  relation  to  family  members  in  the  overall  balancing
    exercise.  That is a dichotomy that may in due course be resolved,  but
    it seems to me that it does not  have  any  particular  impact  on  the
    circumstances of this case because it is not the circumstance here that
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Rose sought to offset the private life of the
    Third Appellant against the adverse immigration history of the parents.
     Whilst the Judge took into account that the parents were not  entitled
    to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,  he   did   not   in   evaluating
    'reasonableness' in respect of the Third Appellant treat it, or  indeed
    make any reference to the factor  of  overstaying  for  a  considerable
    period, as an adverse factor  that  weighed  heavily  in  the  balance.
    Accordingly the 'territory' to which the MA / MM dichotomy  relates  is
    not one material to the outcome of this particular appeal.

29.  In all those circumstances it seems to  me  that  best  interests  were
    taken into account.  There is no express challenge to suggest that best
    interests were not factored into the overall balance,  and  insofar  as
    the grounds focus upon the order of the assessment I find  them  to  be
    essentially misconceived. I reject the first basis of challenge.

30.  The second ground of challenge is that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    applied an "elevated threshold".  This ground is  essentially  premised
    upon the use of the words "without serious detriment" which  appear  at
    paragraph 39 (which I have already  quoted  above).  These  words  find
    their way into the decision of Judge Rose via the case of Zoumbas:  see
    paragraph 35 of the Decision of  Judge  Rose  citing  paragraph  24  of
    Zoumbas.

31.  It seems to me that all the First-tier Tribunal Judge has  done  is  to
    borrow from the speeches of their Lordships in  the  Supreme  Court  in
    Zoumbas to inform his evaluation on the facts of this particular  case.
    When one looks at paragraph 39 carefully it seems to me that the  Judge
    is not proceeding on the basis that 'serious detriment' is  the  test'.
    The Judge goes on almost immediately to say in terms  at  paragraph  39
    "In light of the matters to which I have referred, I find that it would
    be reasonable to expect [the  Third  Appellant]  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom".  The reference  to  'the  matters  to  which  the  judge  had
    referred', in my judgment is not a simple reference only to  the  issue
    of 'serious detriment', but is a reference back to all those matters in
    the preceding paragraphs wherein he is considering the matters advanced
    on  behalf  of  the  Third  Appellant  in  the  context  of   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) and setting out his analysis by traversing, it  seems  to
    me, each and every point raised on behalf of the Appellants.  I do  not
    read into paragraph 39 an elevation of the test, and  am  reassured  by
    the fact that the Judge echoes the exact wording  of  the  proper  test
    both when directing himself at paragraph 21 at  the  beginning  of  his
    considerations and in the conclusion at paragraph 39.

32.  In such circumstances I find that there is no substance in  the  second
    ground of challenge.

33.  For these reasons I reject the challenge to the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge and uphold the decision.  There is no error of  law
    and the decision stands.



Notice of Decision

34.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no errors of law  and
stands.

35.  The Appellants' appeals remain dismissed.

36.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed   Date: 14 November 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis


