

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                   Appeal Number:
IA/24618/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Promulgated on:           |
|On 7 February 2014                          |On 10 February 2014       |
|                                            |                          |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                              Abdelghani Ayoub
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                         Secretary of State for the
                               Home Department
                                                           Respondent

                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:     The appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer

Background

   1.       This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission to
      the respondent by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett in respect of the
      determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Woolf  who  allowed  the
      appeal by way of a determination dated 13 December 2013.  Although the
      Secretary of State is the party challenging the determination, I have,
      for the sake  of  convenience,  continued  to  refer  to  her  as  the
      respondent and to the applicant as the appellant.

   2.       The appellant is a citizen of Algeria born on 5 April  1985.  He
      appeals the respondent's decision  to  refuse  to  issue  him  with  a
      residence  card  under  Regulation  15  of   the   Immigration   (EEA)
      Regulations 2006. His spouse is a dual Irish/British national. She has
      always lived in the  UK  and  it  was  conceded  that  she  had  never
      exercised her right to freedom of movement, holding Irish  nationality
      merely due to her parentage.

   3.       The application was  refused  because  the  respondent  was  not
      satisfied that the sponsor had exercised her treaty rights.

   4.       The judge heard oral evidence and  concluded  that  the  sponsor
      fell to be treated as a worker or self employed person who had  ceased
      activity under Regulation 15(1)(c) and that  the  appellant  qualified
      for a residence card in accordance with Regulation 15 (1)(d).

   5.       Permission was granted on the basis that the judge had  arguably
      failed to have full regard to the  definition  of  a  worker  who  had
      ceased activity as per Regulation 5 (2)(a) and, additionally, that she
      had not considered the amendment to the Regulations which excluded EEA
      nationals who are also British citizens.  The  latter  point  was  one
      taken by the judge granting permission.

Appeal hearing

   6.       At the hearing I heard submissions from the parties. The sponsor
      was present and spoke on behalf of her husband, the appellant.

   7.       Ms Everett relied on the grounds and submitted that the  sponsor
      did not satisfy the requirements of Regulation 5(2)(a)(i) or (ii). She
      noted the changes to the Regulations but submitted that the  appellant
      appeared to fall within the transitional provisions of Schedule 3.

   8.       The sponsor gave evidence that she had been self employed  as  a
      nanny and then had been made redundant. Prior to that she had  been  a
      nursery nurse. She had then brought up her daughter  and  was  now  on
      jobseeker's allowance. She said that the appellant had  lost  his  job
      because the Secretary of State had not confirmed  his  entitlement  to
      work.

   9.       At the conclusion of the hearing  I  reserved  my  determination
      which I now give.

Findings and Conclusions

  10.        I  have  taken  into  account  the  submissions  made  and  the
      determination of the First-tier Tribunal.

  11.       I have considered the transitional provisions in Schedule 3  and
      it is plain that the appellant falls within 2(3)(a) and (b);  that  is
      to say on 16 July 2012 and 16 October 2012 he held a  valid  residence
      card issued under the Regulations.  The  amended  Regulations  do  not
      therefore impact upon his application which is probably why the  issue
      was never raised by the respondent either as part of the  reasons  for
      refusal or at the hearing.

  12.       I now consider whether the sponsor is a  qualified  person.  The
      First-tier Tribunal Judge found that she was not a qualified person in
      accordance with Regulation 6 but that she could bring  herself  within
      the definition of Regulation 15(1)(c) as a  worker  or  self  employed
      person who has ceased activity. Such a person is defined in Regulation
      5 and the judge set out the terms of  5(1)  and  (2b  and  c)  in  her
      determination at paragraph 23. The respondent's case is that the judge
      did not consider 5(2)(a)(i) and (ii).

  13.       For the sake of clarity I set out the relevant sections  of  the
      Regulation below (my emphasis):

      "Worker or self-employed person who has ceased activity"
      5.-(1) In these Regulations, "worker or self-employed person who has
      ceased activity" means an EEA national who satisfies the conditions in
      paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).
      (2) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if he-


      (a) terminates his activity as a worker or self-employed person and-
      (i) has reached the age at which he is entitled to a state pension on
the date on which he
      terminates his activity; or
      (ii) in the case of a worker, ceases working to take early retirement;


      (b) pursued his activity as a worker or self-employed person in the
United Kingdom for at
      least twelve months prior to the termination; and
      (c) resided in the United Kingdom continuously for more than three
years prior to the
      termination.


  14.       It is plain from the above that a worker or self employed person
      is required to either satisfy 5(2)(a)(i) or 5(2)(a)(ii) or 5(2)(b) and
      (c). The judge found that the sponsor satisfied 5(2)(b) and (c). There
      is no challenge to her finding that the sponsor had worked as  a  self
      employed nanny, that she had been working for at least 12 months prior
      to the termination of that employment and that she had  been  residing
      in the UK for at least three years prior to  the  termination.   Given
      her positive findings there was no need at all  for  her  to  consider
      5(2)(a)(i) or (ii) and there is no merit at all  in  the  respondent's
      suggestion that she should have done so. Neither of those  subsections
      apply to the appellant's partner and it is enough that  the  next  sub
      section does. This is an application that should never have been  made
      by the respondent and should never have been granted by the judge. All
      it has achieved is unnecessary difficulty for the  appellant  and  his
      partner and their child with the appellant  losing  his  job  and  the
      family having to rely on the state for financial assistance.

  15.       First-tier Tribunal Judge Woolf  was  absolutely  right  in  her
      approach and her findings. There has  been  no  misdirection  and  the
      determination contains no error of law.

Decision

  16.       There is no error of law and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal to allow the appeal against the Secretary of State's  refusal
      to issue a permanent residence card is upheld.



      Signed:






      Dr R Keki?
      Judge           of            the            Upper            Tribunal






      7 February 2014



