


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24491/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : (UT)IAC Birmingham            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On : 19 June 2017                        |On : 27 June 2017                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          maxine karlene donaldson
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Bhachu, instructed by Bassi Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing Mrs  Donaldson's
   appeal against the respondent's  decision  to  refuse  her  human  rights
   claim.

2. For the purposes of this decision,  I  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
   Secretary of State as the respondent and Mrs Donaldson as the  appellant,
   reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.

3. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 2 April 1970.  She  entered
   the United Kingdom with entry clearance as a visitor on 21 May  1998  and
   subsequently overstayed until she was granted leave to remain outside the
   immigration rules on 28 February 2014 (or 30 October 2014, as  stated  in
   her application) until 2 March 2015 in order to care for  her  niece  and
   nephews. In the interim she made various  unsuccessful  applications  for
   leave to remain as the spouse of a British citizen, whom she  married  on
   22 May 2000. She was convicted, in 2006, of  possessing  with  intent  to
   supply Class A drugs (heroin) and received a 24 month suspended sentence.
   Her conviction was spent in June 2013.


4. On 27 February 2015 the appellant  applied  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
   spouse, on Form FLR(M), claiming that there were insurmountable obstacles
   to family life with her husband continuing in Jamaica and  also  that  it
   would be unreasonable for her step-son Tyrone,  her  husband's  son,  who
   lived between her home and that of his own mother, to leave the UK as  he
   was a British citizen. Reference was made in the letter accompanying  the
   Form FLR(M) to the fact that she had been  entrusted  with  the  care  of
   three vulnerable children, her niece and nephews,  and  to  her  parental
   relationship with Tyrone, the youngest of her husband's five children.


5. In a letter dated 12 May 2015 responding to the respondent's request  for
   further information it was confirmed that  the  appellant's  nephews  and
   niece had returned to live with their parents, albeit under  supervision,
   and further that Tyrone resided with the appellant and his father.


6. The respondent refused the appellant's application on 16 June  2015.  The
   respondent  found  that  the  appellant  fell  within   the   suitability
   provisions in S-LTR.1.6 as her presence in the UK was  not  conducive  to
   the public good because of her conduct, namely her past  conviction.  The
   respondent considered further that she could  not  meet  the  eligibility
   requirements on the basis of finance and maintenance. It was  noted  that
   there was no evidence to support the appellant's claim  that  she  looked
   after Tyrone and she could not, therefore, meet the criteria in  EX.1(a).
   The respondent considered that there were no insurmountable obstacles  to
   family life between the appellant and her husband continuing  in  Jamaica
   and that she could not, therefore, meet the requirements of EX.1(b).  The
   respondent considered that the criteria  in  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
   276ADE(1)  could  not  be  met  and  that  there  were   no   exceptional
   circumstances justifying a grant of leave outside the immigration rules.

7. The appellant appealed against that decision. Her  appeal  was  heard  by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Watson on 25 April  2016.  Judge  Watson  found
   that the suitability requirements should not have  been  applied  against
   the appellant as the respondent had failed to follow her own guidance  in
   that regard and, furthermore, the appellant had been approved as a foster
   carer by social services subsequent to her conviction  which  would  have
   required an assessment of  her  character  and  conduct.  The  judge  was
   satisfied that the appellant and her partner earned  above  the  required
   amount of income at the time of the hearing but agreed that the  evidence
   produced to the respondent did not satisfy the requirements  of  Appendix
   FM-SE. The judge did not accept the appellant's evidence in  relation  to
   Tyrone living with her and her husband but found that he had been  living
   with his mother and that  the  recent  move  to  her  house  was  one  of
   convenience. The appellant's presence was not necessary for his  welfare.
   The judge did not accept that the appellant had a genuine and  subsisting
   parental relationship with Tyrone. The judge did not  accept  that  there
   were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  appellant   and   her   husband
   maintaining  their  family  life  in  Jamaica  and  considered  that  the
   appellant was no longer needed to care for her  nephews  and  niece.  The
   judge did  not  find  there  to  be  any  significant  obstacles  to  the
   appellant's integration into Jamaica and  concluded  that  the  appellant
   could not meet the requirements of the immigration rules  on  family  and
   private life grounds. However the  judge  considered  that  it  would  be
   disproportionate to refuse  the  appellant's  application  and  that  the
   public  interest  was  outweighed  by  her  personal  circumstances.  She
   accordingly allowed the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  outside  the
   immigration rules.

8. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought  by  the  appellant
   as well as the respondent. The appellant sought to challenge the  judge's
   findings under Appendix FM. Permission was refused  and  the  application
   was not renewed in the Upper Tribunal.

9. However permission to appeal was granted to the respondent on 18  January
   2017 on the basis that the judge had failed to  identify  the  compelling
   circumstances  justifying  a  consideration  of  Article  8  outside  the
   immigration  rules  and  had  failed  to  consider  section  117  of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

Appeal Hearing

10. At the hearing the parties agreed that this was solely an appeal by  the
   Secretary of State. Mr Wilding submitted that the respondent's  challenge
   was to the judge's approach and reasoning. He submitted  that  the  judge
   had erred by allowing the appeal on the same matters which she had  found
   not to meet the requirements of the immigration rules; by considering  as
   positive factors under section 117B matters which  were  supposed  to  be
   regarded as neutral; by failing to identify particularly weighty  factors
   taking the case into the realms of very compelling circumstances; and  by
   failing to give any weight to  the  appellant's  inability  to  meet  the
   requirements of the rules. Ms Bhachu submitted that the immigration rules
   were not determinative of the appeal, as made clear in Hesham Ali  [2016]
   UKSC 60 and that the judge  had  considered  various  cumulative  factors
   outside  the  rules  other  than  those  considered  in  the  context  of
   insurmountable obstacles. She had found there to be sufficient compelling
   circumstances outweighing the public interest and had not erred in law in
   so doing.

11. I advised the parties that in my view the judge had made errors  of  law
   such that her decision had to be set aside. I agreed  with  Mr  Wilding's
   view that the judge had  simply  used  the  same  factors  that  she  had
   considered not to meet the  requirements  of  the  immigration  rules  as
   insurmountable obstacles under paragraph EX.1(b) to then justify a  grant
   of leave outside the immigration rules, thus apparently giving little  or
   no weight to the appellant's inability to meet the  requirements  of  the
   rules. She had given positive weight  to  neutral  factors  such  as  the
   appellant's ability to speak  English  and  her  financial  independence,
   contrary to the approach in AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260  and  she
   had failed to identify the compelling circumstances justifying a grant of
   leave outside the immigration rules. As such her findings  on  Article  8
   outside the rules simply could not stand and had to be set aside and  re-
   made.


12. I did not agree with Ms Bhachu's suggestion that the matter be  remitted
   to the First-tier Tribunal since there appeared to be no reason  why  the
   decision could not be re-made  by  myself  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The
   parties had been warned in advance of the hearing  by  directions  issued
   with the grant of permission that the decision  may  be  re-made  at  the
   hearing and indeed the appellant had provided  further  evidence  with  a
   Notice under Rule 15(2A) of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
   2008. Whilst I was told that the appellant's husband was not available at
   the hearing to give evidence there  was  no  suggestion,  further  to  my
   enquiry, that he would  be  adding  anything  material  to  the  evidence
   already available. The appellant's aunt, whose statement was to be  found
   at Annex H of the appeal  bundle  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  was
   present at the hearing and was standing by  her  statement.  I  was  also
   content for the appellant to give further oral evidence.


13. The appellant, in her evidence before  me,  said  that  since  the  last
   hearing she had opened her own business catering for vulnerable citizens.
   She had undergone training to be a trainer. She had developed her  skills
   in care work and had a  relationship  with  Birmingham  City  Council  in
   caring for vulnerable people. The appellant relied upon a letter from her
   employer  at  Honor  Care  Limited  confirming  her  promotion  to   care
   coordinator, which involved  liaising  with  social  services  and  being
   responsible for the day to day running of the business and the  needs  of
   vulnerable people. She visited an elderly lady on dialysis three times  a
   day, seven days a week. It would be heartbreaking for her clients and for
   the staff of the business if she had to  leave.  Her  niece  and  nephews
   would be devastated if she had to go. They lived on the same road and she
   was central to their care and dropped them to school as her sister, their
   mother, suffered from sickle cell and had to stay in bed. Although  there
   were many other family members living Birmingham they could not help  her
   sister and did not live as close as she did in any event.

14. Both parties then  made  submissions.  Mr  Wilding  submitted  that  the
   appellant's removal was proportionate, whilst Ms  Bhachu  submitted  that
   this was a compelling and compassionate case justifying a grant of  leave
   outside the immigration rules. She referred to the various  factors  that
   had to be considered cumulatively, including the  appellant's  work,  her
   benefit to society in dealing with vulnerable people, the fact  that  she
   was previously granted leave to care  for  her  niece  and  nephews,  her
   length of residence in the UK of almost  two  decades  and  her  attempts
   throughout that time to regularise her stay.

Consideration and Findings

15.  I have given my reasons for finding an error  of  law  in  the  judge's
   decision at [11] above.

16. In re-making the appeal the only issue  is  whether  the  appellant  has
   demonstrated that there are very compelling  circumstances  justifying  a
   grant of leave outside the immigration rules on wider Article  8  grounds
   which would render her removal disproportionate. The  findings  of  Judge
   Watson in relation to the immigration rules are not disturbed and  it  is
   therefore the case that the appellant is unable to meet the  requirements
   of the rules in  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE(1).  There  are  no
   insurmountable obstacles to the appellant  and  her  husband  maintaining
   their family life in Jamaica for the reasons given at [32] of the judge's
   decision and there are no very significant obstacles to  the  appellant's
   integration in Jamaica as the judge found at [34]. Weight has to be given
   to the fact that the appellant cannot meet the requirements of the rules.


17. As regards very compelling circumstances, I do not accept that any  have
   been demonstrated. A factor in the  appellant's  favour  is  her  lengthy
   residence in the UK of 19 years. However length of residence  is  catered
   for within the rules and is not sufficient to establish a case on private
   life grounds. In any event it is relevant to consider that the  appellant
   had no lawful basis of stay in the UK for around 14 to 15 of those  years
   prior to being granted discretionary leave as a carer  for  her  sister's
   children. Whilst it is the case that she did not go underground, but made
   repeated attempts to regularise her stay, she was unable  to  succeed  in
   any of her applications and ought to have left  the  UK  but  decided  to
   remain here unlawfully. Although the appellant was granted leave to  care
   for her sister's children, that was only for a relatively short period of
   time and the children returned to live with their parents.  Judge  Watson
   found in her decision that the appellant was no longer needed to care for
   them. Although the appellant's evidence before  me  was  that  she  still
   played an integral part in their care I had the distinct impression  that
   she was attempting to overplay her  role,  suggesting  initially  in  her
   evidence that her sister was too ill and bed-ridden to care for them, but
   then after being referred to her evidence that her  sister  worked  as  a
   care worker, claiming that she helped on the occasions  when  her  sister
   could not go to work. The appellant's evidence  was  also  that  she  was
   extremely busy with her own work, including her care for an elderly  lady
   and her own business, as well as the 40 hour  week  referred  to  in  her
   employer's letter. I note also that the focus of her  application  of  27
   February 2017 was on her claimed role in the care of  her  husband's  son
   Tyrone, with only a passing mention of her niece and  nephews.  Therefore
   whilst I accept that the appellant has played a significant part  in  the
   care  of  her  sister's  children  in  the  past  and  retains  a   close
   relationship with them, I find that her role is now limited  and  do  not
   consider that relationship to be of any particularly significant weight.

18. As for the appellant's relationship with, and care for,  Tyrone,  it  is
   plain from Judge Watson's decision that she did not find the  appellant's
   evidence  completely  credible  in  that  regard.  Indeed  the  appellant
   provided inconsistent evidence as to whether or not Tyrone lived with her
   and her husband, and Judge Watson considered that his recent move to  her
   property was one of convenience. Again it seems that  the  appellant  was
   seeking to exaggerate her role in Tyrone's care for the purposes  of  her
   application for  leave  to  remain  and  there  is  no  further  evidence
   suggesting that her presence in the UK is required  for  his  care  given
   that he lives with, and is cared for, by his mother and in  any  evet  is
   now an adult of almost 20 years of age.


19. As to the appellant's work with vulnerable clients, I  accept  that  she
   has produced a supportive letter from her employer and that she  provides
   an important role in the care  of  other  people.  However  there  is  no
   evidence to suggest that she is irreplaceable or that her  clients  would
   significantly suffer as a result of her departure. It  is  also  of  some
   relevance to note that the appellant's work has  been  relatively  short-
   term, given that she has only been permitted to work for the  past  three
   years and commenced her current job only two years ago.


20. Accordingly, and having considered all the  evidence  produced  and  the
   cumulative effect of all the various factors in her favour, I  am  unable
   to  conclude  that  there  is  anything  amounting  to  very   compelling
   circumstances so as to outweigh the public interest  in  the  appellant's
   removal, given in particular the findings, and reasons at  [31]  to  [34]
   for the findings, that there are no insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
   life with her husband continuing in Jamaica and that there  are  no  very
   significant obstacles to  integration  in  Jamaica  and  considering  her
   length of stay without leave and inability to meet  the  requirements  of
   the immigration rules. Regard has also to be  given  to  the  appellant's
   criminal conviction in assessing proportionality, albeit the weight to be
   attributed to that has somewhat diminished with time. It is  always  open
   to the appellant to apply for entry clearance to settle in the UK as  the
   spouse of her husband and it is therefore not the case that  her  removal
   would permanently separate her from her family members. For all of  these
   reasons, and having regard  to  the  public  interest  considerations  in
   section 117B of the 2002 Act, including the limited weight to be attached
   to her private life when she was in the UK  unlawfully,  and  considering
   the neutral  factors  of  her  English  language  ability  and  financial
   independence,  I  find  that  the  appellant's  removal  would   not   be
   disproportionate and would not be  in  breach  of  her  Article  8  human
   rights.

DECISION

21. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error
   on a point of law. The Secretary of State's appeal is accordingly allowed
   and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside as stated above.
   I re-make the decision  by  dismissing  Mrs  Donaldson's  appeal  on  all
   grounds, under the immigration rules and on human rights grounds.












Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated: 20 June 2017
