
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24506/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 February 2015                           |On 16 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS


                                   Between

                              MOHAMMED HUSSAIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant, Mr Mohammed Hussain, is a  citizen  of  Bangladesh.   He
    appealed against a decision of the respondent of 23 May  2013  refusing
    his application to vary his leave to remain  in  the  UK  and  to  make
    removal directions.  His appeal was heard by Judge Andonian sitting  at
    Taylor House on 10 October 2014.  Both parties  were  represented,  the
    Appellant by Counsel.

2.   The appeal was based upon three grounds: political  asylum,  Article  3
    of the ECHR and Article 8 of the ECHR.   The  grounds  of  appeal  were
    fully set out in a letter from the Appellant's representatives  to  the
    Respondent of 5 November 2012 and his grounds  of  appeal  of  19  June
    20123 both prepared by his then solicitors.

3.   The judge recorded at paragraph 1 of  his  determination  that  as  the
    commencement of the hearing Counsel for the Appellant stated  that  the
    appeal was not being pursued on political asylum,  Article  3  ECHR  or
    humanitarian protection grounds but only  on  Article  8  human  rights
    grounds based upon the Appellant's private and family life pursuant  to
    Appendix FM and/or paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    appeal proceeded on that basis.  The judge heard the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and his brother.  In a  determination  of  22  October  2014,
    promulgated on 29 October, the appeal was dismissed on Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.

4.   Through  his  then  solicitors,  the  Appellant  sought  permission  to
    appeal.  Three reasons for appealing are given.  They all coalesce into
    a submission that, in considering the Appellant's appeal under  Article
    8, the judge should have read across his evidence, given in the context
    of political asylum, Article 3 ECHR and humanitarian protection, of the
    risk to him on return to Bangladesh and have taken that into account in
    his consideration of the  Article  8  appeal,  but  had  not  done  so.
    Essentially on the grounds that  this  was  arguable,  Judge  Nicholson
    granted permission to appeal on 16 December 2014.

5.   By 10 February 2015, when I conducted the error  of  law  hearing,  the
    Appellant's former solicitors had ceased to act  for  him  and  he  was
    unrepresented.  The appeal was convened for 2 p.m.  on  that  day.   By
    2.40 p.m., when I reached it, there was no appearance by the  Appellant
    nor any representative, nor any explanation for absence.  The Notice of
    Appeal did not conation any telephone number for the Appellant, whom  I
    would otherwise have asked the usher to telephone.

6.   I satisfied myself from the file that notice  of  the  date,  time  and
    place of the hearing had been properly given to the Appellant.  Without
    any explanation for his  absence,  I  heard   the  application  in  his
    absence, releasing the interpreter.

7.   Mr Kandola made submissions,  which  I  have  taken  into  account.   I
    reserved my determination.

Determination

8.   The letter of 5 November 2012 from the Appellant's  representatives  to
    the Respondent sets out the facts of the case and then the legal  basis
    of the application, first under Article 3 and then under Article  8  of
    the ECHR.   It does not  refer  to  political  asylum  or  humanitarian
    protection.  Nor do the Appellant's grounds of appeal, which invoke the
    representations of 5 November 2012 and enlarge upon them.

9.   The determination  of  Judge  Andonian  records  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and his brother. It is plain that the  appeal  was  conducted
    solely on Article 8 grounds by reference to Appendix FM  and  paragraph
    276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  to  Article  8  of  the  1950
    Convention.  At paragraphs 7, 8, 9 and 14 the judge stated  that  there
    was no credible evidence to  show that the Appellant  would  suffer  on
    return insofar as his private life was concerned or that any breach  of
    his right to family  and  private  life  would  lead  to  unduly  harsh
    consequences on return and that his  evidence  about  his  problems  in
    Bangladesh were asylum orientated and therefore not to  be  considered.
    There is no suggestion at any of these points that Counsel representing
    the Appellant invited him to read across into the Article 8 context the
    Appellant's political  asylum/Article  3  related  evidence.   Had  the
    submission been made, the judge may be expected to  have  addressed  it
    and reached  a decision  upon it.

10.  The appeal was confined, at the Appellant's  election,  to  Article  8.
    His Article 8 grounds were clearly delineated from his  Article  3  and
    from any political asylum grounds.  There is no warrant for  the  judge
    being required to read across evidence in a  dimension  of  the  appeal
    which was explicitly not pursued into the one which was.  The fact that
    he did not do so was not an error of law.  The decision is upheld.

Decision

11.  The original determination contains no error of law and is upheld.

12.  No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Dated: 16 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis

