
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24492/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12 June 2017                           |On 23 June 2017                   |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              mr muhammad bilal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Waheed of Counsel instructed by Commonwealth
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Respondent is a citizen of Pakistan and his date  of  birth  is  12
    October 1986.  I shall refer to him as "the Appellant" as he was before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  He made an application for a  residence  card
    which was refused by the Secretary of State in a decision  of  18  June
    2015.  The Secretary of State did not accept that his relationship with
    an EEA national, Ms  Nebunu,  was  genuine  and  concluded  that  their
    marriage was one of convenience. It was also not accepted that the  EEA
    national was not exercising treaty rights.

2.   The matter came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Miller  on  28
    September  2016  who  allowed  the  appeal  in  a  decision  that   was
    promulgated on 10 October 2016.  The judge concluded that the  marriage
    was not one of convenience.  The Respondent was granted  permission  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Davies on 2 May 2017. The Secretary of
    State's grounds assert that the judge  failed  to  make  a  finding  in
    respect of whether or not the EEA national was exercising treaty rights
    and was therefore a qualified person as required  under  the  2006  EEA
    Regulations.  Mr Waheed agreed at the hearing before me that the  judge
    failed to make a finding in relation to this aspect of the  appeal  and
    that this amounts to an error of law.

3.   There was before the First-tier Tribunal a letter at  page  28  of  the
    Appellant's bundle from Big News Ltd of 17 September 2006 which  stated
    that the EEA national commenced employment  with  Big  News  Ltd  on  1
    September 2016.  That was the only piece of evidence before  the  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal relating to the EEA national's employment at
    the date of the hearing.  In  Mr  Bramble's  submission  this  was  not
    sufficient in order to discharge the burden of proof and in Mr Waheed's
    view the evidence was sufficient, and had it been  taken  into  account
    the appeal would have been allowed by the  First-tier  Tribunal.      I
    accept Mr  Bramble's  submission  that  the  letter  was  insufficient,
    particularly in light of the significant  gap  in  the  EEA  national's
    employment history.  There  was  no  evidence  of  bank  statements  or
    otherwise which would support the evidence of employment.

4.   For the above reasons I conclude that the error  is  material  and  set
    aside the decision and go on to remake the decision.

5.   Mr Bramble conceded that the evidence that had  now  been  produced  by
    the Appellant in relation to the EEA national established that  at  the
    date of the hearing before me  that  she  was  employed  and  therefore
    exercising treaty rights. The  Appellant  submitted  evidence  of  bank
    statements. The evidence establishes that the EEA national has been  in
    employment since January of this year.  In the light of  this  I  allow
    the appeal under the 2006 Regulations.

6.   No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date 22 June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

