
IAC-AH-co-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/24625/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2nd December 2014                            |On 30th December 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                       MR Lovemore Gladmore Chinembiri
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Youssefian (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This was an appeal against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge R R Hopkins promulgated  on  15th  September  2014,  following  a
    hearing at Birmingham on 27th August 2014.  In  the  determination  the
    judge  allowed  the  appeal  of  Lovemore  Gladmore  Chinembiri.    The
    Respondent subsequently applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who was  born  on  17th  January
    1956 and he is a male.  He appeals against the decision dated 1st April
    2014 to serve him with removal directions.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is based upon his relationship with his wife  and
    three children in the UK.  He initially entered the UK on 18th  January
    1999 as a visitor.   He  subsequently  applied  for  further  leave  to
    remain.  He embarked upon a course of study at the University of  Luton
    from February 2000.  In July 1999 his wife and children  came  to  join
    him from Zimbabwe.  On 2nd November  1999  the  Appellant  was  granted
    leave to remain until 31st October 2000.  In July 2000 he and his  wife
    purchased their current home.  The Appellant was then  granted  further
    leave until 21st October 2001.  He began studying for a masters  degree
    in business administration at Napier University in Edinburgh.  In 2007,
    his wife and children applied for leave to remain under what  was  then
    the "seven year child concession".  They were granted indefinite  leave
    to remain.

 4. The Appellant, however, was  not  included  in  this  application.   He
    appears to have been under  the  impression  that  he  already  had  an
    outstanding application before the Home Office and he had to  rate  the
    outcome of this.  In the meantime he began working as a supply  teacher
    in mathematics and business studies.   In  2010  he  became  suspicious
    about the delay in finding out  about  his  status.   He  made  further
    enquiries.

 5. On 1st  April  2014  the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State  served  the
    Appellant with notice of liability to removal.  The  Appellant's  claim
    was assessed both under paragraph 276ADE of the Rules and Article 8  of
    the ECHR.  The Respondent concluded that the Appellant did not meet the
    requirements of paragraph  276ADE.   Consideration  was  given  in  the
    refusal letter as to whether there were exceptional circumstances.   It
    was concluded  that  there  was  insufficient  evidence  to  justify  a
    departure from the Rules.  This was despite the fact that the Appellant
    was not known to have any criminal convictions or to  have  engaged  in
    activities or developed associations that  are  not  conducive  to  the
    public good.

The Judge's Findings

 6. The judge came to five firm conclusions.  First, the  judge  held  that
    there were insurmountable obstacles to the family life of the Appellant
    continuing  outside  the  UK  in  Zimbabwe.    There   were   practical
    difficulties.  They had no home there.   Second,  there  would  be  the
    difficulty of the Appellant  obtaining  employment  in  Zimbabwe.   The
    Appellant had a teaching qualification but it was "unclear that  he  is
    very employable" (paragraph 26).  Third, the  Appellant  and  his  wife
    owned their own home in the UK and have a mortgage statement,  and  are
    making monthly payments.  The house would have to be sold if  they  had
    to relocate.  It was unclear that there was a very  substantial  equity
    such that they would be able to re-establish  themselves  in  Zimbabwe.
    Fourth, the  children  were  now  adults,  and  two  of  them  were  at
    university, and they live in the family home during the  holidays,  and
    the Appellant's wife,  who  has  indefinite  leave  to  remain,  cannot
    realistically abandon the property in the UK as it  is  her  children's
    family home (paragraph 27).  The judge also went on to  hold  that  the
    Appellant has no strong ties to Zimbabwe (paragraph  29).   He  applied
    the  Rule  in  Chikwamba  and  held  that  it   was   unnecessary   and
    disproportionate for the Appellant to leave the UK in order to make  an
    application to come back in  again  (paragraph  30).   The  appeal  was
    allowed.

Grounds of Application

 7. In this matter there is a appeal both by the  Respondent  Secretary  of
    State  and  a  cross-appeal  by  the  Appellant.   The  appeal  by  the
    Respondent  Secretary  of  State  is  to  the  effect  that  the  judge
    materially   misdirected   himself   in   finding   that   there   were
    insurmountable obstacles to  the  Appellant's  family  life  continuing
    outside the United Kingdom.  Further the judge failed to direct himself
    to paragraph EX.2 of the Immigration Rules.  Any  difficulty  that  the
    Appellant and his partner encountered outside the  United  Kingdom  was
    not as to amount to "very significant difficulties".   The  Appellant's
    partner is a Zimbabwean national and "returned  to  Zimbabwe  with  the
    Appellant."  On 29th October 2014 permission to appeal was given to the
    Respondent Secretary of State.   The  cross-appeal  by  the  Appellant,
    however, which is out of time, is to the effect that the  judge  failed
    to give sufficient regard  to  the  "Chikwamba  principle"  because  he
    reasoned incorrectly when he said that, "there is a reason in this case
    why requiring the Appellant  to  leave  the  UK  and  apply  for  entry
    clearance  from  abroad  might  be  proportionate:  he  is  in  the  UK
    illegally".  However, the "Chikwamba argument" is  necessarily  engaged
    when the Appellant is illegally in the United Kingdom.   This  is  what
    the case of Chikwamba was about.  On 1st December 2014,  permission  to
    appeal was granted to the Appellant as well.

 8. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Youssefian, appearing on behalf of the
    Appellant, submitted that there would be no need for this  Tribunal  to
    consider the cross-appeal if no error was found in the learned  judge's
    determination, consequent  upon  the  appeal  of  the  Respondent  Home
    Secretary being first heard, in which event the Appellant  would  adopt
    the learned judge's determinations.

 9. At the hearing before me of 2nd December 2014, Mr Armstrong,  appearing
    on behalf of the Respondent, submitted that they would  rely  upon  the
    Grounds of  Appeal.   It  was  submitted  that  there  was  a  material
    misdirection.   The  judge   had   not   explained   how   there   were
    "insurmountable  obstacles"  in  this  case.   The  Appellant  was   an
    overstayer.   The  history  was  set  out  at  paragraph   6   of   the
    determination.  He had been in the UK for thirteen years.  He had never
    qualified  for  leave  to  remain.   His  position  had   always   been
    precarious.  He would have no legitimate expectation  to  remain  here.
    Yet, he had worked in the UK illegally.  Following the case of  Gulshan
    I should consider whether there were "exceptional circumstances"  here.
    There were none.  Accordingly, the determination was flawed.  The judge
    had given inadequate reasons.

10. For his part, Mr Youssefian submitted that, as far as  the  Appellant's
    cross-appeal was concerned, the judge had erred (at  paragraph  33)  in
    stating  that  the  Appellant  could  not  benefit  from  the  rule  in
    Chikwamba, because he had been  in  the  UK  illegally,  but  this  was
    incorrect as a matter of law, because Chikwamba  applied  in  precisely
    this sort of situation.  This was a misdirection in  law.   Second,  as
    far as the appeal of the Respondent Secretary of State  was  concerned,
    the judge had rightly had regard  to  the  fact  that  the  balance  of
    proportionality considerations in respect to Article 8 fell  in  favour
    of the Appellant, given that his wife and children had indefinite leave
    to remain in the UK, and he would have to separate himself from them to
    go and live in Zimbabwe, or to make an application from  there,  before
    he could enter the UK.

11. Furthermore, as the Appellant's Rule 24 response makes clear, the judge
    had  considered  this  and  had  properly  considered  that  the   word
    "insurmountable obstacles" is to do with the practical possibilities of
    relocation.  The decision taken against the Appellant was taken on 22nd
    May 2014, and therefore before the new Rules on 28th July  2014,  apply
    to the new definition in Odelola  [200]  UKHL  25,  such  that  it  was
    unnecessary to have regard to EX.2 of the Immigration Rules.

No Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA  2007)
    such that I should set aside the decision and remake the  decision.   I
    accept that the reference (at paragraph 33) to the  way  in  which  the
    rule in Chikwamba operates, is incorrect, because to put  it  in  these
    terms is to precisely elevate the Rule 2A "dogma" in the  way  rejected
    by the House of Lords.  However, I do not find this to  be  a  material
    error, such that the  determination  should  be  set  aside,  when  the
    determination is considered as a whole, given the  effect  it  has,  of
    allowing the appeal.

13. The decision against the Appellant was made on 22nd May 2014  and  this
    was prior to the coming into effect of the new Rules on 28th July 2014.
      The  judge  had  to  consider  the  significance  of  "insurmountable
    obstacles" but did do so in a way that is clearly  evident.   He  found
    that there would be  sufficient  practical  difficulties  in  both  the
    Appellant and his wife removing themselves from the United  Kingdom  to
    Zimbabwe.   He  allowed  for  the  possibility  that   "the   lack   of
    accommodation might be overcome, at least in the short term, as it  may
    be possible to find a temporary place to live  pending  more  permanent
    arrangements"  (paragraph  26).   This  shows  that   the   judge   was
    sufficiently aware of the practical possibilities facing the  Appellant
    if he were to return to Zimbabwe.

14. However, on the other hand, the judge was not satisfied on the evidence
    before him, that the Appellant  would  be  able  to  obtain  employment
    (paragraph 26).  The greatest difficulty, however, in the mind  of  the
    judge, was with respect to the ownership of the home by  the  Appellant
    and his wife.  This was a home in which their children had  lived,  and
    returned to during the  holidays,  and  it  had  a  mortgage,  with  no
    substantial equity, and the judge was satisfied that, "the  Appellant's
    wife cannot realistically abandon the property in the UK as it  is  her
    children's family home as well as  hers.   They  cannot  reasonably  be
    expected to abandon their studies in order to go to live  in  Zimbabwe"
    (paragraph  27).   The   judge   then   concluded   that   there   were
    insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  continuing  outside  the  UK
    (paragraph 28).

15. Insofar as the Rule in Chikwamba is to be applied to these  facts  (see
    paragraph 30) it would suggest precisely that this was the kind of case
    where the Appellant, who only did not apply for leave  to  remain  with
    the rest of his family because he had an outstanding application before
    the Home Office, it would be disproportionate to require the  Appellant
    to leave the country just as in order to make  an  application  to  re-
    enter.

16. It is significant that the judge had evidence before him that a  letter
    dated 18th August 2014 from the Grange Tuition Ltd stated that he would
    be a candidate for a full-time position as a mathematics  tutor  if  he
    remained in the UK (see paragraph 16).  Accordingly, there is no  error
    of law in the determination.

Decision

17. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

18. No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        29th December 2014
