

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA243452014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 7 June 2016                             |On 8 June 2016                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                 KUNALENDRAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms A. Benfield, counsel, instructed by Birnberg
                    Peirce & Partners, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                           FINDING ON ERROR OF LAW


 1. The appellant complied with my directions of 7 April 2016.  Both he and
    his wife attended the hearing.

 2. Although the respondent has been supplied  with  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's marriage, Mr  Richards  did  not  have  the  file  and  the
    respondent  has  not  commented  upon  the  contents  of  the  material
    submitted.

 3. I have seen a boxed copy of a  wedding  DVD  apparently  professionally
    prepared which records the appellant's  wedding  whose  cover  features
    photographs of the appellant and his wife.  Although I have not  viewed
    its contents, I heard from the appellant by way of  a  summary  of  the
    contents of the DVD.

 4. I was shown a photograph album containing photographs of what  purports
    to be a wedding involving the appellant and his wife.

 5. I was shown but did not study copies of bank statements  purporting  to
    verify the payment of monies incurred in relation to the marriage.

 6. The appellant contends this material was before the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge and that the marriage was attended by about 120  guests  and,  if
    this had been a charade, it was not likely that so many would have been
    complicit in it.

 7. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made an error of  law
    in failing to take this material into  account  in  his  assessment  of
    whether this was a marriage of convenience. His conclusion that he  was
    not satisfied that the 'claimed religious ceremony was  anything  other
    than an attempt to give the appearance of a  subsisting  marriage'  was
    not lawfully open to him without a proper assessment of  the  material.
    In particular, he failed to give due consideration  to  the  likelihood
    (if the event took place as claimed) that it was no more than a  costly
    and elaborate lie involving  the  participation  of  a  large  cast  of
    persons who took part in the deception.

 8. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. The decision is to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.







                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                                 7 June 2016






