
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24030/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 January 2015                   |On 6 February 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MR CHIDI NWAGBARA NWAGBARA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr W M Rees, Counsel instructed by Stanley Richards
                    Solicitors, Bletchley


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Mr Nwagbara is a citizen of Nigeria whose date of birth is recorded as
      22 January 1979.  On 5 March 2014 Mr  Nwagbara  made  application  for
      further discretionary leave to remain in the United  Kingdom.   On  22
      May 2014 a decision was made to refuse the application  having  regard
      both to paragraph 276ADE and Article 8 of the European  Convention  on
      Human Rights (ECHR).  Mr Nwagbara appealed and on 15 October 2014  his
      appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Borsada,  sitting
      at Sheldon Court, Birmingham.

   2. Judge Borsada had regard to Mr Nwagbara's immigration  history  noting
      that he had first arrived in the United Kingdom on 21  September  2007
      with leave to remain as a student, and that  he  had  always  lawfully
      resided in the United Kingdom, with the final period of leave expiring
      on 1 April 2014, Mr Nwagbara having made application for further leave
      in time.  Judge Borsada found  the  Appellant  to  be  an  honest  and
      credible witness, self sufficient without recourse  to  public  funds,
      and working full time with a subsidiary of a large supermarket  chain.
      Additionally Mr Nwagbara had formed a new relationship with a  British
      citizen and had, Judge Borsada  accepted  no  real  ties  to  Nigerian
      socially or culturally, in addition to  having  fallen  out  with  his
      family, they not having approved of a relationship he had formed prior
      to marriage.

   3. Judge Borsada then had regard to paragraph  353B  of  the  Immigration
      Rules  and  after  finding  that  the  circumstances  in   which   the
      application for further leave to remain  was  being  made  on  similar
      facts, though not exactly the same, as the basis upon which a previous
      grant was made, found in  favour  of  Mr  Nwagbara  having  regard  to
      paragraph 276ADE of the rules and in  the  alternative  on  Article  8
      general grounds.  The appeal was allowed and whilst the Judge  Borsada
      did not state precisely the basis upon which the  appeal  was  allowed
      the Statement of Reasons does read as if  it  were  pursuant  to  both
      paragraph 276ADE and on human rights grounds.

   4. Not content with the decision, by Notice dated  29  October  2014  the
      Secretary of State made application for permission to  appeal  to  the
      Upper Tribunal.  The grounds point to the extent to  which  the  judge
      appeared to have allowed the appeal of Mr Nwagbara in  the  First-tier
      Tribunal on the basis of the Secretary of State  not  having  followed
      her own policy and further, having erred in  allowing  the  appeal  by
      reference to paragraph 353B.  The  grounds  submit  that  the  judge's
      assessment of paragraph 276ADE was fundamentally flawed  and  likewise
      the judge erred in her approach to Article 8.

   5. On 17 December 2014 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Lever  granted
      permission.  It does appear however that in granting permission  Judge
      Lever had some reservations because he says  at  paragraph  4  of  the
      grant:-

           "It was also arguably an error for the judge to have  found  [Mr
           Nwagbara] met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE which appears
           to be the  conclusion  at  [10]  although  an  assessment  under
           Article 8 ECHR appears to have been conducted before  the  judge
           had reached such conclusion under the rules."

   6. The material requirements of paragraph  276ADE  are  set  out  in  the
      reasons for refusal letter and are:

           "iii)  has lived continuously in the  UK  for  at  least  twenty
                  years    (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

           iv)    is under the age of 18 years and has  lived  continuously
                  in the UK for at least seven years (discounting any period
                  of imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable to  expect
                  the applicant to leave the UK; or

           v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent at
                  least half of his  life  living  continuously  in  the  UK
                  (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

           vi)    subject to sub paragraph (2) is aged 18 years  or  above,
                  has lived continuously in the  UK  for  less  than  twenty
                  years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but has  no
                  ties (including  social,  cultural  or  family)  with  the
                  country to which he would have to go if required to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

      Clearly on the facts of the instant appeal the sub paragraph  material
      to any successful outcome was (vi).

   7. Mr Rees on behalf of Mr Nwagbara submitted a skeleton argument  making
      reference to the guidance  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the  case  of
      Ogundimu (Article 8 - New Rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT60 (IAC) in  which
      the fourth point in the headnote reads:-

           "The  natural  and  ordinary  meaning  of  the  word  "ties"  in
           paragraph 399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  imports  a  concept
           involving something more than merely remote or abstract links to
           the country of proposed deportation  or  removal.   It  involves
           there being a connection to life in that country.  Consideration
           of whether a person has "no ties" to such a country must involve
           a rounded assessment of all the relevant  circumstances  and  is
           not  to  be   limited   to   "social,   cultural   and   family"
           circumstances."

   8.  More recently the Upper Tribunal has given guidance in  the  case  of
      Bossadi (Paragraph 276ADE; Suitability; Ties)  [2015]  UK  UT00042  in
      which it was said as follows:

           "1)    Being able to meet the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE
                  of the Immigration Rules requires being able to  meet  the
                  suitability requirements set out in  paragraph  276ADE(1).
                  It is  because  this  sub-paragraph  contains  suitability
                  requirements that it is not possible for foreign criminals
                  relying  on  private  life  grounds  to   circumvent   the
                  provisions  of  the  rules  dealing  with  deportation  of
                  foreign criminals.

           2) The requirement set out  in  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  (enforced
                  from 9 July 2012 to 27 July 2014) to show that  a  person,
                  "is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in  the
                  UK for less than twenty years (discounting any  period  of
                  imprisonment) but has no ties (including social,  cultural
                  or family) with the country to which he would have  to  go
                  if  required  to  leave  the  UK,"  requires   a   rounded
                  assessment as to whether a  persons  familial  ties  could
                  result in support to him in the event of  his  return;  an
                  assessment  taking  into  account  both   subjective   and
                  objective considerations and also  consideration  of  what
                  lies within the choice of a claimant to achieve."

   9. Quite why Judge Borsada  made  reference  to  paragraph  353B  of  the
      Immigration Rules is not at all clear.  The  Secretary  of  State  was
      right to point to the guidance  in  the  case  of  Khanum  and  others
      (Paragraph 353B) [2013] UK UT00311.  Paragraph 353B in reality is  not
      a rule that has anything to do with the Tribunal but simply  sets  out
      the policy by which the Secretary of State will  consider  whether  or
      not to reverse a decision when all other avenues open to an  applicant
      have closed.  However this is a matter in her discretion to be applied
      when an appellant has become "appeal rights exhausted".

  10. However Ms Everett accepted that the factors in  paragraph  353B  were
      factors capable of being  "put  in  the  balance"  in  any  Article  8
      proportionality assessment.  The factors set out in Paragraph 353B are
      not of themselves objectionable.  The  paragraph  makes  reference  to
      character, conduct and associations including criminal record and  the
      nature of any offence, compliance with any conditions  attached  to  a
      previous grant of leave and,  length  of  time  spent  in  the  United
      Kingdom.  Ms Everett agreed that there were factors there  capable  of
      being put in the balance.  She was right, to make that concession.  At
      the same time I agree that had the judge simply allowed the appeal  on
      the basis that the requirements of paragraph 353B  had  been  met,  he
      would have erred in law for the reasons set out in the case of  Khanum
      to which I have already referred.

  11. Further, if the judge had determined this appeal on the basis that  it
      appeared that the Secretary of State  had  been  inconsistent  in  her
      approach to her own  policy  in  that  discretionary  leave  had  been
      granted on a previous occasion, in  circumstances  which,  though  not
      exactly the same, were similar in all key respects, it may well be too
      that the judge would have erred. However I do not need to resolve that
      issue. This is a determination which when read as a whole can be  seen
      to have been drafted in with various alternatives in the mind  of  the
      judge.  It is possible to pick out the positive findings made  by  the
      judge, being findings that were open to him.

  12. At paragraph 7 of his Statement of Reasons he said:-

           "I did accept that any return to  Nigeria  would  cause  a  huge
           disruption to his existing, private and family life  and  I  did
           also accept that he  had  effectively  broken  his  family  ties
           because of his relationship choices [my emphasis] in the  United
           Kingdom."

  13. That the judge said "choices" rather than "choice" demonstrates on the
      facts of this case that he was cognoscent not only of the relationship
      formed in the United Kingdom but also in Nigeria. I observe also  that
      Judge Borsada was clearly very impressed by the candid manner in which
      Mr Nwagbara gave his evidence.   The  finding  of  animosity  directed
      towards the Mr Nwagbara in his home country was open to the judge  and
      one which he was entitled, to put in the mix".




  14. The Secretary of State submits that the  paragraph  276ADE  assessment
      was flawed.  It is submitted that  it  was  not  established  that  Mr
      Nwagbara had lost all ties to Nigeria.  It was  submitted  that  there
      was no  corroboration  of  Mr  Nwagbara's  assertion  that  there  was
      animosity between him and his family  and  it  was  submitted  in  the
      grounds that as Mr Nwagbara was brought up  in  Nigeria  and  able  to
      speak the official language, English, he would be able to  reintegrate
      albeit with an initial degree of hardship.

  15. However an assessment of the evidence requires an  holistic  approach,
      which is what the judge did.  Still further whilst the  grounds  point
      to the absence of corroboration, there  is  no  requirement  it.   The
      judge found Mr Nwagbara an honest and truthful witness and indeed went
      so far as to explain why he did so.

  16. Ms Everett rightly accepted that whether Mr Nwagbara had  "broken  all
      ties" was a factor to be considered in the Article 8  assessment  even
      if not determinative in the wider consideration of it.  Further, given
      the finding of the judge that any return to Nigeria would cause a huge
      disruption to existing private and family life whether one  looked  to
      the guidance in Gulshan (Article 8 - new  Rules  -  correct  approach)
      [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) or MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ  985  there  was
      sufficient basis for this judge to look to the  wider  application  of
      Article 8.  The judge did precisely that. It is perfectly  clear  that
      the judge had regard to the statutory guidance in Section 117B of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  It  was  not  necessary
      for the judge to set out each and every factor.  What was required was
      for the judge to consider that section. It is clear  (and  Ms  Everett
      quite rightly did not seek to persuade me otherwise)  that  the  judge
      had done precisely that).

  17. The grounds point to Mr Nwagbara having no legitimate  expectation  of
      continuing   his   private   life   in   the   United   Kingdom,   his
      quintessentially precarious status and the fact that fresh application
      could be made from outside the United Kingdom or  in  the  alternative
      for Mr Nwagbara and his new partner could continue family life such as
      it is in Nigeria.

  18. Given the reference to paragraph 353B and  the  possibility  that  the
      Judge had in some  way  considered  that  there  was  some  notion  of
      legitimate  expectation  created  in  the  mind  of  Mr  Nwagbara,   I
      understand why the Secretary of State brought this appeal. However  it
      is of note that the Judge expressly stated, "I would  nevertheless  on
      balance agree with the [Secretary of State] that the circumstances  of
      the previous grant are not exactly the same such that the decision not
      to extend discretionary leave on the same  basis  can  be  justified".
      However that did not preclude  the  Judge  from  looking  at  all  the
      factors favourable to Mr Nwagbara and giving to them  such  weight  as
      was  appropriate  within  the  context  of  the  additional  statutory
      constraints.

  19. The Judge was entitled to find that  all  ties  had  been  broken,  as
      indeed he did, and consider the wider application of Article 8 in  the
      alternative to 276ADE. Reference to  353B  is  not  material  for  the
      reasons set out in paragraph 10. In  short  whilst  reference  to  the
      paragraph 353B is surprising, the appeal was not  allowed  because  of
      that rule but by reference to certain  of  those  factors  capable  of
      being relevant to an Article 8 balancing exercise. The same is true of
      276ADE, in other words the  Judge  looked  to  immigration  rules  and
      considered what factors taken together are  considered  favourable  by
      the Secretary of State. The Judge then proceeded on the basis the  all
      of the requirements of the particular rules were not met  ie  Appendix
      FM and 276ADE but accepting, as he did, that this particular Appellant
      to the First-tier Tribunal had built up his whole life in  the  United
      Kingdom, and was in good employment with a steady relationship  found,
      even if generously, that the balance was in favour of Mr Nwagbara.

  20. That other judges may have come to a different view is not  the  test.
      This Judge's decision cannot be said to be perverse nor irrational. He
      heard the evidence. He had the opportunity to form an impression of Mr
      Nwagbara and guided by the principles in R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982,
      there is in my judgment no sufficient basis for interfering  with  the
      decision. It cannot be said, as was suggested in  Gulshan,  that  this
      judge went on a frolic of his own.

Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed  and  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal is affirmed.



Signed        Date 30 January 2015

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

