
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24686/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination promulgated    |
|On 5 June 2015                                |On 9 June 2015               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MICHAEL OLUWAFEMI ADEWUYI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr Okunowo, Solicitor


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The respondent to this appeal is a citizen of Nigeria born on 10  October
   1973. The appellant is the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department,
   who has appealed with the permission of the First-tier Tribunal against a
   decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Bartlett,  allowing  the
   respondent's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of  State,  dated
   19 May 2014, to remove him to Nigeria, having refused his application for
   leave to remain on human rights grounds. The Secretary of  State  refused
   the application for leave  on  human  rights  grounds,  having  found  Mr
   Adewuyi could not succeed under Appendix FM or paragraph  276ADE  of  the
   Immigration Rules, HC395, and there were no exceptional circumstances for
   the purposes of article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.


2. It is more convenient to refer to the parties as  they  were  before  the
   First-tier Tribunal. I shall therefore refer to Mr Adewuyi from now on as
   "the appellant" and the Secretary of State as "the respondent".


3. I was not asked and saw no reason to make an anonymity direction.


4. The appellant claimed to have arrived in  the  UK  as  a  visitor  on  15
   December 1994. On 26 May 2006 he applied for indefinite leave  to  remain
   but his application was refused without a right of appeal  on  20  August
   2009. On 25 August 2009 he was served  with  a  notice  of  liability  to
   removal. A further application for leave to remain outside the rules  was
   refused on 30 September 2013  without  a  right  of  appeal.  His  latest
   application was submitted on 12 January 2014.


5.  At  the  appeal  hearing  before   Judge   Bartlett,   the   appellant's
   representative made it clear the appeal was not pursued under Appendix FM
   of  the  rules  but  was  pursued  under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  only.
   Alternatively, the judge was asked to find a breach of article 8  outside
   the rules.


6. The judge heard oral evidence from  the  appellant  only.  The  appellant
   said he had lived with his partner, Ms Martins, from 2006 until she  left
   the home they shared in August 2014.  There  were  two  children  of  the
   relationship: Joshua, born in 2008,  and  Elizabeth,  born  in  2009.  Ms
   Martins also had a child from a previous relationship, Raphael,  born  in
   2002. The appellant said his parents in Nigeria  had  died.  He  had  one
   uncle but they did not get on with each other. He  said  he  visited  his
   children, who lived with Ms Martins, every weekend.


7. The judge rejected parts of the evidence. She did not find the  appellant
   had resided in the UK, as he  claimed,  since  1994.  She  found  he  was
   prepared to state things in his witness statement and orally  which  were
   not true and correct. Turning to article 8 outside the rules,  it  having
   been conceded that Appendix FM could not assist the appellant, the  judge
   considered section 117B. As he had been living in the UK illegally little
   weight should be given to the appellant's private life formed during that
   time. The judge did not accept the appellant  was  maintaining  a  family
   link with his "stepchild", Raphael. However, the judge accepted there was
   family life between the appellant and his biological children because  of
   the birth certificates. At its highest, the appellant's case was that  he
   had limited face-to-face contact with them. The judge noted the  children
   were not British and appeared to have no leave to remain in the  UK.  The
   same was true of Ms Martins. It was unclear whether  the  children  would
   remain in the UK. However, based on the facts currently appertaining, the
   judge found it was in  the  children's  best  interests  for  the  weekly
   contact with the appellant to  continue.  She  went  on  to  reason  that
   removing the appellant would inevitably have a significant impact on  the
   children's relationship with their father. It was in the  best  interests
   of the children to  maintain  the  status  quo.  Taking  the  appellant's
   evidence at its highest, that he lived with his children until  2014,  he
   would have  lived  with  them  almost  their  entire  lives  and  it  was
   reasonable to assume their relationship was  of  significant  importance.
   The judge found the appellant had resided in the UK since at least  March
   2008, which was almost 12 years. However, he had not  worked  for  almost
   nine years. He attended church. The judge found  his  private  life  ties
   were limited. However, she found it would not be proportionate to  remove
   him because this would separate him from the children. The judge did  not
   go on to consider paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).


8. The grounds seeking permission to appeal argue the  decision  contains  a
   mistake as to a material  fact.  The  judge  had  been  given  inaccurate
   information. At the date of hearing Ms Martins and the children had  been
   granted limited leave until 15 September 2015.  This  was  granted  on  a
   discretionary basis following the refusal of the asylum claim  which  was
   submitted after the breakdown in the relationship between  the  appellant
   and Ms Martins on 9 January 2014. This indicated  that  the  relationship
   had broken down in November 2013, not August 2014 as the judge was  told.
   There had been no contact between the appellant and  his  children  since
   then.


9. First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchinson granted permission to  appeal.




10. I heard argument on the question of whether  Judge  Bartlett's  decision
   is vitiated by material error of law. Ms Brocklesby-Weller suggested  the
   grounds seeking permission to appeal had been inadvertently truncated and
   there were in reality two points. However, it is clear to me  that  there
   is a single ground  on  which  permission  to  appeal  has  been  granted
   concerning mistake of fact. I refused Ms Brocklesby-Weller's  application
   to vary the grounds.

11. With respect to the single ground on which permission was  granted,  she
   accepted she was in difficulties. I did not need to call on Mr Okunowo.

12. In MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105  (IAC),  the  Tribunal
   discussed the applicable principles in play when an argument is made that
   an error of law was brought about by a mistake  of  fact.  The  following
   passages are germane to this case:

         "19. Of unmistakable  importance  also,  in  the  context  of  this
             appeal, is the decision of the Court of Appeal in E & R - v  -
             Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 49.
             As appears from the  opening  paragraph  of  the  judgment  of
             Carnwath LJ, one of the two  central  issues  raised  in  this
             appeal concerned cases decided by the first instance  Tribunal
             (in that instance, the Adjudicator) where it  is  demonstrated
             that -


                  ".... an important part of  its  reasoning  was  based  on
                  ignorance or mistake as to the facts ...."


              Drawing particularly on the speech of Lord Slynn in R  -  v  -
             Criminal Injuries Compensation Board, ex parte A [1999]  2  AC
             330 (at pages 333 - 336), Carnwath LJ stated:


                  "[63]    In our view, the CICB case points to the way to a
                      separate ground of review, based on the principle  of
                      fairness  ....   the  unfairness   arose   from   the
                      combination of five factors:


                         i) An erroneous impression created by a mistake  as
                            to,  or  ignorance  of,  a  relevant  fact  (the
                            availability of reliable evidence to support her
                            case);


                        ii) The fact was 'established', in the  sense  that,
                            if attention had been drawn to  the  point,  the
                            correct  position  could  have  been  shown   by
                            objective and uncontentious evidence;


                       iii)  The  Claimant  could   not   fairly   be   held
                            responsible for the error;


                        iv) Although there was no duty on the Board  itself,
                            or the police, to  do  the  Claimant's  work  of
                            proving her case, all  the  participants  had  a
                            shared interest in co-operating to  achieve  the
                            correct result.


                         v) The mistaken impression played a  material  part
                            in the reasoning."


             The learned Lord Justice added:


                 "[64]     It is in  the  interests  of  all  parties  that
                      decisions  should  be  made  on  the  best  available
                      information."


              He continued:


                  "[66]    In our view, the time has now come to accept that
                      a mistake of fact giving  rise  to  unfairness  is  a
                      separate head of challenge in an appeal on a point of
                      law, at least in those statutory contexts  where  the
                      parties share an interest in co-operating to  achieve
                      the correct result.  Asylum law is  undoubtedly  such
                      an area.  Without seeking to lay down a precise code,
                      the ordinary requirements for a finding of unfairness
                      are apparent from the above analysis of CICB.  First,
                      there must have been a  mistake  as  to  an  existing
                      fact, including a mistake as to the  availability  of
                      evidence on a particular matter.  Secondly, the  fact
                      or evidence must  have  been  'established',  in  the
                      sense  that  it  was  uncontentious  and  objectively
                      verifiable.  Thirdly, the Appellant (or his advisors)
                      must not  have  been  responsible  for  the  mistake.
                      Fourthly, the mistake must  have  played  a  material
                      (not necessarily decisive)  part  in  the  Tribunal's
                      reasoning."


         20.  The principles relating to  the  impact  upon  proceedings  of
             unfairness arising from error of fact were reconsidered by the
             Court of Appeal in R & ors (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA  Civ  982
             in which decision the Court of  Appeal  conducted  a  detailed
             review of categories of error of law  frequently  encountered.
             Brooke LJ said the following:
                "Part 6.  Error of law: unfairness resulting from a mistake
                of fact
                1.  The  next  matter  we  must  address  relates   to   the
                   circumstances in which an appellate body  like  the  IAT,
                   whose  primary  role  during  the  relevant  period   was
                   restricted to identifying and correcting errors  of  law,
                   could entertain  an  argument  to  the  effect  that  the
                   outcome in the lower court was unfair as a  result  of  a
                   mistake of fact, and that this constituted  an  error  of
                   law which entitled it to interfere.
                         In E & R v  Home  Secretary  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  49;
                         [2004] QB 1044 this court was concerned to  provide
                         a principled explanation of the reasons why a court
                         whose jurisdiction is limited to the correction  of
                         errors of law is occasionally  able  to  intervene,
                         when fairness demands it, when  a  minister  or  an
                         inferior body or tribunal has taken a  decision  on
                         the  basis  of  a  foundation  of  fact  which  was
                         demonstrably wrong. ...
                1. At para 64 Carnwath LJ  said  that  there  was  a  common
                   feature of all these cases, even where the procedure  was
                   adversarial, in  that  the  Secretary  of  State  or  the
                   particular statutory authority had a shared interest with
                   both the particular appellant and with  any  tribunal  or
                   other decision-maker that might be involved in  the  case
                   in  ensuring  that  decisions  were  taken  on  the  best
                   information and on the correct factual basis. At para  66
                   he identified asylum  law  as  representing  a  statutory
                   context in which the parties shared an  interest  in  co-
                   operating to achieve a correct  result.  He  went  on  to
                   suggest that the ordinary requirements for a  finding  of
                   unfairness which amounted to an error of law were that:
                         (i) there  must  have  been  a  mistake  as  to  an
                         existing  fact,  including  a  mistake  as  to  the
                         availability of evidence on a particular matter;
                         (ii) it must be possible to categorise the relevant
                         fact or evidence as "established" in the sense that
                         it was uncontentious and objectively verifiable;
                         (iii) the appellant (or his advisers) must not have
                         been responsible for the mistake;
                         (iv) the mistake must have played a  material  (not
                         necessarily  decisive)  part  in   the   tribunal's
                         reasoning."
             Notably, the learned Lord Justice made clear that he  was  not
             seeking to lay down a precise code. Brooke LJ continued:
                1. "Needless to say, such a mistake could not be  identified
                   by the supervising  or  appellate  court  unless  it  was
                   willing to admit new evidence in order  to  identify  it.
                   Paragraphs 68 to 89 of the judgment in E and R contain an
                   analysis of relevant case law on the power to  admit  new
                   evidence. It concluded with the observation that the case
                   of Khan v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 530 that gave rise to  the
                   problem summarised in (viii) above was a good example  of
                   the need for a residual ground of review  for  unfairness
                   arising from  a  simple  mistake  of  fact  and  that  it
                   illustrated the intrinsic difficulty in many asylum cases
                   of obtaining reliable evidence of  the  facts  that  gave
                   rise to the fear of persecution and  the  need  for  some
                   flexibility  in  the  application  of  Ladd  v   Marshall
                   principles (infra).
                1. The reference to the Ladd  v  Marshall  principles  is  a
                   reference to that part of the judgment of Denning  LJ  in
                   [1954] 1 WLR 1489 when he said (at  p  1491)  that  where
                   there had been a trial or  hearing  on  the  merits,  the
                   decision of the judge could only be overturned by  resort
                   to  further evidence if it could be shown that:
                         (1) the new  evidence  could  not  with  reasonable
                         diligence have been obtained for use at  the  trial
                         (or hearing);
                         (2) the new evidence must be such that,  if  given,
                         it would probably have had an  important  influence
                         on the result of the case (though it  need  not  be
                         decisive);
                         (3)  the  new  evidence  was  apparently   credible
                         although it need not be incontrovertible.
                1. By way of a final summary of the  position,  Carnwath  LJ
                   said in E and R at para 91 that an appeal on  a  question
                   of law might now be  made  on  the  basis  of  unfairness
                   resulting  from  "misunderstanding  or  ignorance  of  an
                   established and relevant fact" and that the admission  of
                   new evidence on such an appeal  was  subject  to  Ladd  v
                   Marshall principles, which  might  be  departed  from  in
                   exceptional circumstances where the interests of  justice
                   required".
         21.  As we have observed, the context of the decision of the  Court
             of Appeal in E & R - v -  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department  was  an  appeal  from  the  Adjudicator   to   the
             Immigration and Asylum Tribunal.  As a  result  of  subsequent
             statutory reforms, the equivalent judicialised bodies are  now
             the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper  Tribunal  respectively.
             In  our  judgment,  simple  logic  impels  inexorably  to  the
             conclusion that the decision in E & R applies fully to appeals
             from the First-tier Tribunal to the Upper Tribunal."

13. Having considered this guidance, I have decided  there  is  no  material
   error of law of the kind proposed by the respondent and her  appeal  must
   be dismissed. The respondent seeks to adduce new evidence to correct  the
   error of the presenting officer who appeared in the First-tier  Tribunal.
   However, no explanation has been offered as to why this  error  was  made
   or, to put it another  way,  why  the  evidence  now  relied  on  by  the
   respondent was not available at the date of the hearing. I infer from the
   circumstances that it could have been adduced at the time of the  hearing
   if reasonable diligence had been applied.

14. In any event, even if that hurdle were overcome, the  condensed  summary
   of the legal test provided in  the  last  substantive  paragraph  of  the
   respondent's grounds omits the key point that the error in this case  was
   brought about by the misinformation given (no doubt in good faith) to the
   judge by the presenting officer. Any resultant unfairness in the  hearing
   resulted from the respondent's own error.

15. Finally, it was not possible to say the evidence  was  "established"  in
   the  sense  that  it  was  uncontentious  and   objectively   verifiable.
   Unfortunately, Ms Brocklesby-Weller had  not  been  able  to  obtain  the
   missing evidence to show me.


16.  The  judge's  decision  is  undoubtedly  extremely  generous   to   the
   appellant. However, it does not contain a material error of  law  of  the
   kind contended by the respondent. Accordingly  it  shall  stand  and  the
   respondent's appeal is dismissed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

     The First-tier Tribunal did not make a material error on  a  point  of
    law and its decision allowing the appeals on article  8  grounds  shall
    stand.


    No anonymity direction has been made.


Signed


         Judge Froom, sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
