


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24137/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 5 February 2014                          |On: 12 February 2014         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           karuppiah vignesh kumar
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Davison, instructed by Indra Sebastian
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   (SSHD) against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver  allowing
   Mr Kumar's appeal, on limited grounds, against the respondent's  decision
   to refuse leave to remain as a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  and  to
   remove him from the United Kingdom by way of directions under section  47
   of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

2. For the purposes of  this  decision,  I  shall  hereafter  refer  to  the
   Secretary of State as the respondent  and  Mr  Kumar  as  the  appellant,
   reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.

3. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 11 November  1984.  He  first
   entered the United Kingdom on 15 September 2009 with leave to enter as  a
   Tier 4 (General Student) Migrant until 30 March 2011. On 4 April 2011  he
   was granted leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post Study Work) Migrant until 4
   April 2013. On 22 March 2013 he applied for further leave to remain as  a
   Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.

4. The appellant's application was refused  under  paragraph  244DD  of  the
   immigration rules  on  the  grounds  that  he  had  failed  to  meet  the
   requirements at paragraph 245DD(b) as he was awarded  zero  points  under
   Appendix A (Attributes). The respondent considered that he had failed  to
   show that he had access to the required funds. He had failed  to  provide
   documentary evidence supporting his claimed business activity in terms of
   advertising  materials,  articles,  information  from  a  trade  fair  or
   registration with a trade body. Furthermore, the contract he had supplied
   as evidence of  trading  activity  did  not  show  the  services  he  was
   providing.

5. The appellant appealed  against  that  decision,  submitting  grounds  of
   appeal that were general in nature. His appeal was  heard  by  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Oliver on 25 October 2013. The judge made reference to the
   appellant's statement in which he had stated that he would have been able
   to supply the required information to the Home Office had they  requested
   it and that he did have evidence supporting his business  activities  and
   the nature of the services he was  providing.  He  also  referred  to  an
   additional statement from the appellant in which he stated  that  he  had
   now noticed that the Home Office bundle did not include all the documents
   submitted with his application. The judge noted that an additional bundle
   had been adduced which  the  appellant  claimed  included  the  documents
   submitted with his application. The judge  concluded  that,  despite  the
   inclusion of paragraph 245AA in  the  immigration  rules  reflecting  the
   respondent's evidential flexibility policy, the policy itself, which  was
   wider than the rules, was still applicable and had not been considered in
   the appellant's case. On that basis he found  the  respondent's  decision
   not to be in accordance with the law and he allowed  the  appeal  on  the
   limited basis that the matter be remitted to the Secretary of  State  for
   further consideration. He also found the removal decision not  to  be  in
   accordance with the law since the appellant's Article  8  claim  had  not
   been considered.

6. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by  the  respondent
   on the grounds that the judge had  erred  by  considering  that  the  old
   evidential flexibility  policy  applied  to  the  appellant  rather  than
   paragraph 245AA of the immigration rules which was in force at  the  time
   his application was made; and that in any event the provisions  of  those
   rules did not apply to him as  the  missing  information  was  too  wide-
   ranging. The judge ought to have dismissed the appeal under the rules and
   gone on to determine the Article 8 claim, noting that no application  had
   been submitted under Appendix FM.

7. Permission to appeal was granted on 16 December 2013.

Appeal hearing

8. The appeal came before me on 5 February 2014. Mr Saunders relied  on  the
   Court of Appeal judgment in Secretary of State for the Home Department  v
   Rodriguez [2014] EWCA Civ 2. He submitted that the  judge  had  erred  by
   finding that the policy applied to the appellant  rather  than  paragraph
   245AA but that in any case the appellant did not fall within the  policy.
   The wording of the skeleton argument suggested that the documents in  the
   supplementary bundle had not been submitted to the Home Office  with  the
   application and the judge made no clear findings on that.

9. Mr Davison accepted that it was not clear  which  documents  were  before
   the Home Office and it  was  on  that  basis  that  the  judge  correctly
   referred the matter back to the Secretary of  State.  Furthermore,  since
   the decision included a removal decision the judge was entitled to  refer
   the matter back to the Secretary of State to consider Article 8 since  it
   had not been considered in the refusal letter. There was no error of law.

Consideration and findings

10.  Judge  Oliver  was  clearly  in  error   in   his   understanding   and
   interpretation of the evidential flexibility policy. Paragraph 245AA  had
   been introduced into the immigration rules at the time the appellant made
   his application and it was therefore the rules themselves which  dictated
   the relevant requirements, rather than the  policy  the  rules  had  been
   introduced to replace. However, even  if  the  policy  had  survived  the
   introduction of  paragraph  245AA,  it  clearly  did  not  apply  in  the
   appellant's circumstances, where the respondent plainly  could  not  have
   had sufficient reason to believe that the required  documentary  evidence
   existed. It is clear from  the  refusal  decision  that  the  appellant's
   application was significantly deficient in its supporting  evidence.  The
   purpose of the policy was not to give the  appellant  an  opportunity  to
   rectify such deficiencies when the rules made it clear  what  documentary
   evidence was required. That was indeed the finding made by the  Court  of
   Appeal in Rodriguez, at paragraph  92:  "Taken  overall,  the  Evidential
   Flexibility process instruction is demonstrably not designed to  give  an
   applicant the opportunity first to remedy any defect or inadequacy in the
   application or supporting documentation so as  to  save  the  application
   from refusal after substantive consideration.". Accordingly  the  judge's
   finding that the respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law
   owing to a failure to consider the policy was manifestly wrong in law and
   what he ought to have done was to consider the matter himself.

11. It was Mr Davison's submission that  the  judge  properly  remitted  the
   matter to the Secretary of State in view of the  confusion  as  to  which
   documents had been submitted  with  the  application.  However  that  was
   clearly not the basis upon which the judge had remitted the case. In fact
   he made no clear findings as to which documents had  been  included  with
   the application and whether or not he accepted the appellant's  claim  to
   have sent the documents in the supplementary bundle to the UKBA.  Neither
   did he give any consideration to the question of  whether  the  documents
   the appellant was claiming to have included with  his  application  would
   have been sufficient to meet the requirements of the rules in any  event.
   Those were findings that he  ought  to  have  made.  Indeed,  if  he  had
   accepted the appellant's claim that the documents had been included  with
   the application and that those documents  did  address  the  deficiencies
   identified in the refusal letter, there would have been no need  for  him
   to remit the matter at all.

12. Accordingly, it seems to me that, in the absence of any findings on  the
   appellant's ability to meet the requirements of  the  immigration  rules,
   that is still a matter that has to be considered and  determined  by  the
   First-tier Tribunal.

13. It was Mr Davison's submission that even if  that  were  the  case,  the
   judge was still correct to send the matter back to the Secretary of State
   since no decision had been made  on  the  appellant's  Article  8  claim.
   However it is relevant to note that  the  appellant  had  never  made  an
   Article 8 claim with his application and that his marriage giving rise to
   that claim took place after  his  application  had  been  considered  and
   refused. There was therefore nothing before the  Secretary  of  State  to
   consider in terms of Article 8. The appellant did not submit  a  separate
   Statement of Additional Grounds, as the refusal decision advised  him  to
   do if he had further reasons for believing that he should be  allowed  to
   stay in the United  Kingdom,  but  reference  was  simply  made,  in  the
   relevant section in his Notice of Appeal, to the general grounds. In  any
   event the Notice of Appeal was  lodged  prior  to  his  marriage  and  no
   reference was made in the grounds to an impending marriage  due  to  take
   place a few days later. Indeed the  grounds  were  extremely  vague  and,
   whilst making a brief reference to Article  8,  provided  no  basis  upon
   which such a claim could be made out. It is also relevant  to  note  that
   the appellant has still made no application under  Appendix  FM.  In  the
   circumstances I see  no  reason  why  Judge  Oliver  ought  not  to  have
   considered the appellant's Article 8 claim himself  and,  again,  in  the
   absence of any findings in that regard it seems to  me  that  this  is  a
   matter that has to go back to the First-tier Tribunal.

14. For all of these reasons, I find that the  decision  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal contains errors  of  law  and  has  to  be  set  aside.  In  the
   circumstances, it is appropriate for the appeal to  be  remitted  to  the
   First-tier Tribunal for all matters to be determined.

DECISION

15. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. The  decision  is  set  aside.  The
   appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  pursuant  to  section
   12(2)(b)(i) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and
   Practice Statement 7.2(b), before any judge aside from Judge Oliver.








                               Signed                                  Date




                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
