
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24468/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 January 2016                   |On 26 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               The SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 AISHA NAZIR
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Sreeraman, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Chohan, instructed by Immigration Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    McMahon.  The decision was promulgated on 24 July 2015.  It allowed the
    Respondent's appeal finding that she was an extended family  member  of
    an EEA citizen and entitled to a residence card declaring  that  to  be
    so.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State for
    the Home Department as the respondent and to Ms Nazir as the appellant,
    reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The parties were in agreement that the only issue before me was whether
    the appellant's brother-in-law was a Spanish national at the time  that
    she was dependent on him and a member of his household prior to  coming
    to the UK and when she was his dependent in the UK from 2011 onwards.

 4. At the hearing I was provided with a certified copy of the  brother-in-
    law's Spanish passport showing that it was issued to him on 4  February
    2008, that is, before the appellant came to the UK.

 5. Ms Sreeraman indicated that the certified copy of the  passport  showed
    the appellant's brother-in-law to be an EEA national  at  the  material
    times and that the respondent's challenge could not succeed where  that
    was so.

Notice of Decision

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.


Signed   [pic]    Date 25 January 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
