
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA 24888 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 February 2014                           |On 12 March 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                             samuel kwame forson
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Oke, Legal Representative instructed by
                  Daniel & Samuel Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Ghana against a decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal to  refuse  to  vary  his  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on 31 May 2013.

 2. The relevant immigration history is  that  the  appellant  came  to  the
    United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor  on  13  October  2001.   He  was  given
    discretionary leave on 21 April 2010 until 21 April 2013  by  reason  of
    his having established family life in the United Kingdom. He applied for
    an extension of that stay on 22 April 2013.  The application was  almost
    certain to run into difficulty because the appellant's circumstances had
    changed and it was refused.

 3. When the appellant was given leave to remain on a discretionary basis it
    was because he had  established  strong  family  life  elements  in  his
    private and family life.  He was living with his wife, his daughter  who
    was then still a minor and his son who is now aged 17.  By the  time  he
    made his second application in April of 2013  the  marriage  had  broken
    down, the daughter had achieved her majority and relations with his  son
    had deteriorated to the point where he had found it necessary to try and
    make an application to the Family Court for a contact order.

 4. In fact the form that he completed with a view to commencing proceedings
    in  the  family  courts  had  been  refused  because  it  had  not  been
    accompanied by the appropriate fee and the appellant had made a  further
    application to be excused fees based on his impecuniosity.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the appeal in what  is  in  many
    ways a thorough and careful determination but there  are  two  potential
    errors.

 6. Firstly, the judge seems to  have  ignored  completely  the  appellant's
    complaint that the decision was in breach of a policy that ought to have
    been considered because it helped the appellant  and  secondly,  because
    the judge had misdirected himself concerning the approach to  take  when
    there are family proceedings which according to the appellant  had  been
    initiated.

 7. I will deal with  the  policy  point  first.  A  difficulty  facing  the
    appellant is  that  it  is  very  hard  to  see  how  the  most  careful
    consideration of the policy identified before me could have assisted the
    appellant and, although the judge ignored  the  point,  the  policy  was
    never produced for  his  consideration.   It  is  well-established  that
    people intending to rely on policies in this Chamber ought to make  sure
    that copies of the policy are available to the  Tribunal.  Policies  are
    often of short duration and old copies can be extraordinarily  difficult
    to track down. It is incumbent on a party relying on a policy to produce
    it so that everybody can understands what it is that  the  appellant  is
    complaining about.  That was not done in this case.

 8. Mr Oke had a copy of the necessary policy before him  when  he  prepared
    the case (or rather I assume that he  had;  he  has  not  actually  been
    established that he did).  I do not doubt that  he  has  acted  in  good
    faith but it is easy to make mistakes.

 9. However the document on which he  relies  does  not  actually  help  the
    appellant.  It would only be of assistance if there had been  no  change
    in the appellant's circumstances but it  is  the  very  essence  of  the
    appellant's case that his circumstances are now different.  He no longer
    claims to be a happily married man living in a nuclear family but to  be
    in an unhappy or dissolved marriage trying to get to court to  order  to
    facilitate  contact  with  his  child.   The  circumstances  are   quite
    different and the most careful consideration of the policy as far  as  I
    can see would have produced exactly the same decision in the  First-tier
    Tribunal. There was no material error here.

10. The second point concerns the approach that  the  Tribunal  should  have
    taken knowing that proceedings had been initiated.   I  am  not  at  all
    satisfied that this is relevant because it  is  not  clear  to  me  that
    proceedings had been initiated.  I have seen  evidence  suggesting  that
    attempts had been made to be excused payment but I am not persuaded that
    proceedings have been initiated when they have not been issued.

11. On the facts of this case this is not material. The  guidance  given  in
    RS (Immigration and Family Court proceedings) India  [2012]  UKUT  00218
    (IAC) assists where courts are getting involved and I do not think it is
    necessarily the case that the proceedings have to be initiated before RS
    is relevant.  The Tribunal's decision should, as  far  as  is  possible,
    have regard not only to the fact that proceedings have  been  issued  or
    contemplated, but to the substances of the application. Otherwise wholly
    unmeritorious  applications  could  be  made  to  frustrate  immigration
    control.

12. I want to  make  it  clear  that  I  am  far  from  satisfied  that  the
    immigration rules do give proper regard to the rights of children in all
    circumstances and I am confident  this  Tribunal,  at  least  until  the
    jurisprudence  is  more  settled,  will  be  extremely  alert   to   the
    possibility that the Rules and policies not taking proper account of the
    needs of children who are affected by the removal of their parents.   It
    would be wholly undesirable and  may  well  be  wrong  in  law  for  the
    Secretary of State to be routinely making decisions to  remove  somebody
    when there are serious issues to be determined in the Family Courts.

13. What is different about  this  case  is  the  extreme  weakness  of  the
    proposed application.  Reference is made to contact order in respect  of
    two children but this is nonsense. The oldest child  is  an  independent
    adult and I can think of no circumstances whatsoever in which a  contact
    order could possibly be made in her case.

14. The case of the second child is a little bit different because he  is  a
    minor and it is generally very desirable that children  are  allowed  to
    cultivate relationships with both of their parents.  However the  second
    child is already 17 years old. Within a year he will be  an  independent
    adult.  There is nothing from him before me to indicate that he wants to
    see his father but he has been frustrated because of his mother.  It  is
    not even the appellant's case in his statement that his former  wife  is
    preventing contact.  The evidence that would be necessary to  show  that
    this is the sort of case  where  there  is  any  merit  in  the  contact
    application is just not before me and so again I  do  not  see  how  any
    deficiencies on the part of the  First-tier  Tribunal  can  possibly  be
    described as material.  This is just not  a  case  where  there  is  any
    proper basis for thinking that the contact proceedings are going to have
    any bearing on the  outcome  of  this  application  that  led  to  these
    proceedings.

15. I address my mind particularly to paragraph 1(iii) of the head  note  in
    RS.  It says:

         "In the case of contact proceedings initiated by an appellant in an
         immigration appeal, is there any reason to believe that the  family
         proceedings have been instituted to delay or frustrate removal  and
         not to promote the child's welfare?"

16. This question has to be answered in the affirmative.   It  is  right  to
    say that attempts  were  made  to  issue  the   proceedings  before  the
    Secretary of State's decision but they were made after  the  application
    had been made and in anticipation of enquiries being  made.   They  were
    clearly brought knowing that there was an immigration issue at large.

17. As I have indicated, it is  an  extremely  weak  case  with  nothing  to
    indicate any inherent merit in it and I think this is a  case  initiated
    in the Family Courts with a view to frustrating the immigration decision
    rather than helping the child.

18. Mr Oke said that the proper course  was  for  me  to  adjourn  the  case
    because it is likely there would be information available for the Family
    Court no later than 31 March which could go some way to indicating if my
    analysis of the case is right or if this is an unusual case where  there
    are elements that I have just not considered.  This  was  a  point  made
    attractively but I think it would be inappropriate for me to yield to it
    because the decision to me is plain on the evidence and it is that there
    is no material error on the part of the First-tier Tribunal.

19. It follows therefore that I uphold the decision of the First-tier  Judge
    and dismiss the appeal that is before me.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 7 March 2014                   |











