
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24225/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th March 2019                             |On 6th March 2019             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SHAHRUKH KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jones, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Not represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                           (Decision given orally)

 1. This appeal was remitted by the Court of Appeal in a decision sealed on
    the 16 August 2018. The matter subsequently came before  me  on  the  3
    October 2018 and, in a decision of the same date, I set aside the First-
    tier Tribunal's decision. Regrettably, I could not proceed  immediately
    to re-make the decision on appeal and the matter was thereafter  listed
    for hearing on today's date.

 2. Mr Khan appeared in person today having withdrawn instructions from his
    former legal representatives. At the outset  of  the  hearing  Mr  Khan
    sought an adjournment, indicating that he also had  an  ongoing  appeal
    before  the  First-tier   Tribunal,   a   fact   his   previous   legal
    representatives failed to mention at the hearing  of  3  October.  That
    appeal, it is said, relates to a refusal by the SSHD to grant him leave
    on long residence grounds (it must in fact be a  human  rights  appeal,
    founded on such basis). Mr Khan requested that the Tribunal  hear  both
    the appeals on the same occasion. Ms Jones agreed that  this  would  be
    preferable.

 3. Despite both the vintage of this appeal, and the  decision  made  on  3
    October that it would remain for determination in the  Upper  Tribunal,
    in all the circumstances I  accept  that  it  is  prudent  and  in  the
    interests of justice for the Mr Khan to have his claim that  he  has  a
    right to remain in the UK considered as a whole.

 4. I therefore remit this appeal to the FtT to be heard at the  same  time
    as the appeal referenced as HU/16429/2017 (currently listed on 28 March
    2019 at the Hatton Cross hearing centre).

Signed:  Date 5th March 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
