
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24443/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice - Belfast|Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 1 August 2016                          |On 18 August 2016                |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                             RANA PRADIP SINGHA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr D Jones, instructed by McCallion Keown
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. At the outset of the hearing I made an  anonymity  direction,  however,
    given the path the hearing took I now set aside such direction.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born 1  January  1979.  On  15
    February 2013 he made an application for  an  EEA  permanent  residence
    card, having previously been issued with a residence card, valid for  5
    years, as the spouse of a Ms Periera. The SSHD refused such application
    by way of a decision dated 8 November 2013.

 3. The appellant was unsuccessful in his appeal to the First-tier Tribunal
    ("FtT"), Judge Fox concluding, inter alia, that:  (i)  the  appellant's
    marriage to Ms Pereira had been  one  of  convenience  and,  therefore,
    could not be relied upon by the appellant to found a  claim  under  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006; and, (ii) that, in  any  event,  it
    had not been established that Ms Pereira  was  a  qualified  person  (a
    worker in the instant case) during the entirety of the relevant  5-year
    period and, as a consequence, the  appellant  had  not  established  an
    entitlement to permanent residence.

 4. By way of a decision of the 21 October 2015 the President of the  Upper
    Tribunal set aside the FtT's decision concluding, inter alia, that  the
    FtT had misdirected itself as to the appropriate burden and standard of
    proof on both the issue of marriage of convenience and the  genuineness
    of the financial documentation relied on by the appellant in support of
    the contention that his wife had  been  in  work  during  the  relevant
    periods.

 5. Thus the matter came before me to remake the decision under appeal. The
    appellant  gave  lengthy  oral  evidence  in  support  of  his  claims,
    initially asserting both the genuineness of his  marriage  and  of  the
    documentation relied upon in support of  his  wife's  claimed  economic
    activity. As the cross-examination of the appellant evolved his answers
    became ever vaguer  and  more  inconsistent.  After  over  an  hour  of
    evidence the appellant admitted defeat and accepted that  he  had  lied
    about the fact that his wife had been working in the UK in  the  period
    after 2010.

 6. This  evidence  of  itself,  and  certainly  in  combination  with  the
    contradictions and variations in the appellant's account given over the
    preceding hour, led to  it  being  inevitable  that  his  appeal  would
    dismissed.  At  this  juncture  I  rose  to  allow  Mr  Jones  to  take
    instructions,  which  he  did  with  the  assistance   of   the   court
    interpreter.

 7. Upon return Mr Jones sought the Tribunal's consent for the appellant to
    withdraw his case. In the absence of any objection from Mr  Matthews  I
    gave such consent. As a consequence of the  appellant  withdrawing  his
    case before the Upper Tribunal I formally dismiss his appeal.

 8. I will only add that the appellant's legal representatives  before  the
    Upper Tribunal (both solicitor and counsel) have  conducted  themselves
    in nothing other than in a proper manner. They, like the SSHD  and  the
    Tribunal, have been subjected to the appellant's deception and  I  have
    no doubt that each properly put the appellant's  case  forward  on  the
    basis of the instructions provided to them - as they were  entitled  to
    do.

Decision

For the reasons given above the appellant's appeal is dismissed

Signed:
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor

1 August 2016

