
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/24441/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 November 2014                  |On 18 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                             Karina Noemi Melgar
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     In person (with help of Ms L. Silva).
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Morrison promulgated on  18  August  2014  dismissing  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the decision of the Respondent  dated  22  May  2014  to
    refuse to issue her with a  'derivative  residence  card'  pursuant  to
    regulation 15A of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
    2006.

 2. The Appellant's appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  had  been  dealt
    with 'on the papers'. However, the Appellant appeared  before  me,  and
    was accompanied by Ms Lydia  Silva.  Ms  Silva  was  a  friend  of  the
    Appellant who worked for an organisation called GYROS that had assisted
    in the presentation of the Appellant's application  to  the  Respondent
    (e.g. see Annex B of the  Respondent's  bundle  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal). She told me that she had obtained OISC level I. She did  not
    attend formally to represent the Appellant in the appeal but  to  offer
    help and  support.  Ms  Isherwood  raised  no  objection  to  Ms  Silva
    participating in the hearing in such a way, and accordingly  I  invited
    observations and comments during the course of the  hearing  from  both
    the Appellant and Ms Silva. (I  note  that  there  is  also  a  written
    submission prepared for consideration by the Upper Tribunal, which is a
    matter of record on file, and to which I have had regard.)

Background

 3. The Appellant is a national of Argentina born on 21 November 1969.  Her
    full immigration and personal  histories  are  not  set  out  with  any
    clarity in the documents on file. Be that  as  it  may,  it  is  common
    ground that the Appellant first entered the UK as a visitor on 4 August
    2005. Thereafter, she applied for a residence card  on  1  August  2006
    which was issued on 9  November  2006.  An  application  for  permanent
    residence made on 10 October 2011 was rejected on 20 October 2011. On 5
    November 2012 she again applied  for  permanent  residence,  which  was
    refused on 23 May 2013. A subsequent  appeal  (ref  IA/22073/2013)  was
    dismissed by a determination promulgated on 16 December 2013.

 4. In the meantime the Appellant made a further application, on 3  October
    2013. The earlier  application  appears  to  have  been  based  on  her
    relationship with her partner; the instant  application,  however,  was
    for a derivative residence card as the primary carer of the child of an
    EEA national. The application was refused for  reasons  set  out  in  a
    'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 22 May 2014 with particular
    reference to regulation 15A(4) of the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006, and a Notice of Immigration Decision was issued
    on the same date..

 5. The Appellant appealed to the IAC.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  after
    consideration 'on the papers' for reasons set out in his determination.

 7. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on 3 October 2014.

Consideration

 8. The Appellant's application for a derivative residence card  was  based
    on her relationship with her two children (whose  names  and  dates  of
    birth are a matter of record on file). The  Appellant  lives  with  her
    children and their father, Mr Marcello Alejandro  Campos  Da  Silva,  a
    Portuguese national.

 9. The Respondent refused the application on the basis that  she  was  not
    satisfied that the Appellant was the  primary  carer  of  her  children
    (regulation 15A(4)(a), with reference to regulation 15A(7)).

10. The Appellant's Grounds of Appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the
    Notice of Appeal are generalised and do not contain anything by way  of
    particularisation of the facts and circumstances of  her  own  case.  I
    pause to note that the Grounds do not plead  Article  8  of  the  ECHR;
    however, as identified by the First-tier Tribunal Judge at paragraph 10
    of his decision,  subsequent  representations  by  the  Appellant  made
    assertions in respect of Article 8.

11. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  refused  the  appeal  under  the  EEA
    Regulations essentially  on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    addressed the issue of 'primary carer', commenting that  the  Appellant
    had  seemingly  "failed  to  understand  the  nature  of  the  refusal"
    (paragraph 11). In respect of Article 8 the Judge  identified  that  it
    was necessary to deal with the issue (paragraph 12), but then  did  not
    do so  on  the  basis  that  no  removal  directions  had  been  issued
    (paragraph 13), and that it was  not  disproportionate  to  expect  the
    Appellant to make a relevant 'human rights' application as suggested in
    the RFRL (paragraph 14).

12. The Appellant's Grounds in support of the application for permission to
    appeal do  not  expressly  identify  any  error  of  law.  Rather  they
    constitute a number of factual assertions as to the Appellant's history
    and circumstances in the UK, and refer  to  reasons  why  the  children
    could not go to Argentina, assert that her husband "will not return  to
    Argentina" with her, and that the family have established ties  to  the
    UK. The Grounds conclude with a request that the Appellant's Article  8
    rights be respected.

13. In granting permission to appeal Judge Hollingworth does not engage  at
    all with these grounds or otherwise with the Article 8  issue.  Instead
    he identifies Judge Morrison's  observation  at  paragraph  11  of  the
    determination that the Appellant had seemingly failed to understand the
    nature of the refusal, and then opines  that  this  gives  rise  to  an
    arguable error of law with reference to "the principle of  equality  of
    arms".

14. I am not remotely persuaded that the Judge's reference at paragraph  11
    gives rise to an error of law. Nor am I persuaded  that  there  is  any
    issue of an 'inequality of arms'. The  question  of  fairness  in  this
    context is really one of opportunity. It cannot be said - and indeed is
    not asserted by her - that the Appellant has not had the opportunity of
    seeking advice and representation in her appeal before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Indeed the Appellant  had  access  to  an  organisation  that
    offers immigration advice and carries an OISC logo on its letterhead in
    the presentation of her application, and there is  nothing  to  suggest
    that there was any barrier to seeking and obtaining  continuing  advice
    and assistance in the context of the appeal. I  am  entirely  satisfied
    that the Appellant has had the same opportunity as any other  Appellant
    to participate in the appeal process: she has had a free election as to
    whether to have her case decided 'on the papers' or  at  a  hearing  at
    which she could attend  to  give  evidence  and  address  any  relevant
    issues, and she had in any event been given the opportunity to file and
    serve any materials upon which she might wish to rely before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

15. Whilst not determinative, I note that the  written  submission  to  the
    Upper Tribunal dated 6 November 2014 made  on  the  Appellant's  behalf
    does not make any reference  to,  or  otherwise  seek  to  develop  the
    argument in respect of 'inequality of arms',  or  otherwise  raise  any
    issue in respect of procedural fairness.

16. Nonetheless, notwithstanding the absence  of  any  properly  formulated
    grounds  identifying  an  error  of  law,  and  my  rejection  of   the
    formulation of an error of law in the decision granting  permission  to
    appeal, Ms Isherwood was content for there to be a 'general airing' and
    discussion of the  Appellant's  case  against  the  background  of  the
    Regulations.

17. At  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing  I  indicated  that  I  would  be
    determining the appeal on the basis of there  being  no  error  of  law
    under the EEA Regulations, and no material error in respect of  Article
    8.

18. However, in the writing of  the  decision  herein  I  have  come  to  a
    different view under the Regulations.

19. The key passage in the RFRL is as follows:

         "The evidence you have submitted fails to show  that  you  are  the
         primary carer of your children.

         The children's father.... is also resident in  the  United  Kingdom
         and resides with you and the children.

         The payslips and Jobcentreplus letter submitted confirm  that  your
         children's  father,  an  EEA  national...  has  been   continuously
         resident in the United Kingdom since at least May 2005.

         Therefore you  cannot  satisfy  the  criteria  that  your  children
         resided in the United Kingdom at  a  time  when  the  EEA  national
         parent was residing in the United Kingdom as a worker and  the  EEA
         national parent no longer resides in the United Kingdom.

         This is because the children's  father  has  not  left  the  United
         Kingdom and has been continuously resident here since at least  May
         2005."

20. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  does  not  expressly  engage  with  this
    reasoning, or otherwise seek to apply the Regulations to the  facts  of
    the Appellant's case, but simply relies upon  the  Appellant's  failure
    expressly to address the 'primary carer' issue in the appeal.

21. Regulation 15(4) is in the following terms:

         "P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if -

             (a) P is the primary carer of a person meeting the criteria in
             paragraph (3) ("the relevant person"); and

             (b) the relevant person would be  unable  to  continue  to  be
             educated in the United Kingdom if P were required to leave."

22. It is to be noted that the Respondent's decision  does  not  raise  any
    issue as to the children meeting the criteria of regulation 15A(3).

23. In respect of 'primary carer', regulations 15A(7) and (7A) provide:

         "(7)     P is to be regarded as a "primary carer" of another person
         if

             (a) P is a direct relative or a legal guardian of that person;
             and

             (b) P -

                  (i)  is the person who has primary responsibility for that
                  person's care; or

                  (ii) shares equally the responsibility for  that  person's
                  care with one other person who is not an exempt person.

         (7A)     Where P is to be regarded as a primary  carer  of  another
         person by virtue of paragraph (7)(b)(ii) the criteria in paragraphs
         (2)(b)(iii), (4)(b) and (4A)(c) shall be considered  on  the  basis
         that both P and the person with whom care responsibility is  shared
         would be required to leave the United Kingdom."

24. An 'exempt person' is defined for the purposes  of  regulation  15A  in
    subparagraph (6)(c)(i)-(iv). None of (6)(c)(ii)-(iv)  is  of  potential
    application  to  the  Appellant's   husband.   Subparagraph   (6)(c)(i)
    specifies a person "who has a right to reside in the United Kingdom  as
    a result of any other provision of these Regulations".

25. There is no issue in respect of 15A(7)(a) - the Appellant is clearly  a
    direct relative of her children. The  Appellant  shares  responsibility
    for her children with her husband. The question arises,  therefore,  as
    to whether Mr Da Silva is or is not an 'exempt person'.

26. In this context regulation 6(4) et seq is germane in respect of the way
    in which a 'jobseeker' may or  may  not  be  defined  as  a  'qualified
    person'. It may reasonably be presumed that Judge Morrison had this  in
    mind in stating "I assume that the  respondent  did  not  consider  the
    application on the basis of the appellant's spouse as if he had been  a
    Job Seeker since 2005 is not a person who has  been  exercising  Treaty
    Rights in the UK" (paragraph 7). Indeed this is the  basis  upon  which
    the earlier appeal (IA/22073/2013) was dismissed: see decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Camp at  paragraphs  10-12,  concluding  "that  the
    sponsor [i.e. the Appellant's husband] has  not  shown  that  he  is  a
    qualified person". (I pause to note that in the course of  the  hearing
    the Appellant confirmed that whilst he had worked  initially  following
    the family's arrival in the  UK  from  May  2005  until  November  2005
    feeding chickens, her husband had not had a job for the  last  9  years
    whilst in the UK.)

27. As such, and bearing in mind regulations 13 and 14(1)  -  "a  qualified
    person is entitled to reside in the United Kingdom for so  long  as  he
    remains  a  qualified  person"  -  it  is  readily  apparent  that  the
    Appellant's husband did not have a right to reside as a result  of  any
    other provisions in the Regulations, and accordingly was not an  exempt
    person.

28. Regulation 15A(7)(b)(ii) therefore applied, and accordingly  regulation
    15A(4)(b) fell to be considered on the basis that  both  the  Appellant
    and her husband would be required to leave the United Kingdom. If  that
    were the case, necessarily neither of the children  would  be  able  to
    continue in their education  in  the  UK.  In  such  circumstances  the
    Appellant meets the definition of a 'primary carer'.

29. The Respondent's reference in the RFRL to the Appellant's husband being
    continuously resident in the UK would  only  be  material  if  he  were
    resident pursuant to a right to  reside  under  the  Regulations  as  a
    qualified person - a matter that is not  only  not  borne  out  in  the
    evidence, but had  previously  been  expressly  rejected  both  by  the
    Respondent and by the IAC in  earlier  proceedings,  and  moreover  was
    expressly rejected by Judge Morrison at paragraph 11 of his decision.

30. Given that no issue was taken in respect of regulation 15A(3), and that
    the only issue raised was in respect of the Appellant being  a  primary
    carer of her children, her appeal properly fell to be allowed under the
    Regulations for the reasons set out above.

31.  Notwithstanding  that  the  Appellant's  case  was  not  properly   or
    adequately articulated before the First Tier Tribunal, I  am  satisfied
    that it was an error of law in effect to endorse the  decision  of  the
    Respondent merely by reason of the  Appellant's  failure  expressly  to
    address the key issue  in  her  Grounds  and  representations,  without
    subjecting the Respondent's decision to the independent scrutiny of the
    Tribunal.

32. In all the circumstances I set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and remake the decision in the appeal by allowing it under the
    EEA Regulations for the  reasons  set  out  above.  The  Appellant  was
    entitled to a derivative residence card pursuant to regulation  18A  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 by reason  of
    meeting the requirements of regulation 15A(4).

33. In so far as I gave a different indication at  the  hearing,  this  was
    primarily because I  misread  regulation  15A(3)(b)  as  stipulating  a
    requirement that the relevant EEA national parent have continued to  be
    a worker. However, it now seems to me clear that all that is  necessary
    is that the relevant child have resided in the UK at any time when  the
    EEA national parent was residing as a worker.

34. I have given consideration to whether or not in light of my volte  face
    it would be appropriate to reconvene  the  hearing  to  invite  further
    submissions. I have decided that that is not necessary. Once regulation
    15A(3)(b) is properly understood, given the  historical  acceptance  of
    the fact that the Appellant's  husband  has  been  a  worker  (and  had
    produced payslips - which was acknowledged by  the  Respondent  in  the
    RFRL herein), and given that he is not a 'qualified  person'  with  his
    own right to reside under the  Regulations,  the  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant meets the definition of a primary carer is  unavoidable,  and
    the outcome of the appeal is inevitable - and therefore not amenable to
    alteration by further submissions.

35. In the circumstances it is not necessary for me to consider any further
    the Article 8 issue.

Notice of Decision

36. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.

37. I remake the decision in the appeal. The appeal is  allowed  under  the
    EEA Regulations.

38. No anonymity order is sought or made.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     15 June 2015
