
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/24565/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 5 April 2016                           |On 22 August 2016                |
|And 18 July 2016                          |                                 |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

                              NICOLAS FEHLANDT
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance (on either occasion)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Mr N Bramble (Senior Home Office
Presenting
      Officers, April and July 2016 respectively)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the appeal of Nicolas Fehlandt, a citizen  of  Chile  born  26
      January 1982, against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  of  21
      September 2015 dismissing his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
      Secretary of State to refuse his application for a residence  card  to
      confirm his exercise of Treaty Rights as the extended family member of
      a student.


   2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom  and  was  granted  leave  to
      enter as a student from 16 August 2013 until 30 October  2015.  On  27
      January 2015 he applied for a residence  card  on  the  basis  of  his
      relationship  with  his  partner  Natalia  Cortazar.  The   First-tier
      Tribunal accepted the reality of their  relationship,  and  also  made
      findings that Ms Cortazar had studied for a Master's degree in  Public
      Administration at the London School of Economics from 1  October  2013
      until 30 June 2015. She first secured comprehensive sickness insurance
      cover ("CSIC") from 9  July  2015  until  8  July  2016  with  Western
      Provident  Association  Ltd.  From  May  to  July  2015   she   sought
      employment, as was attested to by various emails. On 26 June 2015, she
      applied to  the  Department  of  Work  and  Pensions  for  Jobseeker's
      Allowance, which she was awarded from 8 July 2015.


   3.  The  application  was  refused  on  23  June  2015  because  in   the
      Respondent's view Ms Cortazar had not shown herself to be a  qualified
      person, for she had established neither the possession of CSIC  so  as
      to qualify her as a student, nor that she had been a jobseeker  absent
      registration as such with the Department of Work and Pensions.


   4. The First-tier Tribunal concluded that


        a) Ms Cortazar did not qualify as a student for EEA purposes as she
           had only obtained a form of qualifying CSIC following her
           course's conclusion, and her prior possession of a European
           Health Insurance Card ("EHIC") did not suffice to constitute
           CSIC in its own right;


        b) She was not a jobseeker because a condition precedent of that
           status was that she was present in this country seeking
           employment immediately following the expiry of some other right
           to reside under the Regulations: but the very lack of EEA
           student status just identified meant that she was not such a
           person.


   5. Grounds of appeal argued  that  the  Sponsor  had  complied  with  all
      relevant requirements, because EHIC was  not  excluded  from  being  a
      relevant form of temporary comprehensive sickness insurance  cover  by
      the terms of The  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
      2006.


   6. Permission to appeal was granted on 15 February 2016 by the First-tier
      Tribunal on the basis that it was arguable that the  EHIC  might  have
      qualified as a form of CSIC.


   7. A Rule 24 Response of 3 March 2016 relied on Ahmad [2014] EWCA Civ 988
      which at [71] held that possession of CSIC  whilst  a  student  was  a
      condition that had to be the of strict compliance.


Findings and reasons - Error of law hearing


   8. Article 7(1)(d) of the Directive 2004/38/EC ("the Directive"):


           "Article 7
           1. All Union citizens shall have the right of residence  on  the
           territory of another Member State for a period  of  longer  than
           three months if they:
                 '....(c)  -  are  enrolled   at   a   private   or   public
                 establishment, accredited or financed by  the  host  Member
                 State on the basis of  its  legislation  or  administrative
                 practice, for the principal purpose of following  a  course
                 of  study,  including   vocational   training;   and   have
                 comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the  host  Member
                 State and assure the relevant national authority, by  means
                 of a declaration or by such equivalent means  as  they  may
                 choose, that they have sufficient resources for  themselves
                 and their family members not to  become  a  burden  on  the
                 social assistance system of the host  Member  State  during
                 their period of residence; or...'"


    9. The Regulation is glossed  by  these  guidelines  from  the  European
       Commission on the implementation of  Directive  2004/38  (COM  (2009)
       313, paragraph 2.3.2, emphasis in the original - these of  course  do
       not have the force of law, but are part of the relevant background):


           "Any insurance cover, private or public, contracted in the  host
           Member State or elsewhere, is acceptable in principle,  as  long
           as it provides comprehensive coverage  and  does  not  create  a
           burden on the public finances  of  the  host  Member  State.  In
           protecting   their   public   finances   while   assessing   the
           comprehensiveness of sickness  insurance  cover,  Member  States
           must act in compliance with the limits imposed by Community  law
           and in accordance with the principle of proportionality.
           The European Health Insurance  Card  offers  such  comprehensive
           cover when the EU citizen concerned does not move the  residence
           in the sense of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/71 to the  host  Member
           State and has the intention to return, e.g. studies  or  posting
           to another Member State."


  10. Article 7(1)(c) receives domestic transposition  via  The  Immigration
      (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  at Regulation 4:


           "Worker", "self-employed person", "self-sufficient  person"  and
           "student"
           4.
           (1) In these Regulations ...
           (d)"student" means a person who-
           (i) is enrolled, for the principal purpose of following a course
           of study (including vocational training), at a public or private
           establishment which is-
           (aa) financed from public funds; or
           (bb) otherwise recognised  by  the  Secretary  of  State  as  an
           establishment which has  been  accredited  for  the  purpose  of
           providing  such  courses  or  training   within   the   law   or
           administrative practice of the part of  the  United  Kingdom  in
           which the establishment is located;
           (ii) has comprehensive sickness insurance cover  in  the  United
           Kingdom; and
           (iii) assures the Secretary of State, by means of a declaration,
           or by such equivalent means as the person may  choose,  that  he
           has sufficient resources not to become a burden  on  the  social
           assistance system of the United Kingdom  during  his  period  of
           residence. "


  11. There is no doubt, given those provisions, that CSIC  is  required  in
      order for an EEA migrant to demonstrate that they hold the status of a
      student for the purposes of exercising free movement rights. The  Home
      Office Response is correct to note that in Ahmad [2014] EWCA  Civ  988
      Arden LJ states  that  the  conditions  in  Article  7(1)  are  to  be
      interpreted strictly subject to the general principles of EU law, such
      as proportionality. However, the judgment also records that


           "it is not enough for Mr Kadri QC to  establish  that  CSIC  can
           include public healthcare  provision.  The  Secretary  of  State
           accepts that it can. However, the Secretary of  State  does  not
           accept that it can include the public healthcare system  of  the
           host  state  because  that  would  defeat  the  object  of   the
           Directive: it would not  relieve  that  state  of  the  cost  of
           providing healthcare in the first five years."


  12. So it can be seen that Ahmad is a case on the necessity of CSIC  being
      possessed other than via the public  healthcare  system  of  the  host
      state - it does not bear on the question of whether or not an EHIC may
      qualify as CSIC,  and  indeed  the  Secretary  of  State's  concession
      therein was that public healthcare provision other than from the  host
      state could qualify. Indeed the point is made  even  more  clearly  in
      Ahmad at [53] where it is said that


           "It is common ground that if there were reciprocal  arrangements
           with the EEA national's own state that would  be  sufficient  to
           constitute comprehensive insurance cover."


  13. That concession is in tune with the Home Office Guidance which  states
      (at page 44 of 66 of the  Guidance  EEA  nationals  qualified  persons
      version 3.0, 7 April 2015):


           "For applications for a registration certificate or a  residence
           card
           [Applicants] must provide one of the following documents to show
           they have comprehensive sickness insurance:
    . A comprehensive private medical insurance policy document
    . A valid European Health Insurance Card (EHIC) issued by an EEA  member
      state other than the UK (for people temporarily in the UK)."


   14. Given these considerations, following the hearing as to whether there
       was an error of law in the decision below, I accepted  that  an  EHIC
       was in fact a qualifying form of CSIC and I found that the First-tier
       Tribunal erred in law in finding to the contrary.


   15. The materials before me at that time did not demonstrate  whether  Ms
       Cortazar was present on a temporary basis or  a  long-term  one.  The
       point was not exposed as relevant in the proceedings below, or indeed
       before me at the error of law hearing, where Mr Tufan was  not  aware
       of the Home Office guidance. For this reason it was not  possible  to
       determine whether the EHIC, which potentially qualified as a  species
       of CSIC, in fact did  so.  In  the  circumstances  I  considered  the
       fairest outcome would be to  recognise  that  an  error  of  law  was
       established as to the potential relevance of EHIC, and  to  set  this
       appeal down  for  further  hearing  to  make  the  limited  requisite
       findings in the Upper Tribunal.


   16. At the continuation hearing in the Upper Tribunal, there as again  no
       appearance for the Appellant, and no explanation was put forward  for
       his non-attendance notwithstanding the  directions  I  had  made  for
       further evidence to  be  provided.  There  being  no  reason  in  the
       interests of justice to defer final determination of  the  appeal,  I
       accordingly heard submissions from Mr Bramble for  the  Secretary  of
       State, who submitted that whilst there was scant evidence  as  to  Ms
       Cortazar's intentions at the relevant  time,  it  was  reasonable  to
       infer that she had consistently wished to remain in this country on a
       permanent  basis,  inconsistently  with  the  proposition  that   her
       residence was only  temporary  which  would  necessarily  underlie  a
       finding that her EHIC qualified as CSIC at the relevant time.


   17. In the absence of any evidence to contradict the  inference  that  Mr
       Bramble invited me to draw, I accept on balance of probabilities that
       the Appellant, on whom the  burden  of  proof  lies,  has  failed  to
       establish that the EHIC qualified as CSIC prior to 9 July 2015.


   18. The Sponsor was studying for a Master's degree at the  London  School
       of Economics. The Caseworker Handback Sheet of June 2015 which formed
       part of the Respondent's bundle below notes that she had  stated  she
       was seeking employment following her course ending,  but  the  mobile
       telephone number  given  to  contact  her  to  pursue  any  enquiries
       relating to the application transpired to be disconnected.


   19. The Appellant stated that his relationship with her  was  durable  in
       the representations supporting  his  residence  card  application  in
       March 2015. A letter co-signed by Appellant and Sponsor of 7  January
       2015 states that they wished to remain in the United Kingdom after Ms
       Cortazar finished her studies. By the  time  the  appeal  was  lodged
       against the decision of the Secretary of State on 8  July  2015,  the
       Appellant was able to assert that he had the right to reside  in  the
       UK  alongside  her  "as  she  will  stay  in   the   United   Kingdom
       indefinitely".


   20. It seems to me that this material justifies  an  inference  that  the
       Sponsor's stay was in fact seen by the couple as permanent, and  thus
       not temporary, prior to the date at which she acquired private health
       insurance, thereby disqualifying her EHIC from counting as CISC. Thus
       she was not a "student" for the purposes of the EEA Regulations. This
       finding also inevitably means that she was not "enjoying a  right  to
       reside pursuant" to working, self-sufficiency, studying or being self-
       employed (Reg 6(1) read with Reg 6(5)(b)) and thus  did  not  satisfy
       the condition precedent to being a job-seeker thereafter.


   21. She has accordingly not established herself to be a qualified person,
       and the Appellant has not shown himself to be the  family  member  of
       such a person. Accordingly the appeal is dismissed.


    Decision


    The appeal is dismissed.




Signed:                                            Date: 26 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes
