
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA241992013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th June 2016                              |On 20th June 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                              Mrs Zaitoon Bibi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Nasim of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals against the determination of First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Jacobs-Jones, promulgated  on  7  January  2015,  dismissing  her
    appeal on human rights grounds against the respondent's decision, dated
    29 May 2013, to remove her from the UK.

 2. The background to this case is that the appellant entered the UK  on  6
    August 2011 as a visitor with leave to remain until  10  January  2012.
    On 5 January 2012 the appellant applied for leave to remain in  the  UK
    on a compassionate basis, as she wished  to  donate  a  kidney  to  the
    sponsor.  The appellant had married the sponsor, Mr Syed Wajid  Hussain
    Shah (a citizen of Pakistan born on 2 April 1963) on 10 December  1995.
    The information indicates that they had separated in 2005 when he  came
    to the UK and  the  sponsor  was  granted  a  Certificate  of  Approval
    (marriage) to marry a British citizen on 15  October  2009  but  it  is
    understood that she left him and that the  certificate  expired  on  15
    January 2010.  The sponsor was diagnosed with chronic renal failure  in
    2009 and the information indicates that the appellant was  reintroduced
    to the sponsor by his niece.

 3. The respondent refused the appellant's application on  the  basis  that
    although the sponsor had  lived  in  the  UK  since  2005  and  was  in
    employment the respondent did not accept that there are  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing outside the  UK.   Furthermore  the
    respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  could  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  as  she  had
    not lived in the UK continuously for twenty years  and  maintained  her
    ties to  Pakistan.   The  appellant's  application  was  refused  under
    paragraph 276ADE and paragraph E-LTRP of Appendix FM.

 4. The appellant's initial appeal on 17 June 2013 was dismissed  by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Howard on 3 February  2014.   That  decision
    was set aside by the Upper Tribunal on the basis  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's fact-finding  exercise  and  proportionality  exercise
    were flawed to the extent that it was a material error.  The appeal was
    then remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh finding  of  facts
    on all issues.  That appeal  came  before  Judge  Jacobs-Jones,  on  17
    December 2014, who dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds

 5.  The  appeal  came  before  me.   I   heard   submissions   from   both
    representatives.

 6. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by  a  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal on 11  May  2016  on  the  basis  that  it  was
    arguable that (a) it had been unnecessary  for  the  Tribunal  to  find
    compelling circumstances that were not within the contemplation of  the
    Immigration Rules in order to undertake a  full  Article  8  assessment
    given that the  Rules  which  express  the  respondent's  view  of  its
    operation were not in force at the time when  the  appellant  made  her
    application;  and  (b)  the  Tribunal  failed  to  undertake  such   an
    assessment and it was argued that the Tribunal had conflated the second
    and fifth questions in Razgar in the final sentence of paragraph  [16];
    and (c) that the outcome of the appeal would have been different had  a
    full Article 8 assessment been undertaken.

Decision on Error of Law

 7. Mr Nasim sought at the hearing to amend the grounds of appeal to  argue
    that in  his  view  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  postdecision
    evidence, permission was refused.  I was clearly of the view  that  the
    motion came too late; the respondent's representative had  no  previous
    intimation of this ground prior to the morning of the hearing and there
    were difficulties in him seeking to address this  ground  when  he  had
    been given no notice that it was to be raised.  In addition, there  was
    no adequate explanation as to why this ground had not  previously  been
    raised, in particular when permission was sought. In any event, in  the
    alternative, for the reasons set out below I am not satisfied that this
    ground discloses any error, material or otherwise.

 8. In relation to the grounds of appeal on which permission  was  granted,
    although it was stated that the  Rules  set  out  in  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter, in relation to Appendix FM, were not  in  operation  at
    the date of application, I am bound by Singh v The Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 74.  Although  the  appellant's
    application was made in  January  2012,  Singh  is  authority  for  the
    proposition that the old Rules only apply to decisions made  between  9
    July and 6 September 2012 as from that date the respondent was entitled
    to:

         "take into account the provisions of  Appendix  FM  and  paragraphs
         276ADE - 276DH in deciding private or family life applications even
         if they were made prior to 9 July 2012.  The result is that the law
         as it was held to be in Edgehill only obtained as regards decisions
         taken in the two month window between 9 July and 6 September 2012."

 9. Although, as discussed at the hearing, the  judge  arguably  fell  into
    error in not making a finding as to the applicable Immigration Rules at
    the date of decision, such cannot be material  as  it  was  not  argued
    before  me  that  the  appellant  could  succeed  under  Appendix   FM.
    Therefore any error the judge made was not material.

10. In relation to the consideration of Article 8  outside  of  the  Rules,
    although Mr Nasim belatedly argued that the judge erred in paragraph 21
    in stating that the appellant had failed to show that there  were  that
    exceptional circumstances that would warrant a grant of leave to remain
    in the UK on the basis of  her  private  and  family  life,  I  am  not
    satisfied that this is properly arguable.

11. I directed Mr Nasim to SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 where  the  Court
    of Appeal restated that compelling circumstances would have to apply to
    justify a grant of  leave  to  enter  or  leave  to  remain  where  the
    Immigration Rules are not complied with.

12. I have also reminded myself that whether circumstances are described as
    'compelling' or 'exceptional' is not a matter of substance and that 'in
    practice they are likely to be both  compelling  and  exceptional,  but
    this is not a legal requirement' (R (on the application of Sunassee)  v
    Upper Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  [2015]  EWHC  1604
    (Admin)).

13. I am satisfied that the judge directed himself appropriately in finding
    that there were no such circumstances.

14. In any event, the judge did conduct an assessment of Article 8  outside
    the Rules and I am not satisfied that any slip he made in  setting  out
    the Razgar test, disclosed  any  material  error.   The  judge  clearly
    carried out the balancing exercise  in  terms  of  proportionality  and
    directed himself properly as to Section 117B of the 2014 Act.

15. Although Mr Nasim argued that the judge fell into error in  not  taking
    into account that the appellant was in the UK lawfully  when  she  made
    her application, that is to misunderstand the effect of  Section  117B,
    which sets out the public interest considerations.  It  is  clear  that
    there was no public interest consideration against the appellant as she
    was in the UK legally when she established her  relationship  with  the
    sponsor.  Such was not a ground of appeal but in any event  I  find  no
    arguable error in the judge's approach.

16. Similarly, the additional arguments of Mr Nasim before me  amounted  to
    nothing more than a disagreement with the judge's  findings.   Even  if
    these were permitted grounds of appeal it has not been shown  that  the
    judge failed to  take  into  account  relevant  postdecision  evidence.
    Although I accept that there were a number of  references  to  material
    produced in 2011 onwards this is understandable  as  it  related  to  a
    particularly important time in the  sponsor's  medical  history,  given
    that he underwent a kidney transplant in February 2012.

17. The judge made findings open to him and it was clear that  in  addition
    to the documentary evidence the judge took into consideration the  oral
    evidence before him which he set out at paragraphs [5] to [8].   It  is
    evident that the judge properly considered the information before  him,
    including evidence which post-dated the decision, and reached  findings
    that were open to him. The appellant's grounds amount to no more than a
    disagreement with those findings.

Notice of Decision

18. The appeal is dismissed.   The  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Jacobs-Jones did not involve the making of an error  of  law  and
    shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Dated: 13 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.

Signed                                  Dated: 13 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

