
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/24943/2015
                                                               IA/24945/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13 January 2017                       |On 30 January 2017                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                             JASPREET KAUR GILL
                                SATNAM SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellants:    Mr V. Mahol, instructed by Maalik & Co Solicitiors
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The first appellant (hereinafter "the appellant") is a citizen of
      India born on 27 February 1992. The second appellant is her spouse.

   2. On 21 December 2012 the appellant applied for leave to remain in the
      UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student. On 1 March 2013 her application was
      refused. She appealed successfully and the matter was remitted to the
      respondent.

   3. On 1 March 2015 the respondent wrote to the appellant informing her
      that the licence for her college had been revoked and allowing her
      sixty days to submit a new Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies
      (CAS).

   4. On 20 April 2015 the appellant's representative wrote to the
      respondent requesting that she be sent a certified copy of her
      passport. The letter stated that the appellant had been told by
      various potential Tier 4 sponsors that they needed her to provide them
      with a certified copy of her passport. A 28 day extension was
      requested in the letter.

   5. On 25 June 2015, the appellant's application of 21 December 2012 was
      refused on the basis that a valid CAS had not been submitted.

   6. The appellant appealed and her appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal
      ("FtT") Judge Swinnerton. The appellant's argument before the FtT, in
      sum, was that she had been treated unfairly as she had not been
      provided with her passport (or a certified copy) and this meant she
      was unable to enrol with a new sponsor and thereby obtain a CAS.

   7. In a decision promulgated on 26 July 2016 the judge dismissed the
      appeal. The judge's reasoning is set out in paragraph 24, where it is
      said:

         "I do not accept the arguments of the first appellant that she has
         not been allowed sufficient time and opportunity to obtain a CAS.
         The first appellant has had sufficient time to obtain a CAS and has
         clearly not done so."


   8. The appellant is now appealing against the decision of FtT Judge
      Swinnerton.

   9. The grounds of appeal argue that the judge failed to address the key
      issue, which is that the respondent failed to provide her with the
      documentation she needed in order to obtain the CAS.

  10. At the error of law hearing Mr Clarke, on behalf of the respondent,
      accepted that it was Home Office policy to send applicants certified
      copies of their passport as this is needed to obtain a CAS. He handed
      me a copy of a letter from the Home Office dated 6 May 2015. The
      letter is a response to the appellant's letter of 20 April 2015 and
      states that it encloses a certified copy of her passport. The letter,
      however, is addressed incorrectly (to a different firm of solicitors
      to those representing the appellant). Mr Clarke accepted that because
      the letter was misdirected it was unlikely that the appellant had ever
      received a copy of her certified passport and that this meant she
      would have been unable to obtain a new CAS.

Analysis and Findings

  11. The respondent has a policy whereby she will grant foreign students
      sixty days to obtain a new CAS. This policy is intended to give effect
      to the principle of common law fairness.

  12. As a practical matter, to obtain a CAS an applicant will need, inter
      alia, a certified copy of her passport. Where an applicant's passport
      is held by the respondent, fairness requires both that the respondent
      send the applicant her passport (or a certified copy) and that the
      applicant is given reasonable time, after receiving the passport (or
      certified copy), to obtain a new CAS.

  13. The judge made a material error of law by finding that the appellant
      had "sufficient time and opportunity to obtain a CAS". Plainly, she
      did not, as through no fault of her own she did not receive a
      certified copy of her passport (it having been sent by the respondent
      to the wrong solicitors).

  14. It follows from the forgoing analysis that the appellant's appeal
      against the respondent's decision should be allowed to the extent that
      she should be given a reasonable period of time whilst in possession
      of the documentation necessary to obtain a CAS to locate a sponsor and
      obtain a new CAS.

Decision

A. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law
and is set aside.

B.  I remake the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal.




|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 27 January 2017               |

