
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24858/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 December 2016                            |On 9 January 2017             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    MR MASUN PRASAD FERNANDO NAINABADUGE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Vatish, Counsel instructed by Law Lane
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 12 November 1984 who
    entered the UK as a student in April 2004.

 2. On 10 March 2015 he applied for indefinite leave to remain in the UK on
    the ground of continuous lawful residence for at least ten years under
    Paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.

 3. On 24 June 2015 his application was refused.

 4. The respondent appealed and his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Thomas.  In a decision promulgated on 18 July 2016 the judge
    found that the respondent did not satisfy the requirements of Paragraph
    276B of the Immigration Rules as he did not have lawful leave in the UK
    between 30 June 2006 and 5 September 2006.  However the judge allowed
    the appeal under Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules on the basis that the
    respondent's removal would be a disproportionate interference with his
    right to family and private life in the UK.

 5. The grounds of appeal submit that the First-tier Tribunal did not have
    jurisdiction to allow the appeal under Article 8 because the respondent
    is entitled to live in the UK as a family member of an EEA national and
    there was no basis for showing that refusal of indefinite leave to
    remain would lead to a breach of Article 8.

 6. Before me, Mr Walker relied on and reiterated the argument in the
    grounds of appeal.  Ms Vatish, in response, argued that this was not an
    EEA application. It was an application for indefinite leave to remain
    under the Rules and therefore the judge was entitled to assess the case
    under Article 8.

 7. In response to a question from me both parties agreed that the
    respondent now satisfies the requirements of Paragraph 276B.  Both
    parties accepted the judge's finding at paragraph 16 that the
    respondent has been in the UK lawfully since 5 September 2006 which
    means that as of 5 September 2016 the ten year residence requirement
    has been satisfied.

Consideration

 8. Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as
    amended by the Immigration Act 2014 provides for a right of appeal
    against the refusal of a human rights claim. Section 84 states that an
    appeal of a refusal of a human rights claim "must be brought on the
    ground that the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human
    Rights Act 1998".

 9. On 24 June 2015 the Secretary of State refused the respondent's
    application for leave to remain. In her letter ("the Refusal Letter"),
    the Secretary of State set out reasons why the appellant failed to
    satisfy requirements for leave to remain on the basis of family or
    private life under Appendix FM and Paragraph 276ADE.

10. The Refusal Letter stated that the respondent was entitled to appeal
    against the refusal of his human rights claim on the ground that the
    decision was unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act. It was
    correct for it to do so. The legal framework introduced by the
    Immigration Act 2014 provides for statutory appeals against refusals of
    human rights applications. Having made such an application, and it
    having been refused, the respondent had a right of appeal.

11. The fact that the respondent is entitled to live in the UK in any event
    as a family member of an EEA national is relevant to the merits of the
    appeal but it does not affect whether the Tribunal had jurisdiction to
    hear the appeal, which arises from the refusal of a human rights claim.



12. Although not relevant to this decision, I note that both parties were
    in agreement that the respondent now satisfies the ten year residence
    requirement under the Immigration Rules.

Decision

A. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
   material error of law and shall stand.

B. The appeal is dismissed.



|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 6 January 2017                |

