
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24861/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 November 2016                   |On 15 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                          FARIDA BANU GULAM HUSAIN
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Brooks, Counsel instructed by Raffles Haig
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent (hereinafter "the claimant") is a citizen of India born
    on 22 July 1944. Her eldest son, daughter in law and their children,
    with whom she lives, are British citizens. She is in poor health,
    suffering from dementia.

 2. The claimant entered the UK as a visitor in August 2009. She then
    applied for leave to remain as the dependent relative of a settled
    person. That application, and the appeal which followed, were not
    successful. Thereafter, she remained in the UK even though she did not
    have a lawful basis to do so.

 3. On 28 February 2012 she applied for leave to remain under Article 8
    ECHR. Eventually, on 23 June 2015, following further representations
    which were made on 17 April 2015, the appellant (hereinafter "the
    Secretary of State") refused the application. The claimant appealed and
    her appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Burnett. In a
    decision promulgated on 20 May 2016, the judge allowed the appeal under
    Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules. The Secretary of State
    now appeals that decision.



Factual Background.

 4. The background to this appeal, in summary, is that the claimant's
    children have all moved away from India. Her eldest son lives in the UK
    and her other children are in Canada and America. She has siblings and
    wider family living in India.

 5. The claimant entered the UK as a visitor in 2009 and has remained ever
    since, notwithstanding the expiry of her lawful basis to do so.

 6. Throughout her time in the UK she has lived with her son, daughter in
    law and their two children, who are aged 16 and 9.  She has received
    free medical treatment on the NHS.

 7. She is in poor health and has been since arriving in the UK. She has
    dementia, the early signs of which were present when she first entered
    the UK, and she is now dependent on others to accomplish even basis
    tasks, such as personal hygiene, cooking and cleaning. She is
    incontinent and easily agitated.

 8. In the last few years, she has become entirely dependent on her son and
    daughter in law for her basic needs (including physical care) and her
    life revolves around them and their children.



Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The judge first addressed whether the claimant could succeed under the
    Immigration Rules. He considered paragraph 276ADE(vi) which provides a
    route to leave to remain for the claimant if she would face "very
    significant obstacles" to integration into India.

10. The judge found that the claimant did not meet this threshold because
    she has friends, family and connections in India who could visit and
    provide some support to her. Moreover, the judge found that she would
    be able to access support services in India, comparable to those in the
    UK, and that her family in the UK could pay for such services.

11. The judge then considered the appeal outside the Rules. He found, at
    paragraph 54, that because of her mental health condition the
    claimant's bond with her son and his family goes beyond that of normal
    emotional ties such that family life within the meaning of Article 8
    ECHR is engaged.

12. The judge proceeded to assess the proportionality of the claimant's
    removal. At paragraph 67 he stated that taking "a holistic approach to
    the totality of the case" removal would be disproportionate.

13. The judge's reasons for reaching this conclusion are not clearly
    articulated. Indeed, before reaching the conclusion that removal would
    be disproportionate the judge listed a range of factors that would lead
    to the opposite conclusion. These include that the claimant would be
    able to access medical and social support in India where she has
    friends and family, that she does not speak English and is not
    financially independent, that any private life in the UK was formed
    when her immigration status was either precarious or unlawful, and that
    she has been accessing the NHS freely despite not being entitled to do
    so.

14. The only finding to support the judge's conclusion that removal would
    be disproportionate was at paragraph 59 where the judge stated:

         "In my judgment the separation now from the close emotional and
         supportive role of her family would greatly affect her ability to
         cope with her dementia and have an adverse effect on her"



Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

15. The grounds argue that Article 8 has been used as a safety net in a
    difficult case and that as all the factors in Section 117B of the
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") weighed
    against the claimant the appeal should not have been allowed.

16. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Easterman stated that it was
    arguably unclear on what basis the judge had found there to be
    compelling circumstances that would justify allowing the appeal outside
    the Rules. He also questioned whether there had been a proper balancing
    exercise under Article 8.

17. In his submissions, Mr Norton argued that the judge had failed to give
    proper reasons for his conclusion.  He also contended that the judge's
    findings cannot be construed as demonstrating compelling circumstances
    to allow the appeal outside the Rules. He highlighted the judge's
    findings that the claimant would be able to access support, both
    professional and from family, in India, that she could return to India
    to make a proper entry clearance application and that she has had
    access to the NHS despite not being entitled. He also emphasised that
    all of the considerations in Section 117 of the 2002 Act point against
    granting the claimant leave to remain.

18. Mr Brooks argued that the judge correctly directed himself to the
    requirement to consider compelling circumstances and that it is
    implicit in the decision that compelling circumstances were found.

19. He contended that it was clear the claimant has a family life with her
    son and daughter in law in the UK and that this would be destroyed if
    she were removed to India.

20. Mr Brooks developed an argument that the adult dependent relative
    provisions in the Immigration Rules do not consider family life as they
    focus only on medical and care needs. The claimant's circumstances are
    therefore not catered for under the Rules.

21. With regard to the factors set out in Section 117 of the 2002 Act, Mr
    Brooks contended that the judge had given these consideration but was
    entitled to give greater weight to other factors.



Consideration

22. The judge found, at paragraph 54, that the claimant has a family life
    in the UK with her son and his family. This finding was, in my view,
    undoubtedly open to him.

23. In Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 630 the Court of Appeal stated that, for
    family life to be found between an adult child and parent, there must
    be "something more" than the normal love and affection a parent and
    adult child feel for each other. In this case, the claimant is entirely
    dependent on her son and daughter in law who attend to all of her day
    to day needs, both emotionally and physically, and with whom she lives
    and spends all of her time. This level of interaction and support
    clearly amounts to "something more" such that there can be no error of
    law in finding there to be family life for the purpose of Article 8.

24. Once it was accepted that the claimant has a family life with her son
    (and his family) that engaged Article 8, the task for the judge was to
    determine whether the removal of the claimant was a proportionate
    interference with that family life. In undertaking this analysis the
    judge was required both to take into consideration the factors set out
    in  Section 117B of the 2002 Act and that to support a claim for leave
    to remain outside the Immigration Rules compelling circumstances need
    to be identified which are not sufficiently recognised under the Rules.
    See SS (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

25. Although the judge, at paragraph 31, cited SS Congo and the requirement
    to show "compelling circumstances," it is not clear how, or if, he has
    actually considered whether there are compelling circumstances to
    justify a grant of leave outside the Rules. At paragraphs 56- 68 the
    judge set out a range of factors relevant to the question of
    proportionality but at no stage indicated whether any such factor,
    either individually or cumulatively, is "compelling".

26. However, although I accept, as argued by Mr Norton, that there is a
    deficiency in the judge's reasoning, I am satisfied that it was open to
    the judge, based on the evidence before him, to find that there were
    compelling reasons to allow the appeal outwith the Rules and
    accordingly I find that the judge's error was not material.

27. In the Article 8 balancing exercise, there are a number of significant
    factors weighing in favour of removing the claimant. These include:

      a. There is a strong public interest in the maintenance of Immigration
         Control (see Section 117B(1)) which is undermined by allowing
         someone to enter the UK as a visitor, overstay their visa and then
         use human rights law to regularise their position.

      b. The claimant has been using the NHS even though she is not entitled
         to do so. She is likely to require significant health resources in
         the future. Although she is presently cared for by her son and
         daughter in law, there can be no guarantee this will continue
         indefinitely and she may become a substantial burden on the state
         for social care in addition to medical care.

      c. At the time she entered the UK she did not have a family life
         within the meaning of Article 8 with her son. At that time, her
         relations with her son were no more than the normal bonds that
         might be expected. It is only after she came to the UK and her
         health deteriorated, and her son began providing for her day to day
         care needs, that her Article 8 family life was established.
         Accordingly, her family life was established at a time her status
         in the UK was unlawful (or precarious). In these circumstances,  it
         is deserving of only little weight.

      d. The claimant has not established a meaningful private life in the
         UK, as she has few interactions outside her immediate family.

      e. She is not financially independent and does not speak English
         (section 117B(2) and (3)).

      f. She would be able to access support for her day to day and medical
         needs in India that her son could pay for and she would have some
         interaction with and emotional support from her family who live in
         India

28. Weighing against the claimant's removal is that her son and daughter in
    law could not realistically be expected to move to India with her. They
    have two British children and their lives are established in the UK.
    The obstacles to their moving to India would likely be very significant
    indeed.

29. Accordingly, the claimant is likely to move to India without her son
    and his family. That, of itself, even with her medical problems, is not
    a compelling reason to grant her leave to remain. Although in India she
    will no longer receive the physical and emotional care from her son
    (and his family) that she currently enjoys, she will be able to access
    professional services to support her day to day and medical needs and
    her siblings live in India. She will not be destitute or without some
    family or friends with whom to interact.

30. However, because of her dementia, upon return to India it is likely she
    will be unable to maintain any meaningful connection with her family in
    the UK. She is unlikely to be capable of communicating by telephone,
    let alone modern communication methods such as skype. Nor will she be
    in a fit state to visit the UK. The only way relations of any sort
    could be maintained, given the claimant's dementia, is by the UK family
    visiting her. Even if they visit several times a year, the meaningful
    ongoing relationship that the family have enjoyed will effectively be
    ended by the claimant's removal.

31. The claimant's advanced stage of dementia which renders her unable to
    maintain contact with her UK family once removed (which contrasts to
    the circumstances of the vast majority of families who live in
    different countries who are able to maintain contact through the
    telephone and internet) is, in my view, a reason to treat this case as
    exceptional or, to use the language of SS Congo, it is a compelling
    reason not sufficiently recognised under the Rules. Although the judge
    did not articulate his findings as I have outlined, the substance of
    his assessment leads to the same conclusion and therefore I find that
    even though the deficiency in the reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal
    decision amounts to an error of law, the error is not material.



Decision

32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law and shall stand.

33. The appeal is dismissed.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 14 November 2016              |

