
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24102/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 May 2015                                |On 03 June 2015               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR

                                   Between

                            mr md almuch hossain
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   Although this is strictly an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  have,
    for the sake of consistency, continued to refer to the parties by their
    original designations in the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Secretary  of
    State thus continues to be called "the respondent".

2.   The Secretary of State  has  appealed,  with  permission,  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge G A  Black  who,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 12 February 2015, allowed the appellant's appeal,  under
    the Immigration Rules, against the respondent's decision of 23 May 2014
    refusing his application for further  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student.

3.   The appellant is a 28 year old citizen of Bangladesh who  has  been  in
    the United Kingdom on a student visa since March 2011.  He had leave to
    study an accountancy ACCA  course  at  Bedfordshire  College  which  he
    passed  successfully.   He  also  undertook,  perfectly   lawfully,   a
    supplementary course at London  West  Valley  College  and  obtained  a
    postgraduate diploma in  business  administration  on  25  March  2014.
    During the time of his studies Bedfordshire College had its sponsorship
    certificate withdrawn and the appellant, without seeking further  leave
    from the respondent, continued his accountancy studies at  London  West
    Valley College where he had  been  on  the  supplementary  course.   He
    subsequently completed an MBA course with Sunderland University.

4.   The appellant's application  for  further  leave  was  refused  by  the
    respondent on 23 May 2014.  It was refused because  he  had  failed  to
    seek permission from the respondent to transfer his main  college  from
    Bedfordshire College without seeking permission to  transfer  his  main
    studies to London West Valley College.  That was a breach of  paragraph
    322(3) of the Immigration Rules.

5.   Judge Black, in allowing the appeal,  held,  at  [18]  that  there  was
    policy guidance in force at the relevant time allowing the appellant to
    undertake a supplementary course  without  permission.   That  was  the
    basis of her decision to allow the appeal.

6.   Permission to appeal was given on 9 April 2015  on  the  basis  of  the
    grounds submitted by  the  respondent.   The  essential  parts  of  the
    grounds were as follows:

         "4.  It is not in dispute that the appellant  did  not  inform  the
             Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  that  he  was
             studying at an institution other than the one for which he was
             granted leave to remain.   It  therefore  then  cannot  be  in
             dispute that the appellant fell foul  of  Section  50  of  the
             Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.


         5.   If a student chooses to study at an institution different from
             the one for which leave was granted to study at,  the  student
             is required to make an institution  specific  application  and
             obtain permission from the Secretary of State.


         6.   It is accepted that the appellant's EBMA postgraduate  diploma
             in business administration at the London West  Valley  College
             was a  supplementary  course  of  study.   However,  when  the
             appellant continued to study there after Bedfordshire  College
             had its licence revoked, and he  could  not  attend  the  ACCA
             course, the postgraduate diploma ceased to be supplementary."

7.   At the hearing before me the appellant appeared in person.  He told  me
    that he had dispensed with the services of his solicitors about a  week
    ago.  He said that he had not received copies of the grounds nor of the
    permission to appeal even though I was satisfied from the Tribunal file
    that copies had been sent both to  him,  at  his  correct  and  current
    address, as well as to his solicitors.  They had not been  returned  by
    the post office.  The appellant was assisted by a McKenzie  friend.   I
    explained the substance of the grounds in simple terms.

8.   The appellant did not ask for an adjournment.  Indeed, at  the  end  of
    the hearing, he asked for a speedy decision because, he  said,  he  had
    completed  all  his  studies  in  the  UK  and  now  wished  to  return
    permanently to Bangladesh as quickly as possible because his mother  is
    unwell.

9.   In making his  submissions,  Mr  Duffy  relied  on  the  grounds.   The
    appellant had studied at his new college for his main subjects  without
    obtaining permission from the respondent.  That could not  be  regarded
    as a supplementary course.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  it  was
    submitted, was wrong to have allowed the appeal.  She had not taken the
    point that the appellant was studying at the new college  as  his  main
    course.  The decision  should  be  set  aside  and  should  be  re-made
    dismissing the appeal.

10.  In reply Mr Hossain, with the assistance  of  his  McKenzie  friend  (a
    qualified OISC practitioner) acknowledged that he had studied for  both
    exams at the second college.  He has passed all his exams including the
    final MBA course with Sunderland University.  All his studies  are  now
    complete and he just  wants  to  go  back  to  Bangladesh  as  soon  as
    possible.  He does not want to have a black mark against his name  for,
    apparently, having breached the  Immigration  Rules  and  that  is  the
    reason he opposes the respondent's application today.

11.  I am, however, satisfied, that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    does contain a material error of law such that it must  be  set  aside.
    The grounds, as set out above, accurately represent  the  law  and  the
    Immigration Rules.  The appellant was not permitted, under his  student
    leave, to undertake his main course of studies  at  any  college  other
    than that which had previously been approved by the Secretary of State.
     In failing to make such a finding the First-tier Tribunal Judge  erred
    in law and her decision must therefore be set aside.

12.  It follows also that, for the reasons  set  out  in  the  grounds,  the
    appellant cannot succeed in his appeal.  His appeal against the refusal
    to grant him further leave to remain as a student must be dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and is hereby set aside.  I re-make the decision by  dismissing  the  appeal
of the appellant, Mr Hossain.

No anonymity direction has been requested and none is made.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal I make no fee award.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor


