
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/24563/2012
     ia/24592/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 June 2016                              |On 01 July 2016               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          (1) JENIFER GARCIA GARCIA
                        (2) CHRISTOPHER GARCIA GARCIA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Pipe, Counsel, instructed by Salam & Co,
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department  against  a  determination  of  Immigration  Judge   Edwards
    promulgated on 20 February 2013. It is brought with the  permission  of
    Designated Judge Shaerf which was granted on 19 July 2013.

2.   The appeal was originally heard on 14  October  2013  by  Deputy  Upper
    Judge Plimmer whose determination was promulgated on 16  October  2013.
    The respondents neither appeared nor  were  they  represented  at  that
    hearing. However this determination was set aside by direction of Upper
    Tribunal Judge Rintoul, under rule 43 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008, on the basis that proper notice  of  the  hearing
    was not given. Judge Rintoul directed that the matter be listed  before
    Upper  Tribunal  for  the  appeal  to  be  determined  afresh.  It   is
    unfortunate that more than three years have now passed since the matter
    was before the First-tier Tribunal.

3.   The  respondents  are  brother  and  sister.  Jenifer  was  born  on  2
    September 1994 and is now aged twenty-one years.  Her  younger  brother
    Christopher was born on 9 October 1995 and is now aged twenty.  He  had
    yet to  turn  eighteen  when  the  matter  was  before  the  First-tier
    tribunal.

4.   Jenifer and Christopher are both citizens of  the  Dominican  Republic.
    They arrived in the United Kingdom on 22 July  2010  and  were  allowed
    entry under visitor's visas until 13 January 2011. On 28 February  2012
    (having remained in the United Kingdom beyond  their  permitted  leave)
    they each applied for indefinite leave to remain  as  the  children  of
    settled parents, under paragraph 298(i) of the Immigration  Rules  then
    in force.

5.   By a separate refusal letters, each dated 11 October  2012,  indefinite
    leave to remain was refused  for  both  Jenifer  and  Christopher.  The
    letters went on to consider the matter under paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules, and concluded that neither Christopher  nor  Jenifer
    could bring themselves within the scope  of  the  rules.  There  is  no
    challenge to this conclusion:  neither  having  been  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom for the qualifying period. Consideration was then  given
    as to whether it would be appropriate to allow them to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom exceptionally outside the rules. The Secretary of  State
    concluded that neither had  demonstrated  any  sufficiently  compelling
    factors to justify being allowed to remain. Accordingly the application
    for leave to remain was refused.

6.   Appeals were duly lodged and the matter came on for hearing before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. In paragraphs [5] to [8] of his determination, the
    judge stated the law by reciting rule 298, setting out Article 8 of the
    European Convention on Human Rights, and the  five-fold  test  of  Lord
    Bingham from R (Razgar) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2004] UKHL 27.

7.   The judge at paragraphs [9] to [13] then summarised the evidence  which
    had been before him and  at  [14]  and  [15]  the  submissions  of  the
    representatives of the respective parties. He states  his  findings  on
    the evidence at [16] to [19], his  conclusions  under  the  Immigration
    Rules at [20] and those in respect of the Human Rights Act at  [21]  to
    [24]. The judge at paragraph  [25]  dismissed  the  appeals  under  the
    Immigration Rules, but allowed them under Article  8  on  a  restricted
    basis at paragraph [26] which reads:


         'The appeals in respect of the Human Rights Act are allowed to  the
         extent that [the appellants] should  be  granted  leave  to  remain
         until such time as they have completed their full  time  education,
         or for three years, whichever is the shorter period.'


    The three year period expired in February 2016, so  in  many  ways  the
    disposal of  the  current  appeal  (which  has  been  delayed  for  the
    procedural reasons outlined above) has become largely academic.

8.   The grounds of appeal raised a  narrow  point  and  were  pursued  with
    economy by Mr Walker on behalf of the Secretary of State. He  submitted
    that the judge failed to give adequate reasons for allowing the  appeal
    under Article 8, outside the Immigration Rules. The suggestion  in  the
    written grounds that the judge was wrong to take into  account  section
    55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009,  was  properly
    abandoned by Mr Walker as the younger  child,  Christopher,  was  still
    under eighteen at  the  time  of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the judge was correct to consider it.

9.   Mr Pipe, on behalf  of  Jenifer  and  Christopher,  conceded  that  the
    judge's reasoning was somewhat brief, but submitted that it  was  clear
    from reading the determination holistically and  in  context  that  the
    judge  had  properly  directed  himself  on  the  proper  approach   to
    considering human rights claims  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
    judge was entitled to state shortly that family life exists, since  the
    issue was not controversial, and to deal with first four of the  Razgar
    questions swiftly and peremptorily as he did at  paragraph  [21]  since
    they were not contentious. The judge was  entitled,  he  submitted,  to
    move promptly to the question of proportionality and to dispose of  the
    appeal in the way he did.

10.  We agree with Mr Pipe's analysis. Whilst the conclusion  to  which  the
    judge came may not have been the one each of us would have reached,  it
    was open to him so to conclude on the basis of the evidence as he found
    it. We are satisfied that the judge carried  out  a  careful  balancing
    exercise within the parameters of discretion afforded to him, and  that
    the  salient   paragraphs   of   his   determination   give   adequate,
    comprehensible and supportable reasons for  coming  to  the  conclusion
    which he did.

11.  The judge took into account that  both  Jenifer  and  Christopher  were
    minors at the time of their application, and Christopher remained so at
    the time of the hearing. He noted that they had both  overstayed  their
    visitor visas, and that there was nothing in the evidence to suggest  a
    special dependency as between an adult child and a parent. He took into
    account the friends and sporting interests that Jenifer and Christopher
    had established in the United Kingdom, whilst  acknowledging  that  the
    same was presumably true in the Dominican Republic. He had in mind  the
    clear public interest in maintaining immigration control.  What  tipped
    the  proportionality  balance  in  the  judge's  assessment   was   the
    disruption to their  education  which  would  arise  were  they  to  be
    compelled to return. On that narrow basis he allowed the appeals to the
    limited extent that he did, as rehearsed verbatim at paragraph 7 above.



12.  Mr Pipe made the further submission that a revised version of  pragraph
    298 came into force in December 2012, subsequent to the refusal  letter
    but prior to the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal. He argued that the
    judge would have been entitled to take into account  the  Secretary  of
    State's change in policy (being  one  which  he  submitted  would  have
    favoured Jenifer and Christopher) in the proportionality  analysis  for
    the purposes of Article 8. However, since this did not form part of the
    judge's reasoning, it would be inappropriate for  us  to  resolve  that
    matter.

13.  We are satisfied that there is no material error of law in the  judge's
    determination. Accordingly it follows that we maintain  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision with the consequence that the Respondents'  appeals
    are allowed. Paragraph 26 is therefore affirmed in relation to the time-
    limited grant of leave to remain. Since that time is  now  expired,  it
    will be for the Secretary of State to decide what steps are to be taken
    in relation to Jenifer and  Christopher's  continued  presence  in  the
    United Kingdom.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision does not  contain  a  material  error  of
law.  Accordingly the decision is  upheld  with  the  consequence  that  the
Respondents' appeals are allowed on human  rights  grounds,  to  the  extent
specified in paragraph 26 of the First-tier Tribunal decision.



Signed   Mark Hill QC                        Date         1 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
