
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24096/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 3rd January 2017                        |On 8th February 2017             |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                            mrs mary Owusu-Bempah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Robbie Addaih (acting as a McKenzie friend)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clark (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Ghana  who  was  born  on  16th
    August 1972.  She appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent taken on 22nd  June  2015  under  Regulation
    15A(4), 15A(7) and 18A of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations  2006.   The  decision  appealed  held   that   there   was
    insufficient evidence to show that her ex-husband, Adwuni Owusu-Bempah,
    an EEA national, was no longer in the UK and would not be able to  care
    for her children if she was forced to leave the UK,  which  meant  that
    there was insufficient evidence to demonstrate that her children  would
    be unable to remain in the UK to continue their education if she had to
    leave this country.

 2. The Appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hawden-
    Beal in Birmingham on 23rd August 2016, who had  referred  to  a  court
    order from the Family Court made on 13th July giving the Appellant's ex-
    husband contact once per  month  with  respect  of  the  children.   In
    paragraph 9 of the determination, the  judge  referred  to  submissions
    made by Mr Addaih (the McKenzie  friend  before  the  judge)  that  the
    Family Court had ordered that  the  children  stay  with  their  mother
    because she was a Sponsor for their care since the father  was  not  in
    the UK.  She had cared for them since they all came to the UK in  2007.
    The father had remained behind in Germany.  She has been and  still  is
    their sole carer and  if  she  is  removed  their  education  would  be
    affected.

 3. The judge made findings in relation  to  this  matter  as  follows  (at
    paragraph 14):

         "The fact that the Family Court has ordered them to live  with  her
         for the time being does not mean that if she had to leave  the  UK,
         they could not be cared for by their father or be taken into social
         care and thus continue with their education in the UK.   Regulation
         15A(4)(b) requires the  child  to  be  unable  to  continue  to  be
         educated in the UK if the person applying for the derivative  right
         of  residence  was  required  to  leave  the  UK.   The  children's
         education could  continue  if  the  Appellant  left  the  UK.   She
         therefore cannot meet the requirements of Regulation 15A(4)."

 4. The appeal was dismissed.

 5. On 28th November 2016, permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis
    that the only issue was whether the Appellant was the primary carer  of
    her four children for the purposes of the Regulations.  The  judge  had
    found that the Appellant's father was a qualified and exempt person and
    Regulation 15A(7) was then addressed.   The  judge  held  that  if  the
    applicant left the United Kingdom the children would  all  be  able  to
    remain in education here.  She concluded there is nothing to  show  the
    children could not remain with the father, or in local authority  care.
    The Tribunal granting permission held that it is  arguable  that  where
    there is a Family Court order, as there is in  this  case,  giving  the
    father very limited access, and where it  is  clear  from  the  Cafcass
    report, that there has been domestic violence, and where at  least  one
    of the children had not even wanted to have monthly meetings  with  the
    father, in those circumstances the applicant has shown on  balance  she
    is the primary carer, within the meaning of the Regulations.

 6. At the hearing before me on 3rd January 2017, Mr Addaih  repeated  what
    had been presented before Judge Hawden-Beal emphasising that there were
    four children, all of whom were with German passports, and all of  whom
    had since 2007 stayed with their mother in this country.   It  was  the
    father who had instituted divorce proceedings, and he had  then  sought
    custody of the children, but the court had granted those rights to  the
    mother of the children, and given the father minimal contact.

 7. For his part, Mr Clark accepted that the problem  in  this  matter  was
    that the father had only been granted  "indirect  contact"  by  way  of
    cards and letters in the court order, and what  required  determination
    was whether this in itself was enough to deprive the mother  of  having
    the rights of a primary carer.  On the other hand, the court order  had
    retracted any reference to domestic violence, as a claim that  was  not
    being pursued and in the Cafcass report the  Appellant  maintains  that
    there is no physical violence.  The father has, in any  event,  decided
    to undergo domestic violence counselling, as recognised  in  the  court
    order.

My Consideration of the Appeal

 8. The Appellant can satisfy the definition of  a  "primary  carer"  under
    Regulation 15A(7) because she is the direct relative of the children as
    their mother and she does not share parental  responsibility  with  the
    children's father, her ex-husband, who only has "indirect contact", and
    even that only on the basis of once a month, in circumstances where one
    of the children does not even want to meet their father.   Accordingly,
    the Appellant has discharged the  burden  of  proof  and  has  met  the
    requirements of Regulation 15A.  If the Appellant, who  applied  for  a
    derivative residence card as the primary carer of the child  who  is  a
    child of an EEA national being educated in the UK, is required to leave
    the UK then the child would be unable to  continue  with  education  in
    this country because the children have since  2007  always  lived  with
    their mother and have been cared for by her.  I have concluded that the
    determination cannot stand and the appeal should  be  allowed  for  the
    reasons that I have given.

 9. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 7th February 2017

