
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24365/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th February 2016                |On 1st March 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 KWADWO DUAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss J Heybroek, Counsel, instructed by Nasim & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although the Secretary of State is the Appellant in this appeal I  will
    refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a national of Ghana, appeals against the decision of the
    Secretary of State of 20th May 2014 to refuse  his  application  for  a
    residence card as  a  family  member  of  an  Austrian  national.   The
    Appellant and the EEA national claim to have been married by  proxy  in
    Ghana on 24th December 2011.  In a decision promulgated  on  11  August
    2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge C Greasley allowed the appeal. The First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  accepted  that  the  proxy  marriage   met   the
    requirements of Ghanaian laws. The Secretary of State now appeals  with
    permission to this Tribunal.

 3. In the grounds of appeal the Secretary of State contends that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge erred in allowing the appeal in that he  failed  to
    consider the guidance in the case of Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU  law)
    [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC) as clarified in  the  case  of  TA  and  Others
    (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316 (IAC) which provide that  in
    proxy marriage cases with an EEA national the marriage must be examined
    in accordance with the laws of the  member  state  from  which  the  EU
    citizen obtains nationality.

 4. The judge granting permission to appeal granted permission on the basis
    of the grounds and further noted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    failed to make any findings to enable a  decision  to  be  made  as  to
    whether the Appellant and his partner are in a durable relationship  in
    accordance with Regulation 8(5) of the EEA Regulations.

 5. At the hearing before me Miss Heybroek conceded that the judge erred in
    relation to the assessment of the validity of the marriage in that  the
    judge failed to consider whether the marriage was valid under  Austrian
    law.

Error of Law

 6. In light of her concession and in light of the clear error on the  part
    of the judge to consider the evidence in relation to how  the  marriage
    would be viewed under Austrian law in accordance with the case law  set
    out above, I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  erred  in
    failing to consider whether the proxy marriage is valid under  Austrian
    law.  I therefore set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  As there is no challenge to  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in relation  to  the  validity  of  the  marriage  under
    Ghanaian law I preserve those findings.

Remaking

 7. In terms of the remaking Miss Heybroek made an application out of  time
    under Rule 15(2A)  to  admit  further  evidence  in  the  interests  of
    justice.  The letter she sought to admit is a  letter  dated  May  2015
    from the Austrian Embassy in London.  This is in response to  a  letter
    dated 22nd May 2015 from the instructing  solicitors  to  the  Austrian
    Embassy seeking clarification in relation to  the  recognition  of  the
    Ghanaian proxy  marriage  in  Austria.  The  response  along  with  her
    translation is contained in a bundle  of  documents  submitted  at  the
    hearing by Miss Heybroek.  She accepted that there was  no  explanation
    as to why this document was not before the First-tier  Tribunal  as  it
    clearly precedes the hearing in August 2015.  She  submitted  that  her
    instructing solicitors sent her the entire file and that she found this
    document in the file but could not explain why it had not  been  before
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 8. Mr Walker indicated that the Secretary of State did not object  to  the
    submission of this document. He accepted that  it  was  a  question  of
    fairness to the Appellant and accepted that  it  was  relevant  to  the
    determination of the issue of remaking the decision.

 9. The letter from the Austrian Embassy confirms that in  accordance  with
    Section 16 paragraph 2 of the Austrian International  Private  Law  Act
    the formal requirements of  a  marriage  outside  of  Austria  must  be
    determined  according   to   the   legislation   applicable   to   each
    partner/individual and that it  is  also  sufficient  that  the  formal
    requirements of the place where the  marriage  was  held  are  complied
    with.  The letter goes on to say that whether or not the bride or groom
    may anticipate in the marriage by proxy is a question of  formality  so
    that the compliance with the formal requirements of the  local  law  is
    sufficient.

10. Mr Walker accepted that it was clear from this letter that the Austrian
    authorities do recognise a proxy marriage conducted in Ghana if  it  is
    compliant with the laws in that country.

11. I take  into  account  the  unchallenged  finding  made  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Greasley that the Appellant's marriage  is  valid  under
    Ghanaian law. In light of this further evidence I am satisfied that the
    Appellant has now demonstrated that the marriage conducted in Ghana  is
    recognised by the authorities in Austria. I  therefore  find  that  the
    Appellant and the sponsor are legally married in  accordance  with  the
    law of Austria.

12.  In  these  circumstances  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Appellant   has
    demonstrated that he is the family  member  of  an  Austrian  national.
    There is no challenge to any of the other findings in relation  to  the
    exercise of  treaty  rights  by  the  Appellant's  partner.   In  these
    circumstances I allow the appeal under the EEA Regulations.

Notice of Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  contained  a  material
    error of law and I set the decision aside.

14. I remake the decision by allowing it under the EEA Regulations.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 24th February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 24th February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

