
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24791/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 September 2015                 |On 14 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MRS SUNDUS RAFIQUE
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the Secretary of State's appeal  but  for  convenience  I  will
    refer to the parties as they were in the original appeal.

2.   In a decision promulgated on 7 July 2015 I found a  material  error  of
    law in the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Iqbal.   The  judge
    allowed the appellant's appeal.

3.   Today Mr Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer, has  referred  me  to
    the two TOEIC certificates which were submitted with the original entry
    clearance application made on 29 July 2011.  He has also referred me to
    two policy statements. These were submitted at the  original  error  of
    law hearing.  The first  policy  statement  confirms  that  in  certain
    circumstances qualifications may be accepted for instance if  they  had
    been used in a previous entry clearance application.  The second policy
    statement provides that certificates from the ETS which have  now  been
    suspended can still be accepted  where  the  transitional  arrangements
    apply.  Those arrangements  apply  for  applications  which  were  made
    before 22 July 2014.  In this case the application was made in  January
    2014.

4.   Consequently, Mr Wilding is prepared to accept  that  the  requirements
    of paragraph 284 of the Immigration Rules were met.

Notice of Decision

5.   Having regard to the points made I would allow  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly



No anonymity direction is made.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

