

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/24390/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 25 February 2015                  |On 27 February 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                              MR ANSAR MEHMOOD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson, Counsel (instructed by Bhogal
                    Partners Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, H O Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1.     The Appellant appealed with permission  granted  on  16  January
         2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge N Osborne against  the  dismissal
         of  his  appeal  seeking  the  issue  of  a  residence  card  under
         regulation  7  of  the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
         Regulations 2006 (as amended) ("the EEA Regulations") by First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Henderson in a decision and reasons  promulgated  on
         19 November 2014.


    2.     The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 16  June  1989.
         He had denied that his marriage to a Polish national, i.e.  an  EEA
         citizen, was one of convenience.


    3.     Judge Henderson found that (a) the Appellant's  spouse  had  not
         shown that she was a qualified person within regulation  6  of  the
         Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 and  (b)  the
         Appellant's marriage was one of convenience, i.e., was a sham.


    4.     Permission to appeal was granted by  Judge  Osborne  because  he
         considered it arguable that the judge  had  conducted  the  hearing
         unfairly  by  refusing  an  adjournment  application  made  by  the
         Respondent  (for  the  purpose  of  producing  the  record  of  the
         Appellant and spouse interview).  It was also  considered  arguable
         that the judge had erred by failing to consider the Article 8  ECHR
         claim which the Appellant had raised in his Notice of Appeal.


    5.     By notice under rule 24 of the Upper Tribunal  Procedure  Rules,
         in the form of a letter dated 22 January 2015, the Respondent  (the
         Secretary of State) indicated that she opposed the application  for
         permission to appeal.


    6.     Mr Richardson for the Appellant submitted  that  the  judge  had
         erred in her credibility findings,  on  which  her  decision  under
         regulations 6 and  7  turned.   The  absence  of  the  Home  Office
         interview records made the hearing unfair.   That was seen  in  the
         judge's view of the Appellant and his spouse's evidence, that  they
         had collaborated: see [23] and [29] of the  decision  and  reasons.
         Although no objection had been taken at the time by the Appellant's
         counsel, the responsibility to  ensure  that  a  hearing  was  fair
         rested ultimately  on  the  trial  judge.    There  was  persuasive
         evidence of cohabitation in the forms of  evidence  of  the  shared
         address. Too much had been made by the judge of minor  matters  and
         her examination of the evidence was  insufficiently  thorough.  The
         judge  seemed  to  have  misunderstood  that  evidence  of  meeting
         regulation 6 was only needed as at the date of  the  hearing.   The
         judge seemed to think that more was needed, which was an  error  of
         law. The judge's unfair decision should be reversed.


    6.     Ms Brocklesby-Weller for the Respondent (the Secretary of State)
         relied on the rule 24 notice.  There had been no  unfairness.   The
         Appellant had been represented by counsel who had proceeded without
         demur  to  call  the  Appellant  and  his  spouse.   Their  witness
         statements had referred to the  interview  records.   Although  the
         interview records in full form had not been available, the  reasons
         for refusal letter set  out  the  Respondent's  case  so  that  the
         Appellant was aware of the allegations he faced.  There was in fact
         no dispute about what had  been  said  at  the  interviews  as  the
         answers given were accepted.  The judge had conducted  a  full  and
         careful assessment  of  the  evidence,  and  had  directed  herself
         correctly as to the ability of the Appellant to provide evidence to
         the date of the hearing.  The  Appellant  had  not  done  so.   The
         determination contained no error of law.


    7.     Mr Richardson wished to add nothing further.


    8.     At the conclusion of submissions the tribunal  stated  it  found
         that there was no material error  of  law  by  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Henderson in her decision and reasons. The tribunal  reserved
         its decision which now follows.


    9.     The tribunal agreed  with  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller's  submissions.
         Indeed, in the tribunal's view the grant of permission to appeal is
         not all easy to follow and must be regarded as generous.  There was
         no application on behalf of the Appellant for  the  hearing  to  be
         further adjourned to enable the Respondent to produce the interview
         records.  Such an adjournment would have been obviously prejudicial
         to the Appellant, as he was ready to  proceed  and  had  instructed
         competent counsel and incurred costs.  Witness statements  and  the
         Appellant's bundle of documents were available.   The  Respondent's
         case was sufficiently set out in the reasons  for  refusal  letter.
         There was no dispute about the accuracy of the interview answers so
         far as they were placed in evidence.  The Appellant's counsel chose
         to examine the Appellant and his  spouse  about  their  answers  at
         their interviews.   It  is  far  too  late  for  any  objection  on
         procedural  fairness  grounds  to  be  raised.   The  tribunal   is
         satisfied in any event that the hearing was fairly conducted.


    10.    The judge heard and saw the  witnesses  for  herself,  a  highly
         relevant advantage given that  one  of  the  main  issues  was  the
         substance of their relationship.  The judge identified a number  of
         adverse  matters  which  she  considered  were  significant.   That
         included the last minute production of  evidence  which  could  and
         should have been produced sooner. There were numerous discrepancies
         in the documents  revealed  by  the  judge's  meticulous  analysis,
         including a lack of correspondence  between  the  spouse's  claimed
         earnings and the bank statements the spouse provided.  The  various
         problems identified by the judge were not  minor  matters  at  all.
         Her adverse findings were open to her.


    11.    Nor did the judge misdirect herself as to the relevant date  for
         her findings of fact, which was correctly set out  at  [6]  of  the
         decision, i.e., the date of the hearing.  The judge's reference  at
         [29] to "has been exercising Treaty rights" is in the context of  a
         general summary of the  evidence,  explaining  why  the  judge  was
         unable to give weight to the spouse's claimed current employment.


    12.     Article  8  ECHR  simply  did  not  arise   for   the   judge's
         consideration.  In the first place, there was no section 120 notice
         and there were no Removal Directions.  The Appellant had the option
         of making a  fresh  application  under  the  Immigration  (European
         Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as the reasons for  refusal  letter
         stated.  The judge found in any event that there  was  in  fact  no
         family relationship.


    13.    For the reasons given above, no material error of law  has  been
         shown.  The Appellant's onwards appeal fails and the  decision  and
         reasons stands.


    DECISION


    There was no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision and reasons, which stands unchanged






    Signed Dated 26 February 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
