
[pic]
IAC-CH- CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24579/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24th October 2014                          |On 11th November 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          VERONICA VIOLET THOMPSON
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Catherine Grubb, Counsel


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

   1. In this decision I will refer to the parties by  the  style  in  which
      they appeared before the First-Tier Tribunal.

   2. The appellant is a female citizen of Jamaica, born 30 April 1967.  The
      appellant entered the United Kingdom in November 2000 as a visitor and
      has remained since despite an  application  for  further  leave  being
      refused.  The appellant then applied to remain in the  United  Kingdom
      as the unmarried partner of a person present and settled in the United
      Kingdom.  That application was refused in March 2013 and in June  2013
      the respondent made a further decision under paragraph 10a of Schedule
      2 to  the  Immigration  Act  1971  for  administrative  removal.   The
      appellant appealed against that decision.

   3. The appellant's appeal came before Judge of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      Maciel  sitting  at  Newport  on  8  May  2014.   The  appellant   was
      represented by Ms Grubb and the respondent by  a  Presenting  Officer.
      An oral hearing was held.  The appellant attended and  gave  evidence.
      In a determination promulgated on 21 May 2014 the judge dismissed  the
      appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules, but allowed the appeal
      under "human rights".  It had been conceded on behalf of the appellant
      that she was not in the United Kingdom legally and could  not  succeed
      under the Immigration Rules.  By reason of that concession  the  judge
      found that the appellant was not eligible for leave  to  remain  under
      Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  The judge however  went  on  to
      consider "paragraph EX"  and  although  it  was  considered  that  the
      appellant was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with a  British
      citizen it was not considered that there were insurmountable obstacles
      to the couple living in Jamaica.  The judge then went on  to  consider
      paragraph 276ADE, but made findings on the evidence that the appellant
      has close family in Jamaica and that her ties to that country have not
      been severed.

   4. As a result findings made by the judge  the  determination  (paragraph
      44) records that the "immigration appeal is dismissed".

   5. Having thus reached conclusions the judge went on to  consider  "human
      rights" from paragraph  30  onwards.   In  that  paragraph  the  judge
      considered whether the Immigration Rules provided a complete code  and
      if there were goods grounds to consider Article 8.  As the appellant's
      partner had two children the judge found this to  be  good  reason  to
      consider Article 8 and to allow that aspect of the appeal.

   6. The respondent appealed against that decision.  The grounds contend  a
      material misdirection of law alleging that the determination  contains
      internal inconsistencies.  Whilst considering  the  Immigration  Rules
      the judge  had  found  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
      continuing outside the  United  Kingdom,  but  that  when  considering
      Article 8 the judge had found  that  the  appellant's  partner  had  a
      career in the United Kingdom, together with family  ties  which  would
      result in it being unreasonable for him to  be  required  to  live  in
      Jamaica.  The grounds further contend that the judge  failed  to  have
      regard to the case of R (On the application of) Nagre v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720  (Admin).   It  is  also
      alleged that the judge failed  to  properly  deal  with  the  evidence
      reaching a conclusion  that  it  would  be  disproportionate  for  the
      appellant to  have  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  to  secure  entry
      clearance, when the evidence of the partner was that he did not  think
      it would be a problem for the appellant to return to Jamaica to  apply
      for entry clearance and return.

   7. The application for leave came before another judge of the  First-Tier
      Tribunal who in granting leave gave the following as reasons:

         "1.  The respondent seeks permission to appeal,  in  time,  against
      the  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge   Maciel   who   in   a
      determination promulgated on 21  May  2014  allowed  on  human  rights
      grounds, in terms  of  Article  8  of  the  1950  Convention  for  the
      Protection  of  Human  Rights  and  Fundamental  Freedoms  (the   1950
      Convention), the appellant's appeal against the respondent's  decision
      to refuse leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

     2.  The basis of the respondent's grounds of appeal are that the First-
      Tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  materially  misdirected  himself  in   his
      assessment of the appellant's Article 8 rights outside the Immigration
      Rules and the decision was therefore not in accordance with  the  law.
      In particular the respondent submitted that  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      Judge misdirected himself in applying the criteria specified in R  (On
      the application of) Nagre v SSHD  [2013]  EWHC  720  -  whereby  after
      applying the requirements of the Immigration Rules only if  there  may
      be arguably good grounds for granting leave to  remain  outside  them,
      would it be necessary for Article 8 purposes  to  go  on  to  consider
      whether  there  were   compelling   circumstances   not   sufficiently
      recognised under them.

     3.  The First-Tier Tribunals Judge's reasons  for  finding  that  there
      were good grounds for granting leave outside the  Rules  are  arguably
      briefly and inadequately expressed.

     4.  There is also an arguable error of law in the submission  that  the
      First-Tier Tribunal Judge misdirected himself in finding that it would
      be disproportionate to expect the appellant to return  to  Jamaica  to
      make an entry clearance application - in view of the evidence that  it
      would not be a problem for the  appellant  to  return  to  Jamaica  to
      obtain entry clearance and to return.  This submission is particularly
      arguable in view of the First-Tier Tribunal  Judge's  finding  that  a
      separation for a month to make the appropriate application  would  not
      be proportionate,  without  adequate  reasons  being  given  for  this
      conclusion.

     5.  The First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge's  determination  does  contain  an
      arguable error of law.  Permission to appeal is granted".

   8. Hence the matter came before me in the Upper Tribunal.

   9. Mr Richards relied upon the grounds  seeking  leave.   The  Article  8
      findings were inadequately  reasoned  and  irrational.   There  was  a
      concession that the appellant could not benefit from the  rules.   The
      public interest weighed against the individual.  Paragraph 42  of  the
      determination had not been adequately  reasoned,  no  explanation  has
      been given as to why it would be "not proportionate".

  10. Ms Grubb produced a skeleton argument minutes before the start of  the
      hearing.  No Rule 24 response had been lodged by the appellant.  As  I
      had not had the opportunity of considering the  skeleton  argument  Ms
      Grubb led me through the document.

  11.  In  essence  it  was  argued  that  Article  8   still   exists   for
      consideration.  There is nothing to say that there has been any change
      in the law with regard to that aspect.  The case of Huang v  Secretary
      of State for the Home Department [2007] UKHL 11 still holds true.   Ms
      Grubb argued that adequate consideration had been given by  the  judge
      and she referred me to paragraph 19 of the determination.

  12. Clearly the judge had in mind that the rules provided a complete code,
      she  referred  me  to  paragraph  30  of   the   determination.    The
      determination should be read in a common  sense  way.   Clear  reasons
      have been given.  The sponsor has two children  with  whom  he  is  in
      regular contact.  As to the return to Jamaica to make  an  application
      Ms Grubb referred me to the case of Chickwamba [2008]  UKHL  40.   She
      acknowledged that this was not mentioned in the determination, but had
      been in her skeleton  argument.   Ms  Grubb  indicated  there  was  no
      material error.

  13. Mr Richards chose to make no response.

  14. At the end of the hearing I indicated that I  did  consider,  for  the
      reasons now set out, that  there was a material error of law  and  the
      decision of the First-Tier Tribunal must be set aside.   A  degree  of
      fact finding was necessary and the appellant was not  present  at  the
      hearing.   I  consider  that  the  case  falls  within  the   practice
      directions of the Senior President and that it is appropriate to remit
      the case back to the First-Tier Tribunal  to  be  re-heard.   It  goes
      without saying that by reason of the  concessions  already  made,  the
      decision of the First-Tier Tribunal under the Immigration  Rules  must
      stand and the facts found by the judge in respect of  that  aspect  of
      the appeal are preserved.

  15. I have noted in particular Ms Grubb's submissions and  have  now  read
      her skeleton argument.  This document sets out the relevant  basis  to
      be followed.  The judge's determination is silent with regard  to  the
      majority of the authorities.

  16. Sadly, the judge's determination was inadequately reasoned as  to  why
      it was possible to consider the Article 8 claim independently  of  the
      rules.  The judge has acknowledged that they may well  be  a  complete
      code, but has not properly conducted the exercise to explain  why  she
      was able to conduct the proportionality test in respect of  Article  8
      and the original decision of the respondent.

  17. The determination  is  internally  inconsistent  with  regard  to  the
      position of the appellant's partner.  At one  stage  the  judge  finds
      that there are no insurmountable obstacles to the appellant living  in
      Jamaica with the partner, but then goes on to find that  it  would  be
      unreasonable for him to be required to live in Jamaica  by  reason  of
      his career and family ties.  There may well be an explanation for this
      apparent  conflict,  but  no  explanation  has  been  given   in   the
      determination.

  18.  The  judge  then  found  that  separation  of  one  month  would   be
      disproportionate,  despite  the  evidence  given  by  the  appellant's
      partner that "did not think it would be a problem for the appellant to
      return to Jamaica to obtain entry clearance and return".  In  addition
      there is little examination of the public interest to be weighed.

  19. For these reasons I find a material error  of  law  and  the  case  is
      remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal to be re-heard  by  a  First  tier
      Tribunal Judge other  than  Judge  Maciel.   As  indicated  above  the
      decision and findings in respect of the appeal under the rules made by
      Judge Maciel are preserved.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Poole                   10th November 2014
