
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24768/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 29 September 2017                      |On 27 November 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                            Iqbal Singh Shergill
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Fraczyk, instructed by Louis Kennedy, Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Iqbal Singh Shergill born on 12 December 1984 and  is  a
    male citizen of  India.   He  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 19 June 2015 to refuse  his  application  for  further
    leave to remain on human rights grounds.  The appellant had been in the
    United Kingdom lawfully as a student with several periods of leave, the
    last  of  which  was  due  to  terminate  on  30  December  2015.   The
    appellant's last application for  further  leave  to  remain  had  been
    refused on the basis that the appellant had overstayed for more than 28
    days before  submitting  his  application.   By  a  decision  dated  12
    November 2013, the  Secretary  of  State  had  sought  to  curtail  the
    appellant's leave to remain.  The Home Office had received  information
    from the appellant's educational sponsor on 9 January 2013 that he  had
    ceased studying with them.  The letter states that,

         the Home Office records have been checked and there was no evidence
         that you have made an application to change your sponsor or made  a
         fresh application for entry clearance, leave to enter or  leave  to
         remain in the United Kingdom in any capacity."

    Leave was thereby curtailed under paragraph 323A(a)(ii)(2)  of  HC  395
    (as amended).

 2. The appellant appealed against the decision to the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge M Symes) which, in a decision promulgated on 30  December  2016,
    dismissed the appeal.  Judge Symes found  that  the  appellant  had  no
    right of appeal and that the notice of curtailment had been duly served
    upon him.  It  followed  that  the  appellant's  last  application  for
    further leave to remain had, following the curtailment of his  existing
    leave, been properly rejected by the Secretary of State  on  the  basis
    that the appellant had overstayed.  The appellant did not appear before
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  hearing  was  dealt  with  in  the
    appellant's absence.  The judge wrote as follows:

         9.   Subject to  any  successful  challenge  to  the  Secretary  of
             State's treatment of the most recent  application  as  out  of
             time, it  seems  to  me  that  the  appellant  had  become  an
             overstayer from  the  time  the  additional  period  of  leave
             afforded him once  the  original  grant  had  been  curtailed,
             expired.  When he was refused further leave in June 2015,  the
             lack of leave  which  overshadowed  his  application  was  not
             otherwise "the result of  the  refusal"  rather  part  of  his
             earlier overstaying, since January 2014.

         10.  The question arises as  to  whether  the  appellant  was  duly
             served with a notice of curtailment decision.  The Immigration
             (Leave  to  Enter  and  Remain)  Order  2000  at  Article  8ZB
             addresses presumptions about receipt of notice.   Article  8ZA
             expressly allows for service by post and electronically to  an
             e-mail address provided for correspondence by  the  person  or
             the person's representative.

             8ZB -    Presumptions about receipt of notice

                    1.     Where notice is sent ... it should be  deemed  to
                        have been given to the person affected, unless  the
                        contrary is proved

                        (a)    where the notice is sent by postal service

                             (i)    on the second day after it was  sent  by
                                 postal  service  in  which   delivery   or
                                 receipt is recorded if  sent  to  a  place
                                 within the United Kingdom;

                        (b)    whether the notice is sent by  fax,  e-mail,
                             document exchange or courier on the day it  was
                             sent ...

 3. The judge found that the notice had been legally served.  He found that
    service had been affected at the appellant's last known e-mail address.
     The judge wrote:

         So the burden of proof in truth effectively shifts to the appellant
         to establish that the Secretary of State has failed  to  effectuate
         service upon him, given the attempt to  serve  him  via  an  e-mail
         address.  Had he attended a hearing before me to explain  his  side
         of things, it is conceivable an explanation would have  been  given
         that discharged that burden.  However he has not done  anything  to
         suggest that the Home Office attempts to serve him were in any  way
         misguided and in those circumstances  I  do  not  accept  that  the
         "contrary is proved" regarding the normal course of service.

 4. The grounds of appeal challenge the judge's findings.  It appears to be
    common ground that the notice of curtailment was sent by post to  [West
    Bromwich].  The notice was also served on the  appellant  by  email  at
    [r*****]@yahoo.com.  The grounds of appeal assert that this address  is
    "not the appellant's e-mail address."

 5. Mr Singh, who appeared for the Secretary of State, produced a  copy  of
    the curtailment notice which is dated 12 November 2013 which is  marked
    "served by via e-mail."  He also produced a copy of  the  letter  of  4
    September 2013 (which had been served by post at [West Bromwich]) which
    records that the appellant's educational sponsor had informed the  Home
    Office that the appellant was no longer studying with them.   Mr  Singh
    also produced screen shots from the Home Office  database.   The  first
    shows an update of the database in relation to the appellant's  records
    and is dated 12 November 2013.  The text  records  that  correspondence
    sent to the appellant had  been  returned.   The  entry  records  that:



         A fresh 60 day curtailment period is to be given to the student  to
         be able to apply for new leave or to leave the UK.  Curtailed leave
         is now to expire on 11 January 2014.  Form ICD3971 [the decision of
         4 September 2013 - see above] sent  to  applicant  via  e-mail  to
         [r*****]@yahoo.com.

 6. The second screen shot bears an earlier date  (4  September  2013),  it
    shows the appellant's postal address as [West Bromwich] and his  e-mail
    address as [r*****]@yahoo.com.

 7. A final screen shot from the database is  dated  28  June  2014.   This
    shows the appellant's current address in East Ham, London and  gives  a
    different e-mail address, namely [m*****]@hotmail.co.uk.

 8. I find that the judge did not err in law.  The screen shots produced by
    the Senior Presenting Officer were, of course,  not  available  to  the
    judge at the hearing.  However, these screen shots simply confirm  that
    the facts as found by the judge were accurate.   At  the  time  of  the
    service of the September 2013 decision, records held by the Home Office
    showed that the appellant's address was [West Bromwich] and his  e-mail
    address [r*****]@yahoo.com.  New particulars were not notified  to  the
    Home Office until 28 June 2014.  The notice of  curtailment  served  by
    post to [West Bromwich] was not  properly  served,  as  the  respondent
    acknowledges,  because  the  letter  was  not  called  for  or  receipt
    acknowledged by the appellant.  Mr Fraczyk argued that  the  respondent
    should have been put on notice by  the  failure  of  service  that  the
    particulars of the appellant's address had changed.   Whilst  that  may
    well have been the case  in  respect  of  the  appellant's  residential
    postal address (had he been living  at  that  address  one  would  have
    expected him to have signed for the letter sent to him  there),  I can
    see no reason at all to conclude from that fact that the appellant's e-
    mail address held by the Home Office should also have  changed.   There
    is no logic in the proposition that one is likely to  change  one's  e-
    mail address when one moves residence.  Significantly, the e-mail  sent
    to the appellant did not "bounce"; the sender was not notified that the
    email was undeliverable so the account remained in  existence  even  if
    the appellant had begun to use a  different  account.   No  new  e-mail
    address was notified by the appellant until after the  service  of  the
    decision to  curtail  leave.   It  follows  that,  notwithstanding  the
    failure of the postal service, service on the appellant of  the  notice
    of curtailment by e-mail had been good service. Accordingly, the  judge
    did not misunderstand  the  evidence  but  rather  reached  an  outcome
    plainly available to him on that evidence. In  the  circumstances,  the
    appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 9. This appeal is dismissed.

10. There is no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 20 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed so no fees are repayable


Signed                              Date 20 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




