
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/24262/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 10 March 2015                   |On 24 March 2015                   |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                           MANUEL DE JESUS MURILLO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms Sharkey of Medivisas
For the Respondent: Ms C Johnstone Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
   order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
   First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against
   a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge A K  Simpson  promulgated  on  16
   December 2014 which allowed the Appellant's appeal against a  refusal  of
   leave to remain as a spouse and held that  it  was  disproportionate  and
   unlawful under Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights  to
   remove him to the United States of America.
Background
3. The Appellant was born on 10 August 1985 and is a national of the  United
   States of America.
4. The Appellant first entered the United Kingdom as a visitor on 2  October
   2013 and was given leave to remain until 2 April 2014. On 31  March  2014
   he applied to vary his leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  the
   spouse of Sarah Pamela Knowles a British citizen but his application  was
   refused on 22 May 2014 on the basis that the Appellant could not meet the
   immigration status requirements of the Rules as  he  was  in  the  United
   Kingdom as a visitor; he did not  meet  the  requirements  for  leave  to
   remain  as  a  parent;  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the   eligibility
   requirements of the Rules and therefore could not benefit from EX.1 ;  he
   did not meet the private life requirements of the Rules;  there  were  no
   exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of leave outside  the  Rules
   as there were no insurmountable obstacles to them  enjoying  family  life
   together in the USA.


The Judge's Decision
5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Simpson heard oral evidence from the Appellant  and  his  wife  and
   dismissed the appeal under the Rules but allowed the appeal  against  the
   Respondent's decision under Article 8. The Judge found :
   a) Contrary to the assertion of the Respondent in the refusal letter  the
      Appellant's child was a British citizen as her mother  is  British  by
      birth so although she was born in the USA she was British by  descent.
      She was also an American citizen.
   b) It was accepted by both sides that the Appellant could  not  meet  the
      requirements of the Rules.
   c) There were good reasons to consider a grant of leave outside the Rules
      as the Appellant is the father of a British child.
   d) She considered  the  case  under  Article  8  outside  the  Rules  and
      determined that the issue came down  to  one  of  proportionality  and
      whether it would be proportional to expect the Appellant to return  to
      the USA alone and re establish his  domicile  before  his  wife  could
      rejoin him there.
   e) The Appellant would have to return alone as there  were  problems  for
      the  Appellant's  wife  relating  to  domicile  and  green  cards  and
      returning residents. These  were  discussed  during  the  hearing  and
      confirmed in written submissions that were received in September  2014
      and served on the Respondent and not challenged. The  Judge  concluded
      she would be refused re entry to the US as her green card  had  lapsed
      and would not be readmitted as a returning resident.  She  found  that
      the sponsor would have to reapply for a green card and  the  Appellant
      would have to meet the criteria for domicile which she set out.
   f) The judge took into account the  best  interests  of  the  Appellant's
      child . She found that she was entitled to remain with her mother  and
      could not realistically join her father in the US as she was too young
      to be separated from her  mother.  Therefore  family  life  could  not
      continue in the US
   g) The Judge took into account that the  Appellant's  did  not  meet  the
      requirements of the Rules.
   h) The Judge concluded that in the light of  all  the  circumstances  the
      decision to remove was disproportionate.
6. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that  the  Judge  had  demonstrated
   bias in the  way  she  dealt  with  the  case;  there  was  a  procedural
   impropriety in relation to the internet research carried out by the Judge
   and the Judge failed to identify non standard features in this case  that
   would justify consideration of the case outside the Rules .On 6  February
   2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Kamara gave permission to appeal.

7. At the hearing I heard submissions from Ms Johnstone  on  behalf  of  the
   Respondent that :

   a) There was a procedural impropriety  in  that  the  Judge  demonstrated
      bias.

   b) The assessment of proportionality  was  inadequate  as  there  was  no
      consideration of section 117B of the  Immigration  Act  2014  and  the
      public interest factors set out there.

8. On behalf of the Respondent  Ms Sharkey submitted that :

   a) The suggestion that the Judge had exhibited bias was bewildering given
      the number of issues where she found against the Appellant .

   b) In relation to the internet research carried out by the Judge she  had
      given both parties the opportunity to address it .The submissions made
      by the Appellant were sent to the Respondent and  there  was  evidence
      produced to show that. There was no suggestion that the HOPO in  court
      objected to this course of action being taken.

   c) The Judge's Article 8  assessment  was  adequate.  She  addressed  the
      relavant caselaw and acknowledged that the Appellant  could  not  meet
      the maintenance requirements.

   d) While the public interest  was  not  explicitly  referred  to  in  the
      findings that would have made no difference  to  the  outcome  of  the
      decision.

Finding on Material Error

9. Having  heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

10. This was an application by the Appellant for  leave  to  remain  as  the
   spouse of a British Citizen Sarah Knowles with whom he had a child who at
   the time of the hearing was 3 years old. The Appellant and his  wife  had
   met and married in the USA  and  their  child  was  born  there  and  was
   therefore a dual citizen of the USA and the United Kingdom.. It  was  not
   disputed that for a number of reasons the Appellant could  not  meet  the
   requirements of Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE.
11. The grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  contend  that  the  Judge
   erred in two respects. It is firstly contended that the Judge's  decision
   was procedurally unfair as she had demonstrated bias. I have  no  witness
   statement from the HOPO Mr Archbald simply a copy of his attendance  note
   which while  note  providing  any  verbatim  note  of  remarks  that  are
   considered to show bias attributes motives to the Judges  behaviour  that
   reflect adversely on her conduct of  the  hearing.  A  witness  statement
   should have been provided as there is clearly a distinction between legal
   submissions and arguments and evidence about events at the hearing.

12. Therefore the only 'evidence' that I am provided with  to  suggest  that
   there is bias is the HOPOs attendance note  which  I  must  read  in  the
   context of the decision before me. The note records:

   "The IJ then started to try and find a way to make  it  unreasonable  for
   the app to return to the US and be separated from his wife and child, she
   clearly stated in court that she would get  evidence  of  what  the  wife
   would need to do to return and live in the US..... It is quite clear that
   she was doing the reps job as the  rep  had  provided  nothing  about  US
   citizenship, and therefore that she was not being independent. It  should
   be noted that she did this whilst it was unclear what status the wife had
   in the US, and whether or not the status had been lost or revoked."
13. The test for judicial bias relied on by the Respondent  is  set  out  in
   Porter and Magill 2001 UKHL 67 at paragraphs 102 and 103 as follows:
   "The Court must first  ascertain  all  the  circumstances  which  have  a
   bearing on the suggestion that the judge was biased.  It  must  then  ask
   whether those  circumstances  would  lead  a  fair  minded  and  informed
   observer to conclude that there was a real possibility the  tribunal  was
   bias"
14. In this case the Judge carried out  an  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
   case by reference to Article 8. In the refusal  letter  at  page  3  when
   addressing the issue of whether there were exceptional  circumstances  to
   warrant a grant of leave outside the Rules  the  Respondent  asserted  in
   essence that there was nothing to stop the Appellant  and  his  wife  and
   child relocating to the US and enjoying family life there  and  the  same
   argument underpinned their views on Article 8.
15. This was a live issue in the case before the Judge given that while  she
   found as a fact that the child was a dual national and therefore entitled
   to live in the US the Appellant's wife gave evidence (paragraph 10)  that
   her green card had expired in 2011 and therefore was disputing  that  she
   could  simply  return  to  live  there.   In  her   assessment   of   the
   proportionality of the Respondent's  decision  the  Judge  was  therefore
   inevitably bound to consider whether the family life could reasonably  be
   expected to continue in the US and that involved an assessment of whether
   the Appellant's wife was entitled to live  there.  It  appears  that  the
   Judge identified that neither party had  provided  adequate  evidence  on
   this issue although she records that there  was  a  'discussion'  and  Mr
   Archbold's  attendance  note  agrees,  in  relation  to  this  in   court
   (paragraph 21). Identification of the important issues in  a  case  is  a
   common  feature  of  the  work  of  Tribunal  Judges  and  underpins  the
   overriding objective as set out in the Procedure Rules and there  can  be
   nothing about such an attempt to identify the live issues in  discussions
   between  the  parties  which  would  suggest  that  the  Judge  was   not
   approaching the case with an open mind.
16. It appears that she retired to ascertain if this could be clarified  and
   researched the matter on the internet.  She  presented  her  findings  in
   court  and  then  gave  the  parties  the  opportunity  to  make  written
   submissions before deciding the case. I note that the submissions made by
   the Appellant were received by  the  court  on  25  September  2014.  The
   Appellant has produced evidence that this was served on the HOPO unit and
   signed for by them so while Ms Johnstone and the grounds suggest they did
   not see these submissions that is clearly the  fault  of  their  unit  in
   linking post to files. The decision was not  written  until  15  December
   2014 so it is clear that the Judge did not write the decision until these
   submissions were received and the Respondent was given an opportunity  to
   respond. Mr Archbold I am satisfied  drew  adverse  inferences  from  the
   Judge's indication that she required more evidence about an issue in  the
   case which is not supported by her actions.
17. Given that there had been a discussion of the issue  in  court  and  the
   parties had been given the opportunity to make further submissions  after
   the hearing and the Judge did not decide the case until they had had  the
   opportunity to do so I can see no basis on which it could  be  reasonably
   argued that the Judge had been biased or had  not  approached  this  case
   with an open mind.
18.  In relation to the Judges assessment under Article 8  it  is  contended
   in the grounds that the Judge misdirected herself at paragraphs 18-19  in
   failing to identify non standard features of  a  compelling  nature  that
   show that removal would be unjustifiably harsh.  I am  satisfied  however
   that if that is the correct test  to  apply  the  Judge  applied  it:  at
   paragraph 18 she  identified  that  the  refusal  letter  had  failed  to
   correctly identify the nationality of the Appellant's  child  as  British
   and that this would in the circumstances not be a  factor  recognised  by
   the Rules in the Appellant's case. The  Judge  found  in  her  Article  8
   assessment that it was a relevant factor and explained in clear terms why
   she found it was important.
19. Ms Johnstone argued in more general terms that  the  Judge's  Article  8
   was 'inadequate' although this was  not  specifically  identified  as  an
   error of law in the grounds nor was permission granted on that basis. She
   specifically suggested that it was an inadequate assessment  because  the
   Judge had failed to refer to the statutory public interest considerations
   as required by the Immigration Act 2014. However even had that  been  the
   basis of the grant  of  permission  I  am  satisfied  that  although  not
   referred to the Judge took into account that the Appellant did  not  meet
   the requirements of the Rules as she said  that  this  was  part  of  the
   balancing exercise that she carried out in paragraph  24.  She  had  also
   heard evidence from the Appellant in English, she had heard evidence that
   while the sponsor did not meet the financial requirements of Appendix  FM
   she was in full time employment with John Lewis  and  there  was  nothing
   therefore to suggest the family were a burden on United  Kingdom  society
   or unable to integrate.
20. Finally in failing to address paragraph  117B  Ms  Johnstone  failed  to
   note that the Appellant would in fact on the basis of the  findings  made
   by the Judge have benefited from the  application  of  paragraph  117B(6)
   which provides that:
   "In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the public
   interest does not require the person's removal where-
   (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
   qualifying child, and
   (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
   Kingdom."
21. The Judge having found that there were barriers to the Appellant's  wife
   relocating to the US it could not be argued that  it  was  reasonable  to
   expect his child to leave the United Kingdom.
22. In failing to refer to section  117B  I  have  reminded  myself  of  the
   recent Court of Appeal  decision in SSHD - v - AJ  (Angola)  [2014]  EWCA
   Civ 1636 that  an  error  of  law  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  may  be
   considered immaterial -


   " ... if it is clear that  on  the  materials  before  the  Tribunal  any
   rational Tribunal must have come to the same conclusion or if it is clear
   that, despite its failure to refer to the relevant legal instruments, the
   Tribunal has in fact applied the test which  it  was  supposed  to  apply
   according to those instruments."

23. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning. While it may be  categorised  as  generous
   and not a conclusion that other Judges would have reached I am  satisfied
   that this is not the test and therefore I uphold the decision.

CONCLUSION

24. I therefore found that no material errors of law have  been  established
   and that the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

25. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
22.3.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell






