
IAC-AH-DP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24276/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 5 May 2015                            |On 19 May 2015                      |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                             mr enkh-od shoovder
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             IMMIGRATION OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill (Counsel instructed by Aslam Law
Associates)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  against  the  decision  and  reasons  of  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Hawden-Beal) who in a determination on the  papers  and
    promulgated on 22 July 2014, dismissed the appellant's appeal under the
    Immigration and EEA Rules, following a decision  by  the  Secretary  of
    State refusing to allow him to re-enter the UK and revoking his  family
    permit issued under EEA Regulations.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Mongolia and his date of birth is 11  May
    1975.

3.   He was granted a residence card as the family  member  (spouse)  of  an
    EEA national exercising treaty rights.  The appellant left the  UK  and
    returned on  13  June  2014  arriving  at  Stansted  Airport  where  an
    Immigration Officer made an immigration decision to  refuse  him  entry
    into the UK and revoking his  EEA  family  permit  in  accordance  with
    Regulation 19 of the EEA Regulations.  The Immigration  Officer  relied
    on the appellant's admission that he had separated from his spouse  and
    that there was no prospect of reconciliation.

4.   The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal.  The Tribunal  considered
    that it had been hampered by a lack of documentation from both parties.
     The Tribunal found  that  the  appellant  could  not  be  said  to  be
    "joining" his spouse in the UK, under Regulation 19, in  light  of  the
    fact that the parties were separated.  The Tribunal nevertheless  found
    that the appellant came within the definition of a family member.

Grounds of Application

5.   In grounds of appeal the appellant argued that the  Tribunal  erred  in
    law by mistakenly treating the residence card issued to  the  appellant
    as an EEA family permit.  It was argued that this mistake  was  founded
    on the respondent's decision under Regulation 19 which was an incorrect
    application of that Regulation.  The decision to revoke  the  residence
    card was unlawful given that the appellant was a family  member  of  an
    EEA national exercising treaty rights under Regulation 20(4)(8).

6.    The  second  ground  argued   was   that   the   Tribunal   erred   by
    misinterpreting the word  "joining"  under  Regulation  19(2)  to  mean
    "physically" joining the same household.   It  was  asserted  that  the
    proper interpretation was to join as in be present in the UK.

Permission to Appeal

7.   Permission to appeal was initially refused by the First-tier  Tribunal.
     The application was then renewed to the Upper Tribunal and granted  by
    Senior Immigration Judge Allen who found an arguable case in respect of
    ground 1.

Error of Law Hearing

8.    At  the  hearing   before   me   I   heard   submissions   from   both
    representatives.  Ms  Revill  provided  a  detailed  skeleton  argument
    supported by relevant case law.  Mr Nath relied on the  refusal  letter
    but acknowledged that the Tribunal had not been  assisted  in  reaching
    its decision given the lack of documentation and evidence available  to
    it for consideration.

Discussion and Decision

9.   At the end of the hearing I allowed the appeal.  I find that there  was
    a material error of law.  I set aside the decision made.

10.  I am satisfied that the Tribunal firstly erred by  mistakenly  reaching
    the view that the appellant was issued with a family permit rather than
    a residence card.  It was common ground that the appellant  had  indeed
    been granted a residence  card  valid  for  a  period  of  five  years.
    Grounds for revocation of a residence card are limited and are set  out
    in Regulation 20(4) of the EEA Regulations.  Having made this error the
    Tribunal misapplied Regulations that were not applicable  to  a  family
    residence card.  Secondly, I am satisfied that the interpretation given
    by the Tribunal to the words "joining" was an interpretation  that  was
    restrictive and wrong.  The Tribunal correctly found that the appellant
    was a family member of an EEA national exercising treaty rights.  There
    was no evidence that the parties were divorced and/or that  the  spouse
    was not exercising treaty rights in the UK.

Re making the decision

11.  Having found material errors  of  law  I  now  propose  to  remake  the
    decision. As the appellant was issued with a residence card I find that
    there was no basis for the revocation and I  direct  that  there  be  a
    reinstatement the residence  card.   I  find  that  the  appellant  was
    joining his spouse in the UK.  The interpretation of the word "joining"
    means physical presence in the UK rather than any physical presence  in
    the EEA national's household.  This view is clearly supported  in  case
    law which was cited and relied on by  the  appellant  in  the  skeleton
    argument including Samsam (EEA: revocation and retained  rights)  Syria
    [2011] UKUT 00165 (IAC), PM (EEA - spouse  -  "residing  with")  Turkey
    [2011] UKUT 89 (IAC), Diatta  276/83  and  Ogieriakhi  v  Minister  for
    Justice and Equality and Others (C-244/13).  I find that  although  the
    appellant and his spouse had separated, he has not lost his  status  as
    the spouse of an EEA national  as  the  parties  remain  married.   The
    residence card shall be reinstated and the decision refusing entry into
    the UK revoked.

Notice of Decision

12.  Accordingly I set  aside  the  decision.   I  remake  the  decision  by
allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules with reference  to  the  EEA
Regulations.

No anonymity order.



Signed        Date 14.5.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  whole  fee
award.  The reason for the fee award is  that  the  respondent  applied  the
incorrect Regulations and misapplied the law in reaching a decision.



Signed        Date 14.5.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
