
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24499/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6 July 2017                           |On 11 July 2017                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                 NAHID AHMED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr E. Fripp, Counsel instructed by D J Webb & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 5 April 1980 who
    entered the UK as a domestic worker in July 2001 with leave until 8
    January 2002. He remained in the UK after expiry of his leave. In
    October 2009, July 2013 and on 5 February 2015 he applied,
    unsuccessfully, for leave to remain on the basis of his private and
    family life. On 28 April 2015 he applied again for leave to remain on
    basis of his private and family life in the UK. The application was
    refused on 25 June 2015. The appellant appealed to the First-tier
    Tribunal where his appeal was heard by Judge Easterman. In a decision
    promulgated on 24 October 2016 the appeal was dismissed. The appellant
    is now appealing against that decision.


 2. The appellant's case, in summary, is that he has been in the UK for a
    very long period of time (over 15 years) and all of his adult life. He
    claims that he has lost his connection to Bangladesh, where he no
    longer has friends and family. He also claims that he has cohabited
    with his uncle and with his sister (both British citizens) and that he
    has very close ties to both of them. He claims also to be extremely
    close to his sister's children, who would be upset if he had to leave.
    He also says that he has many close friends in the UK. Furthermore, the
    appellant has suffered from depression following the death of his
    parents and relies on his UK family's support.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The judge, firstly, considered whether the appellant was able to
    satisfy Paragraph 276(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules, where the issue
    in contention was whether there would be very significant obstacles to
    the appellant integrating into Bangladesh. The judge found that there
    would not be very significant obstacles on the basis that the appellant
    is of Bangladeshi origin, lives with people who are of Bangladeshi
    origin, and is involved with the Bangladeshi community. The judge also
    found that although the appellant says he suffers from depression and
    is dependent on his sister for moral support, there was "no independent
    evidence that he suffered any more than any other person when they lose
    a close family member or a parent or even a sibling."


 4. The judge then considered the appeal outside the Immigration Rules. At
    paragraph 46, he found that the appellant's relationship with his
    sister was "no more than one would expect of a close brother and sister
    and does not amount to protected family life." However, at paragraph 47
    he found that the appellant's private and family life "built up over
    fifteen years may amount to protected private and family life."


 5. At paragraph 47 the judge found that the appellant spoke English (and
    did not hold against him that he used an interpreter) and is not a
    burden on the economy. At paragraph 48 the judge concluded:


         "When I weigh the friendships formed at a time when had no right be
         in the country and his family life fostered at a time when had no
         right to be in the country, and I weigh against that the Secretary
         of State's right to control immigration, I find the decision to be
         proportionate."

Grounds of appeal and submissions

 6. There are two grounds of appeal. The first ground is that the judge
    failed to undertake a balanced proportionality assessment. It is
    contended that the judge failed to consider that in October 2009 the
    appellant sought to regularise his status but since then no enforcement
    action was taken against him.


 7. The second ground of appeal is that the judge failed to consider, when
    evaluating Article 8 outside the Rules, the appellant's length of
    residence.


 8. Although the grounds challenge only the Article 8 assessment outwith
    the Immigration Rules, in his submissions before me Mr Fripp argued
    that the judge's error extended to his consideration of "very
    significant obstacles" under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  Mr Fripp's
    contention was that the judge failed to consider (or give inadequate
    consideration to) important factors in his evaluation of the appeal.
    These factors are:

     a) that the appellant had suffered depression/mental health problems
        since the loss of his parents;


     b) that the appellant had cohabited with his sister and had an
        extremely close relationship with her and her children; and

     c) that he had lived a very long period of time in the UK, and that
        whilst the respondent had been tolerating his stay, by taking no
        steps to remove him, his family and private life had developed.


 9. Mr Fripp argued that the failure to consider these issues undermined
    both the judge's consideration of Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and of
    Article 8 outside the Rules.


10. Mr Wilding's response was that the judge had considered the appellant's
    family connections in the UK, the death of his mother and length of
    residence. The Immigration Rules provide for leave to be granted where
    a person has lived 20 years in the UK but the appellant's length of
    stay in the UK falls short of this. He argued that the judge had taken
    into account all material matters and there was simply nothing to fault
    in the approach the judge had taken.


Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)

11. Under Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules the issue to be
    resolved was whether there would be very significant obstacles to the
    appellant's integration into Bangladesh. The judge addressed this at
    paragraphs 43 - 46 of the decision. His consideration included a range
    of factors, including:


     a) the appellant's connection to Bangladesh (paragraph 43);


     b) his involvement with the Bangladeshi community in the UK (paragraph
        43);

     c) his ability to return to Bangladesh with the funds available to him
        (paragraph 44);
     d) his connection to his sister and dependence on her for moral
        support and because of his depression (paragraph 45); and


     e) the level of medical support he has required in the UK for his
        depression (paragraph 45).

12. Mr Fripp's argument that the judge erred by failing to consider the
    appellant's mental health and/or his relationship to his sister is
    untenable because the judge has taken these factors into account (as
    set out in paragraph 45 of the decision). The argument that the judge
    erred by failing to take the appellant's length of residence in the UK
    into account is equally untenable as length of time spent in the UK is
    not relevant to an application under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). Paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii) provides a route to leave to remain based on length of
    residence and this requires continuous residence of 20 years, which the
    appellant clearly cannot satisfy.


13. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the judge was entitled, for the
    reasons given, to conclude that the appellant was unable to succeed
    under the Immigration Rules.


Article 8 proportionality assessment


14. I now turn to the judge's proportionality assessment under Article 8
    ECHR outside the Rules.


15. Contrary to the argument made in the grounds, the judge has taken into
    account the appellant's length of residence in the UK. This is
    mentioned in paragraph 47.


16. The judge has also had regard to the appellant's mental health and
    family relations (paragraphs 45 and 46).


17. Mr Fripp argued that the judge's decision is undermined by failing to
    refer to the appellant and his sister cohabiting. However, it is not
    necessary for a decision to record every detail from an appellant's
    evidence. It is clear from the decision that the judge has considered
    the appellant's relationship with his sister and accepted that it was
    "close". Reviewing the decision as a whole as well as the evidence that
    was before the First-tier Tribunal, I am satisfied that the judge has
    not overlooked any material aspect of the appellant's relationship with
    his sister.


18. The grounds argue that the judge ought, in carrying out the
    proportionality exercise, to have weighed in the appellant's favour
    that enforcement action had not been taken against him. This argument
    has no merit. It does not weigh in the appellant's favour that the
    Secretary of State has failed to take action to remove him. The
    Secretary of State is entitled to proceed on the basis that an
    overstayer will leave on his own volition. See paragraph 29 of the
    judgment in Patel v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]
    UKSC 72.

19. In carrying out the proportionality assessment, the judge has taken
    into account all of the material evidence that was before the Tribunal
    about the appellant and his family. The weight to attach to this
    evidence was a matter for the judge and I am satisfied that the judge
    reached a conclusion that was open to him based on that evidence and
    which has been adequately explained in the decision.


 Decision

20. The appeal is dismissed.


21. The judge has not made a material error of law and the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal stands.


      |                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 10 July 2017                  |

