

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Numbers:
IA/24684/2015


                                            IA/31755/2015




                                               HU/00802/2016


,
                                               HU/00806/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS




    |Heard at Liverpool                       |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 25th April 2017                       |  On 15th June 2017               |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                     Eco
                                     PCO
                                     BCO
                                     GOO
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Atueabe, R&A Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mrs M.Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

     1. The respondent has permission to appeal the decision of First-tier
        Judge Lever who, following a hearing in September 2016, allowed the
        appeals. For convenience I will continue to refer to the parties
        hereinafter as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.


     2. The appellants are siblings from Nigeria. They came to the United
        Kingdom as children in the company of their mother in 2005/2006 on
        visit visas. They then overstayed and have remained here since.

     3.  First-tier Judge Lever found that the appellants' parents brought
        them to the United Kingdom intending they would overstay and
        benefit from life here including getting a free education. Their
        parents were relatively wealthy, their mother being an accountant.
        When immigration control eventually caught up with the family their
        parents left them to be cared for by the State. Since September
        2012 Manchester City Council has been providing them with free
        accommodation and supporting them financially. The judge said that
        the eldest appellant, B, was placed in the position of being the
        main carer of her siblings.

     4. Their mother went to Dublin with another sibling. In the Republic
        of Ireland she gave birth to another child and she is now an Irish
        citizen.

     5. The appellants are aged 23, 22, 20 and 16. E has been in the United
        Kingdom from the age of 12 to 22, B from 13 to 23, P from 10 to 20,
        and G from 6 to 16.

     6. The judge referred to the reprehensible conduct of their parents
        but said that no blame should be attached to the appellants who
        were children at the time. In line with the decision of PD [2016]
        UKUT 00108 the judge considered their claims jointly.

     7. The judge concluded that G succeeded under the immigration rules
        because she was 16 years of age and was assisted by paragraph 276
        ADE (1)(iv). She was entitled to remain on the basis of private
        life as she was under the age of 18 and had lived continuously in
        the United Kingdom for at least seven years and it would not be
        reasonable to expect her to leave. The judge said that the case of
        G could not be considered in isolation.

     8. The other appellants could not succeed under the rules because of
        their ages. The judge concluded that it was appropriate to consider
        their situation outside the rules. The judge referred them being
        abandoned by their parents and left destitute. Whilst they are now
        adults the judge found a greater and deeper family life between
        them than was the norm because of their circumstances. The judge
        allowed their appeals on a freestanding article 8 basis.

     9. The judge did not consider section 117 B (1)-(5) on the basis that
        section 117B (6) applied. This provides:

            In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
            public interest does not require the person's removal where-
           a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
              was a qualifying child, and
           b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
              United Kingdom.


         A qualifying child means someone under the age of 18 who has lived
         in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years or
         more.

    10. The judge went on to say that whilst the appellants may have come
        from a reasonably moneyed family in Nigeria it was uncertain
        whether they had a home in the country. The judge accepted they had
        limited relatives in Nigeria but they were not close. The judge
        accepted they had not been in contact with anyone from Nigeria for
        over 10 years. The judge concluded they could not look for support
        from either parent: they were unlikely to return to Nigeria.


The appeal

    11. Permission to appeal was sought on the basis the judge failed to
        adequately consider the reasonableness of G leaving the United
        Kingdom. It was submitted that the judge had entirely discounted
        the poor immigration history of the appellants on the basis the
        fault lay with their parents. Reference was made to the Court of
        Appeal decision in MA Pakistan and others 2016 AWC CAV 705 and that
        the test involves balancing  factors, including the public interest
        and the interests of the child. The judge had failed to balance
        adequately the public interest in the face of serious deception.


    12. Reference was also made to the absence of consideration of the
        factors set out in section 117B, including the cost to the public
        purse of the family. It was contended the judge materially erred in
        applying section 117B (6) as there was no reasoned finding as to
        how the three adult siblings were in a parental relationship with
        G.

    13. It was contended that the judge disregarded the potential for their
        mother, as an Irish national with whom they were in contact, to
        become involved and assist in their return to Nigeria. It was
        submitted the judge did not adequately reason why they could not
        return to their home country, even in the absence of parental
        support, given they were from a wealthy background; had benefited
        from a decade of British education; and very likely, still had
        access to their family home in Nigeria.

    14. Permission was granted on the basis the judge did not properly
        consider the public interest in immigration control nor apply
        section 117B of the 2002 Act. It was also arguable that the judge
        erred in concluding a parental relationship existed between the
        three older appellants and the younger sibling.

    15. At hearing the presenting officer, Mrs Aboni, continued to rely on
        the grounds for which leave had been sought. She submitted that the
        judge had failed to consider the fact that the appellants would be
        returned as a group and the youngest child would have the support
        of her siblings. The judge also failed to consider potential
        support from their mother. She submitted there was inadequate
        reasoning as to why the appellant could not return to Nigeria where
        they had extended family. The judge also erred in relation to
        section 117B (6) in that a parental relationship did not exist.
        There was no consideration by the judge of the other sections of
        section 117B and in particular, the need to demonstrate financial
        independence. In this case the appellants have been a burden upon
        the taxpayer and have benefited from the all that the United
        Kingdom could offer, including free education and financial
        support. She invited me to set aside the decision and remake it.

    16. In response, Mr Atueabe said the youngest appellant came here when
        she was 6 and was 16 at the time of the appeal. He submitted that
        her mother and brother in the Republic of Ireland have played no
        part in her life. She has been going to school here and was active
        in the community. Regarding section 117B he said Manchester Council
        had treated the eldest appellant as if she were the youngest
        child's main carer.


Conclusions

    17. Having considered the points made my conclusion is that the First-
        tier Judge materially erred in law in allowing the appeals on the
        basis indicated. I advised the parties of this at the hearing.
        There being no factual dispute on the judge's findings I remake the
        decision from the facts there and the evidence within the file.


    18. In PD[2016]UKUT 00108 the Upper Tribunal  referred to the situation
        where the claims of several family members coincide and said it
        would be artificial and unrealistic to determine them on their
        individual merits in a rigid sequence and in insulated
        packages(para 21). Consequently, there is interplay between the
        reasonableness test in 276 ADE (iv) and the claims of the remaining
        family members.


The position of G and 276 ADE(iv)


    19. The youngest child, G, is the only one who potentially has a claim
        under the immigration rules. This is in relation the requirements
        for a grant of leave to remain on the basis of private life.
        Paragraph 276 ADE (iv) applies in so far as she is under the age of
        18 and has lived in the United Kingdom for more than seven years.
        She has exceeded the seven-year benchmark. She is now 16 and has
        been here since the age of 6. On 13 December 2012 paragraph 276ADE
        was amended to include whether it would be reasonable to expect the
        applicant to leave. Consequently, it is not sufficient to simply
        show 7 years continuous residence. Therefore the issue for her
        under the rules is the reasonableness of her leaving.

    20. In MA (Pakistan) & Ors, R (on the application of) v Upper Tribunal
        (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705 the
        Court of Appeal pointed out rule 276ADE (iv) and section 117B (6)
        are similarly framed: both require seven years' residence and in
        both, a critical question is whether it would be unreasonable for
        the child to be expected to leave the UK. The court considered the
        application of the reasonableness concept in both provisions. Lord
        Justice Elias having considered various arguments on the
        reasonableness test took the view that the focus was on the child.
        His Lordship saw no justification for reading the concept of
        reasonableness so as to include a consideration of the conduct and
        immigration history of parents as part of an overall analysis of
        the public interest. He acknowledged that this might result in some
        cases in undeserving applicants being allowed to remain. As part of
        the assessment of the reasonableness of her leaving it is necessary
        to consider the position of her siblings.

    21. I set out below my conclusion is in respect of G's siblings. In
        summary my conclusion is that their removal would not be
        disproportionate. The intention is that they would be removed as a
        unit. In that situation I do not find it established that it would
        be unreasonable to expect G to leave.

Article 8

    22. Bossade (Sections 117A-D: Inter-relationship with Rules) [2015]
        UKUT 415 (IAC) held that a tribunal will first consider an
        appellant's Article 8 claim by reference to the Immigration Rules.
        This exercise is performed without reference to Part 5A which is
        engaged directly only where the decision making process reaches the
        stage of concluding that the person does not satisfy the
        requirements of the Rules. Thereafter, Part 5A will be applied in
        the determination of the proportionality question.


    23.  I have considered G on a freestanding article 8 basis. She is a
        child. The Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for
        the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4; [2011] 2 AC 166 that the best
        interests of the child are a primary consideration which has to be
        taken into account in all cases where the child's interests are
        affected. Those interests are incorporated in section 55. In
        Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC
        74; [2013] 1 WLR 3690 it was held that whilst  the best interests
        of a child must be a primary consideration the best interests of a
        child can be outweighed by the cumulative effect of other
        considerations, no other consideration can be treated as inherently
        more significant.

    24. Her best interests are tied up with her siblings' fate. I find
        Judge Lever materially erred in law in concluding section 117B (6)
        applied to them. In R (on the application of RK) v Secretary of
        State for the Home Department (s.117B(6); "parental relationship")
        IJR [2016] UKUT 00031 (IAC) it was pointed out that Part 5A sets
        out no definition of what constitutes a "genuine and subsisting
        parental relationship." Para 42 of the decision reads:

              Whether a person is in a "parental relationship" with a child
             must, necessarily, depend on the individual circumstances.
             Those circumstances will include what role they actually play
             in caring for and making decisions in relation to the child.
             That is likely to be a most significant factor. However, it
             will also include whether that relationship arises because of
             their legal obligations as a parent or in lieu of a parent
             under a court order or other legal obligation. I accept that
             it is not necessary for an individual to have "parental
             responsibility" in law for there to exist a "parental
             relationship," although whether or not that is the case will
             be a relevant factor. What is important is that the individual
             can establish that they have taken on the role that a "parent"
             usually plays in the life of their child.


    25. First tier Judge Lever had concluded that the eldest appellant had
        taken the place of their parents. That role was extended to the
        other siblings so as to apply section 117B (6). I find no basis for
        doing this. There is reference in the letter from Manchester City
        Council dated the 31st August 2016 to B being the main carer of her
        younger siblings. Beyond that, I do not find it demonstrated that
        she is acting in a parental role. There is no legal guardianship
        nor has it been demonstrated she has acted as a de facto parent in
        relation to significant decisions. There is no evidence of a
        parental role by the other two siblings. Consequently, the
        interests of the appellants should have been balance against the
        public interest considerations in section 117B.


    26. I find section 117 B (1)-(4) weighs heavily against the appellants.
        They have been a significant burden on taxpayers. They continue to
        rely on public funds. The private life they have established here
        has developed almost entirely whilst they were here unlawfully.
        There family life together has similarly continued.

    27. The respondent intends returning all four to Nigeria. Consequently,
        the family unit will not be disrupted. Given the family history of
        deception comments made in the statements of the appellants must be
        treated with caution. For instance, the statements suggest their
        parents leaving came as a surprise and they were unaware of their
        lack of status. It is claimed they would have no support and would
        not be familiar with the language and culture of Nigeria. I reject
        this.

    28. Within the papers there is a psychiatric report from a consultant
        psychiatrist, dated 16 December 2015 in respect of E. There is
        reference to the interview-taking place via Skype. The report
        records no past history of contact with the psychiatric services.
        The report does not indicate that the doctor had access to his
        medical records. JL (medical reports-credibility) China [2013] UKUT
        00145 (IAC) called for a critical and objective analysis. The
        doctor diagnosed generalised anxiety disorder and delusional
        disorder. The later is based upon the appellant telling the doctor
        he imagines he is being watched and followed by immigration
        services. This relies upon the patients account and a diagnosis of
        delusional belief is reliant on what is relayed. The doctor
        concludes that by moving country E's stress will increase. The
        doctor goes on to state he would be moving without savings or
        access to mental health services and would likely end up destitute.
        The doctor is not in a position to say this however. The doctor
        makes no reference as to what facilities are available in Nigeria.
        I see nothing about the report that significantly enhances his
        claim. It does not indicate he is suffering from any major mental
        disability.




      Summary.

    29. I find that G does not succeed under paragraph 276 ADE (iv).This is
        because I do not find it established that it would not be
        reasonable to expect her to leave the United Kingdom. Regarding her
        freestanding article 8 rights her best interests are to be with her
        siblings. I find that section 117B (6) does not apply. The public
        interest favours their removal. Even were it in her best interest
        to remain I find this outweighed by the needs of immigration
        control in the circumstance.


Decision

The decision of First-tier Judge Lever allowing G's appeal under the
immigration rules and the appeals of the other appellants on a freestanding
article 8 basis materially errs in law and is set aside.

I remake the decision dismissing all of the appeals.

Deputy Judge Farrelly

14th June 2017






