
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24570/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22nd April 2014                            |On 13th May 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                         mr Kolawole Oladapo Fayose

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Nnamani, of Counsel instructed by Simon Bethel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 23rd September 1985.   He
    entered the United Kingdom in 2009 with leave as a student valid  until
    31st December 2012.  Shortly before the expiry of that leave he applied
    for a residence card as confirmation of his  right  to  reside  in  the
    United Kingdom on the basis of  his  marriage  to  a  Spanish  national
    exercising treaty rights.  That application was  refused  on  22nd  May
    2013.

2.   The reasons for the refusal were that on 19th April 2013 the  appellant
    and his  EEA  spouse  attended  an  interview.   Each  were  questioned
    separately.  It is said in the reasons for refusal that  a  significant
    number of inconsistent and conflicting answers were given  in  the  key
    matters of their relationship, such as to lead to the  conclusion  that
    the marriage was one of convenience.

3.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross on 7th  February  2013.   He
    upheld the concerns of  the  respondent  that  it  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience and dismissed the appeal.  Grounds of appeal were submitted
    contending that the Judge failed to follow the guidance  given  in  the
    case of Papajorgji.  Further that the Judge had failed to consider  the
    wider evidential context of the claim and in particular the evidence of
    cohabitation and the amended witness statements of the appellant and of
    his spouse.

4.   Leave to appeal was granted and thus the  matter  comes  before  me  in
    pursuance of the grant.

5.   The burden of proving that the marriage is one  of  convenience  is  on
    the respondent.  The standard of proof is the balance of probabilities.
     There is, however, an evidential burden upon the appellant to  address
    evidence justifying reasonable suspicion that  the  marriage  has  been
    entered into for the predominant purpose of securing residence  rights.
    Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience)  Greece  [2012]  UKUT
    00038 (IAC).   The Judge has set out the proper test as I  so  find  in
    paragraph 5 of the determination.

6.   In the reasons for refusal the interviews  are  tabulated  in  the  122
    questions that were asked so  as  to  show  the  answer  given  by  the
    appellant contrasting that with the answer given by the EEA sponsor.

7.   In many cases there is an agreement but it is  said  that  in  matters,
    which are of importance to the foundation in the  relationship  and  in
    particular to the circumstances  in  which  the  relationship  came  to
    develop and the marriage itself, that significant contradictions exist.



8.    The  Judge  sought  to  highlight  some  of  those  contradictions  in
    paragraph 9 of the determination.  Such contradictions related to  when
    they first went out together; when and how the  marriage  proposal  was
    made; where they went after the proposal was accepted to celebrate; the
    giving and the wearing of engagement rings and the approximate time  of
    wedding to the application for leave to remain.

9.   The Judge found at paragraph 10 that the inconsistent  answers  between
    the appellant and his wife regarding the basic matters  such  as  their
    first date, proposal,  engagement/wedding  rings,  losing  a  ring  and
    wearing a ring have not been addressed by  them.   He  did  not  accept
    their evidence that the inconsistencies could  be  explained  by  their
    confusion of the questions.  Significantly it was  noted  that  neither
    the appellant nor his wife provided any evidence from friends or family
    members as to the nature of the relationship and no reasons were  given
    why friends or family did not  attend  their  wedding.   The  Judge  in
    paragraph 12 looked at the other evidence in the bundle, in  particular
    the photographic evidence and the evidence that the appellant  and  his
    wife shared accommodation.  The  Judge  was  not  satisfied  that  such
    discharged the evidential burden upon them.

10.  Ms Nnamani, who represented the appellant at the hearing  before  Judge
    Ross and represents him before me, contended that the  Judge  had  been
    unduly dismissive of the explanations that had  been  offered  for  the
    inconsistencies.  Both the  appellant  and  his  spouse  had  travelled
    overnight and arrived in the early morning  for  the  interview.   They
    were both stressed and it is understandable in those circumstances that
    errors may occur.  Both gave that explanation  to  the  Judge  who  was
    unduly dismissive of that.

11.  The photographs were taken at various stages and  were  eloquent  of  a
    relationship.   The  documents  as  a  whole  were   eloquent   as   to
    cohabitation.  She submitted therefore that the Judge adopted an unduly
    restrictive approach to the evidence.  In particular  there  were  bank
    accounts of the appellant and payslips of the  sponsor  and  a  tenancy
    agreement all pointing towards their living at the same address.

12.  Ms Everett, on behalf of the respondent, invited me to  find  that  the
    approach taken by the Judge was a proper one in all  the  circumstances
    with cogent reasons for the suspicions as  to  the  relationship.   The
    inconsistencies were too  powerful  simply  to  be  explained  away  by
    mistake.  I was asked to find  that  the  Judge  adopted  a  consistent
    approach to the evidence in the determination.

13.  A key platform of this appeal is the contention that the Judge did  not
    have fair regard to the amended witness statements of the appellant and
    of his wife in which the inconsistencies were explained.  I turn  first
    of all to that statement of the sponsor dated 17th January 2014.

14.  The sponsor accepts in that statement that there  were  inconsistencies
    in the answers given at the interview and  that  those  inconsistencies
    occurred  because  of  their  being  unaccustomed  to   the   line   of
    questioning.  That of course was precisely the evidence which both gave
    to the Judge at the hearing and which the Judge did not accept.

15.  At paragraph 12 of that statement she  says  "I  can  confirm  that  we
    started our relationship about a week after we met  and  it  must  have
    been a slip and mistake from husband  to  state  few  months  later  as
    stated in paragraph 27 of the interview note".  That  again  highlights
    the error but gives no explanation for it.

16.  The Judge in the determination did not highlight  every  inconsistency.
    In particular were the inconsistencies identified by the respondent was
    in relation to questions 45 to 49 of the interview.  So far as the  EEA
    spouse was concerned she said that she went to see her mother in  Spain
    and before she left there had been an argument.  When she came back the
    appellant had told her that he missed her and asked her to  marry  him.
    The account given by the appellant was that when he asked her to  marry
    him everything was perfect between them, things  were  going  well  and
    that there were no problems at  all.   There  was  no  mention  of  any
    argument shortly before that event.

17.  The explanation offered by the sponsor is that prior to  travelling  to
    Spain there was an argument between the two of  them  because  she  had
    missed her flight.  He had asked her to go to the airport early so that
    she would not miss the flight.  There was therefore a  row  because  he
    had to pay for another flight the following day.   It  was  normal  for
    couples to have disagreements with each other.  She sought  to  explain
    it as being a minor issue.  The appellant in his statement at paragraph
    16 describes the matter as a minor argument.  They made up on the phone
    while she was in Spain and thus the statements made were consistent and
    not contradictory.

18.  In paragraph 18 the EEA national says that in respect of  paragraph  57
    the correct date was February 2012 and that her husband was correct not
    to say July 2012, as she had indicated, because she had mixed the month
    up due to anxiety and pressure in the course of the interview.

19.  In terms of where they had gone after the engagement he said that  they
    went to the Presidential restaurant, a few days later they went to  516
    Old Kent Road.  It may be so but it still does not explain why she  had
    said one address and the appellant had said another.

20.  The sponsor went on to say, with respect to the questions  and  answers
    in paragraphs 61, 62, 63, 64, 65 and  68  of  the  interview  that  she
    misunderstood the entire questions.

21.  She gave an explanation for the fact that neither were wearing  a  ring
    on the day of interview because the appellant needed to get one for her
    as a replacement as the other one was  lost  and  it  was  not  fitting
    properly.

22.  That does not of course explain why the appellant was not  wearing  his
    ring.  He seeks to  give  some  explanation  in  paragraph  25  of  his
    statement that he was thinking the  interviewing  officer  was  talking
    about his ring and his answer was that the ring was at home as  he  was
    not wearing it on the day of the interview.  It still begs the question
    as to why he was not wearing it at the interview.

23.  Similarly in relation to presents he indicates in  his  statement  that
    his wife received presents from his relatives while he did not  receive
    personal gifts of his own as it was a small wedding.  Why he should not
    receive any gifts on his wedding is perhaps a matter that is  far  from
    clear.

24.  Essentially the two statements seek to confirm that  inaccuracies  were
    stated.  Both sponsor and appellant fail to deal essentially  with  why
    the inaccuracies came to arise in the first  place.   Essentially  time
    and time again it is repeated  that  which  was  addressed  before  the
    Immigration Judge, namely that they were confused and that  there  were
    contradictions because they were tired.

25.  The Judge heard the evidence from both the appellant and from his  wife
    and was therefore in the best position to  judge  the  nature  of  that
    evidence and its credibility.

26.  I do not find that the statements, even if they  had  been  read  would
    have made any material difference to the outcome of the hearing by  the
    Judge.  They gave little by way of explanation  for  the  errors  which
    were significant errors in the context of the claimed relationship.

27.  I find that the Judge took all relevant matters into account in  coming
    to the conclusions which he did.  I do  not  find  that  there  is  any
    unfairness in the procedure such as to constitute an error of law.

28.  In the circumstances therefore the  appellant's  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    shall stand, namely that the appeal of the appellant in respect of  the
    2006 Regulations is dismissed as is that in relation to  Article  8  of
    the ECHR.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

