
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/24690/2014
                                                               IA/24692/2014
                                                               IA/24693/2014
                                                               IA/24694/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16 September 2015                 |On 26 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     CN
                                     DO
                                     MO
                                     UO
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Harrison (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondents:   Unrepresented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

      1. The appellant ('the SSHD') appeals against a decision of First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Roopnarine-Davies dated 10 February  2015  in  which
         the respondents' appeals were allowed to the  limited  extent  that
         the decision was not  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  remained
         outstanding.

      2. The Judge provides two reasons for taking the course that she  did,
         which I deal with in turn.

      3. First, the Judge correctly noted that the respondent's  application
         was made prior to the new Immigration Rules introduced from 9  July
         2015.  The Judge concluded that the new Rules do not apply to  such
         applications in light of Edgehill  v  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  402.
         However Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA  74  has  decided  that  upon  the
         introduction of the new  paragraph  A277C  -  with  effect  from  6
         September 2012 - the SSHD was entitled to  take  into  account  the
         provisions of Appendix FM and paragraphs 276ADE-276DH  in  deciding
         private or family life applications even if they were made prior to
         9 July 2012. The result is that the law as it was  held  to  be  in
         Edgehill only obtained as regards decisions taken in the  two-month
         window between 9 July and 6 September 2012.  Singh  is  declaratory
         of the law as it interprets Immigration Rules in place at the  time
         of the decision.  This is a case in which the SSHD  decision  under
         appeal was made on 22 May 2014, and as such  she  was  entitled  to
         apply the new Rules.  It follows that the First-tier Tribunal erred
         in law in deciding otherwise.

      4. I do not accept the submission set out  in  the  skeleton  argument
         provided to me by the first respondent that the SSHD conceded  that
         the proper course was remittal.  The Judge does not  refer  to  any
         concession on the part of the  SSHD  and  states  "I  came  to  the
         view...".

      5. Second, the Judge considered that the SSHD had not  taken  material
         matters into account.  The decision letter is a  detailed  document
         that addresses the  children's  best  interests  and  the  relevant
         circumstances before her at the  time.   If  there  was  additional
         evidence or detail to be considered it is difficult to see why this
         could not be addressed by the Tribunal.  MK (section 55 -  Tribunal
         options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 00223 (IAC) is authority for  the
         proposition that one of the options available to the Tribunal where
         it finds there has been a breach of section  55  is  remittal.   MK
         serves as a reminder that the decision in AJ (India) v SSHD  [2011]
         EWCA Civ 1191 is authority for the proposition that where the First-
         tier Tribunal decides that  a  decision  of  the  SSHD  is  not  in
         accordance with the law on account of a failure  to  discharge  the
         first of the s 55 duties the Tribunal is not obliged to  remit  the
         case to the Secretary of State for a fresh decision.

      6. The Judge has not found a breach of section 55 on the part  of  the
         SSHD but has rather found the analysis lacking.  In any event, even
         if the Judge was entitled to consider the s 55 duty as having  been
         breached he should have gone on to  consider  whether  this  should
         result in a remittal to the SSHD or whether  he  could  and  should
         consider the matter himself.  In  failing  to  consider  this,  the
         Judge has erred in law.  Further, there is no indication  that  the
         Judge has considered the detailed bundle of evidence  available  to
         determine the correct option in this case and whether it was indeed
         remittal.  This is a case in which the SSHD has already  considered
         best interests and there was no need for  this  to  be  done  again
         simply  because  there  was  more  detailed  and  updated  evidence
         available.  The Judge has given no consideration has been given  to
         this evidence or the desirability of  finality  and  promptness  in
         decision-making.

      7. I accept that the position regarding the first appellant's  husband
         and  her  youngest  child  is  uncertain.   At  present  the   only
         appellants are the mother and her three older children. At the time
         of the  application  the  first  appellant  and  her  husband  were
         separated.  Since the date of decision they have lived together  as
         a family unit and have another child. Although I do not  understand
         there to be removal directions made in respect  of  the  husband  /
         father, he has no leave to remain and the  SSHD's  contention  that
         the family members can return as a family unit remains  sound.   It
         would however be helpful for the SSHD to  clarify  the  immigration
         status of the husband and youngest child.

      8. By paragraph 7.2 of the relevant practice statement for appeals  on
         or after 25 September 2012, I must be satisfied that:

             "... the nature or extent of any judicial fact  finding  which
             is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2 it is appropriate to remit the case  to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

      9.  In  all  the  circumstances  I  am  satisfied  that  it  would  be
         proportionate to remit the case to the  First-tier  Tribunal  given
         the nature and extent  of  fact  finding  that  needs  to  be  made
         regarding the children's circumstances  and  whether  it  would  be
         reasonable to expect them to return to Nigeria.

Decision

     10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  a
         material error of law and I set it aside.

Directions

    (1)    The SSHD shall file upon the First-tier Tribunal and serve  upon
         the first respondent a position statement outlining the immigration
         status of the first appellant's husband and youngest child, whether
         immigration decisions have been made in relation to them and if  so
         whether any appeals should be linked to these appeals.

    (2)    14 days before the hearing the respondents shall file and  serve
         evidence to support the submission that it  would  be  unreasonable
         for the children to be removed with their mother and if appropriate
         father, as part of a family unit.

    (3)    The hearing shall be listed  on  the  first  available  date  at
         Manchester IAC.  TE 2 hrs.



Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
17 September 2015

