

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24865/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice            |Decision & Reasons promulgated |
|On 1 October 2018                           |On 22 October 2018             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                    [R L]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Saini instructed by Universal Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Wilding Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This  appeal  has  a  long  procedural  history.  The  respondent's
        decision under challenge is the refusal of  an  application  for  a
        residence card as the family member of an EEA  national  exercising
        treaty rights in the United Kingdom dated 24 June 2015.
     2. The appellant, a national of the Philippines  born  on  29  January
        1974, claimed to be fully financially dependent upon her stepfather
        Mr [PE], a citizen of the Republic of Ireland, who is  the  partner
        of the appellant's mother, a British citizen.
     3. The EEA national and the appellant's mother  are  not  married  but
        have  lived  together  as  an  unmarried  couple  since  1994.  The
        appellant states all three adults live in  the  same  household  at
        Pinner in Middlesex.
     4. First-Tribunal Judge Moan dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  in  a
        decision dated 3 April 2016. Permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
        Tribunal was granted  on  7  September  2016  by  Designated  Judge
        Appleyard (as he  then  was).  On  17  October  2016  Deputy  Upper
        Tribunal  Judge  Chapman  adjourned  the  Initial  hearing  set  to
        determine whether a material error of law  had  been  made  in  the
        decision to dismiss the appeal, giving appropriate case  management
        directions. The 24 July 2017 the Upper  Tribunal  reconvened  in  a
        panel composed of Upper Tribunal Judge  Rintoul  and  Deputy  Upper
        Tribunal Chapman. In a decision handed down on 13 October  2017  it
        was found there was no material error of law in the decision of the
        First-Tier Tribunal which was upheld.
     5. The Upper Tribunal considered an alternative argument  put  forward
        by Mr Saini as to whether or not  the  appellant  qualified  as  an
        extended family member pursuant to  regulation  8(2)  of  the  2006
        Regulations but  found  that  following  Sala  [2016]  UKUT  00411,
        promulgated on 19 August 2016 which post-dated the promulgation  of
        the First-Tier Tribunal decision, there was no statutory  right  of
        appeal against the decision not to grant  a  Residence  Card  to  a
        person claiming to be an extended family member. The panel did  not
        consider  it  appropriate  to  entertain  arguments   designed   to
        challenge the reasoning underlying the decision in Sala in light of
        the fact the matter was to be shortly  considered  by  the  Supreme
        Court.
     6. Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul, following the decision of  the  Court
        of  Appeal  in  Khan,  which  found  Sala  was  wrong  a   position
        subsequently upheld by the Supreme Court, directed pursuant to Rule
        45(i)(b) of the Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  that  the  Upper
        Tribunal intended to set aside the decision of 13 October 2017. The
        direction is dated 21 February 2018.
     7. On 19 April 2018 Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul set the  decision  of
        13 October 2017 aside in accordance with the earlier direction.
     8.  On  20  July  2018  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kebede  adjourned  the
        reconvened Initial hearing, with directions, leading to the  matter
        being relisted on 1 October 2018.
     9. An application to adjourn this hearing  on  the  basis  the  chosen
        advocate was not available, was refused by the  Upper  Tribunal  on
        the papers. The appellant is represented today by Mr Saini who  has
        prior knowledge of and involvement in the case. No fairness  issues
        arise.



Error of law


    10. Mr Saini relied upon his earlier written submissions considered  by
        the panel chaired by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul in support of the
        appellant's assertion that he is a family member of an EEA national
        and the alternative claim of an entitlement to a residence card  as
        an extended family member.
    11. The relevant parts  of  Mr  Saini's  submissions  set  out  in  his
        skeleton argument are in the following terms:


                i. the  term  "family  member"  is  not  confined  to  blood
                   relatives cf. Dulger [2012] EUECJ C-451/11  at  [23]  and
                   Alarape  [2011]  UKUT  443  (IAC)  (Article  12,  EC  Reg
                   1612/68) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 413 (IAC) in which the Upper
                   Tribunal found that, although undefined in  the  European
                   Regulations, the term "child" should be read  to  include
                   "stepchild".  Mr  Saini  asserted  that   there   is   no
                   preclusion or  restriction  stating  that  a  stepchild's
                   parent must be married to the qualifying person;


               ii. to distinguish her is not being a stepchild  due  to  her
                   mother and partner not  being  married  (or  in  a  civil
                   partnership) would be an act of  indirect  discrimination
                   and will be in contravention of European law via  Council
                   Directive 2000/78/EC article 1  and  a  contravention  of
                   domestic law via the Equality Act 2010 cf. Bull & Anor  v
                   Hall and Anor [2013] UKSC 73  and  regulation  3  of  the
                   Equality Act (Sexual Orientation) Regulations 2007;

              iii. it is implicit from the decision of the FtTJ  at  [49]  -
                   [50] that the appellant has been  dependent  on  the  EEA
                   national since her arrival in the United Kingdom in  2004
                   and she is thus entitled to a residence card pursuant  to
                   regulation 7(1)(b)(ii) of the EEA Regulations;


    12. The submission in the alternative that the decision  of  the  Upper
        Tribunal in Sala had been wrongly decided need not be set out as it
        is now settled law that that submission is correct.
    13. The respondent's position is to maintain there is no arguable error
        of law on the basis the appellant is neither a  family  member  nor
        extended family member of an EEA national exercising treaty rights.
    14. The first issue is whether the appellant is a 'family member' under
        the Directive.
    15. The decision of the Judge was that the appellant did not qualify as
        a family member under regulation 7(1). The Judge records at [17] of
        the decision under challenge that it was agreed before her that the
        appellant could not qualify under regulation 7(1)(a)(b) or (d), the
        question being whether she qualified under regulation 7(1)(c) as  a
        dependent direct relative in an ascending line. The Judge finds the
        appellant is precluded from qualifying under regulation 7(1)(b)  on
        the basis of her age as she is over 21, and as she is a  descendant
        and not an ascendant and is precluded from qualifying as a  'family
        member' under regulation 7(1)(c); leaving the issue that of whether
        the appellant was able to qualify as an extended family member.
    16. Although the earlier decision of Upper Tribunal Judge  Rintoul  and
        Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman was set aside for  the  reasons
        set out above, the analysis of the question of  whether  there  was
        any error in the conclusion  the  appellant  did  not  satisfy  the
        definition of a family member was  not  arguably  infected  by  the
        subsequent decision relating to whether an extended  family  member
        has a right of appeal.
    17. At [19] the Judge writes: "What I considered to be  significant  in
        regulation 7(1)(c) is  the  wording  "ascending  line".  Regulation
        7(1)(b) uses the phrase "descendants" to make it  clear  that  this
        means children. Descendants is not used in regulation 7(1)(c)."
    18. The Judge appears to have made an error of law finding  the  phrase
        'descendants' in relation to  7(1)(b)  relates  only  to  children.
        Whilst this interpretation is arguably  permitted  in  relation  to
        regulation 7(1)(b)(i) which provides for direct  descendant  of  an
        EEA national,  his  spouse  or  civil  partner  who  is  under  21,
        subsection (ii) makes provision for "dependence of his, his  spouse
        or civil partner". The Judge did not consider whether  or  not  the
        appellant is a dependent of an EEA national, his  spouse  or  civil
        partner  within  the  meaning  of  regulation  7(1)(b)(ii)  of  the
        Regulations.
    19. The issue is,  as  it  has  always  been,  whether  such  error  is
        material. Mr Saini's position has always been that it is unlawfully
        discriminatory to treat the appellant who he claims is the de facto
        stepchild of an EEA national by virtue of  her  mother's  unmarried
        relationship with Mr [PE] as falling outside the  definition  of  a
        family member for the purposes of regulation 7.
    20. It is not disputed regulation 7 is  concerned  with  direct  family
        members and does  not  encompass  unmarried  partnerships  but  any
        allegation of unlawful discrimination is not arguably made out  for
        the reasons set out in the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
        and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman which I repeat and adopt in
        this determination and which are written in the following terms:


                i. There is provision for  unmarried  partnerships  (durable
                   relationships) as extended  family  members  pursuant  to
                   regulation 8. Whilst the provisions of regulation  8  are
                   less  favourable.......  The  decision   to   distinguish
                   between marriage/civil partners and unmarried partners is
                   deliberate and reflects their differing legal status.


               ii. There has always been a distinction between a  descendant
                   and  a  dependent  and   between   family   members   and
                   descendants, who are different in that one is a subset of
                   the other. The Association Agreement was drafted  on  the
                   basis of family members, who  are  defined  at  10[1]  of
                   Council Directive 2004/68 which predates the  Regulations
                   and the distinction between the different groups has been
                   maintained and carried through.

              iii. We accept that the  jurisprudence  upon  which  Mr  Saini
                   sought to rely recognises the rights of stepchildren  and
                   the fact that "family member" in EU law terms encompasses
                   non-blood relations cf. Dulger [2012] EUECJ C - 451/11 at
                   [23]; Ayaz [2004] EUECJ C - 275/02 at [46] and  [48]  and
                   Alarape (Article 12, EC Reg 1612/68) Nigeria [2011]  UKUT
                   413 (IAC) but these cases concerned the stepchildren of a
                   marriage and not a de facto  stepchild  as  is  the  case
                   before us.
               iv. We further do not accept that the  Equality  Act  (Sexual
                   Orientation) Regulations 2007 assist us, given  that  the
                   complaint of discrimination relates to marital status and
                   the position would be identical were the appellant to  be
                   the de facto stepchild of an unmarried gay couple. Whilst
                   in Bull v Hall [2013] UKSC 73 the Supreme Court found  in
                   favour of a couple in a civil partnership  on  the  basis
                   that they had been subjected to discriminatory  treatment
                   by the refusal of a Christian  hotel  keeper  to  provide
                   them with a double-bedded  room,  the  Appellants  had  a
                   protected characteristic vis  their  sexual  orientation.
                   However, Mr Saini was unable to  identify  the  protected
                   characteristic in playing this case. We do  not  consider
                   that  the  fact  of  being  unmarried  partners  or   the
                   descendant of  an  unmarried  partner  can  constitute  a
                   protected characteristic.


                v. Similarly, whilst in R ota Brewster [2017]  UKHL  8,  the
                   Supreme Court found in favour of an unmarried partner  in
                   respect of a right to receive a survivor's  pension,  the
                   legal  right  was  established  by  way  of   the   Local
                   Government  Pension  Scheme   (Benefits,   Membership   &
                   Contributions) Regulations (Northern Ireland) 2009, which
                   made express provision for  the  right  of  a  cohabiting
                   surviving partner to receive a  survivor's  pension.  The
                   issue in the case  was  the  fact  that  she  had  to  be
                   nominated by the member and the administrating  body  had
                   not received the nomination  form.  Their  Lordships  per
                   Lord  Kerr  disapplied  the  requirement  for  nomination
                   essentially on the basis of proportionality, in order  to
                   give effect to the objective  which  was  to  remove  the
                   difference   in   treatment   between   a   long-standing
                   cohabitant and  a  married  or  civil  partner.  The  EEA
                   Regulations have  a  different  objective,  which  is  to
                   preserve family unity whilst  maintaining  a  distinction
                   between direct and extended family members on  the  basis
                   of inter alia marital status.

               vi.  It  is  further  clear  from  both  the  law   and   the
                   jurisprudence  that  some  forms  of  discrimination  are
                   permissible. It is not unlawful to  discriminate  against
                   an unmarried person under the Sex Discrimination Act 1975
                   or now the Equality Act 2010. Being an  unmarried  person
                   is not, in itself, a protected characteristic. Thus being
                   the child or descendant of an unmarried  person  is  also
                   not a protected characteristic.

              vii. Moreover, the logical effect of Mr  Saini's  argument  is
                   that,  whilst  the  Appellant's  mother   falls   to   be
                   considered as an extended  family  member  by  virtue  of
                   being the unmarried (durable) partner of an EEA national,
                   the Appellant is entitled to be recognised  as  a  family
                   member. This is not only inconsistent but perverse.


    21. It was not made out that any amendments to the equality legislation
        or recent decided authorities  warrant  departing  from  the  above
        conclusion.
    22.  Whilst  there  are  errors  in  the  decision  of  the  First-Tier
        Tribunal's decision they have not been shown to be material,  given
        that the appellant does not qualify as  the  dependent  of  an  EEA
        national, his spouse or civil partner within regulation 7  (1)  (b)
        (ii) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 as amended.
    23. In relation  to  the  submissions  in  the  alternative,  that  the
        appellant is able to succeed as an extended family member  pursuant
        to regulation 8 of the 2006 regulations, the Judge  notes  at  [22]
        that it is not disputed that the appellant was not a family  member
        of the EEA nationals household in the Philippines and  that  it  is
        disputed that the appellant was dependent upon the EEA national  in
        the Philippines. At [23] the Judge records that it is  agreed  that
        the appellant is a member of the household of the EEA  national  in
        the UK albeit that it is disputed that the appellant  is  dependent
        on the EEA national in the UK and at  [24]  that  it  is  therefore
        'dependency' that is in dispute and that  if  the  appellant  could
        show dependency in the Philippines on the EEA  national  she  would
        have fulfilled one of the criteria recognised by the Upper Tribunal
        in Dauhoo (EEA regulations -reg  8(2))  [2012]  UKUT  79  of  prior
        dependency and present membership of the household.
    24. The Judge considered the  evidence  with  the  required  degree  of
        anxious scrutiny before setting  out  findings  from  [36]  of  the
        decision under challenge which in relation to this  issue  are  the
        following terms:


             36.  The Guidance from  the  Home  Office  entitled  "Extended
                  family members of EEA nationals" dated 7 April 2015 states
                  that  an  applicant  must  submit  financial  evidence  of
                  dependency such as  bank  statements  or  money  transfers
                  between the EEA National and the extended  family  member.
                  The Guidance does not specify how much information must be
                  provided.


             37.   Between  1996  and  2004  five  remittance  slips   were
                  provided. I note that two large remittances were  sent  to
                  the Appellant in the two months  prior  to  the  Appellant
                  coming to the UK in March 2004. Other than those transfers
                  in 2004 there are 3 payment slips between  1996  and  2004
                  for that 7-8 year period. I would  have  expected  to  see
                  many more payment slips if 12  monthly  payments  or  more
                  were paid per year over such a long period.


             38.  The Appellant was less than specific about her  financial
                  leads whilst in the Philippines. She said that she  needed
                  15,000 Peso a month to survive. All of the transfers  made
                  to the Appellant were for less than 15,000 Peso other than
                  the one made in February 2004.


             39.  Whilst I accept that I do not need to  have  evidence  to
                  show that the Appellant's mother was covering all  of  the
                  expenses of the Appellant in the Philippines, I am unclear
                  as to how the Appellant maintained herself bearing in mind
                  the shortfall between the sums sent by her mother and  her
                  expenses. I was not given a breakdown of what  income  was
                  required and how it was met in the Philippines.


             40.  The  evidence  given  by  the  Appellant  was  less  than
                  satisfactory. She suggested that she  was  still  studying
                  when her mother started  to  send  money  in  1997/8.  The
                  Appellant later said that she finished studying  when  she
                  was 22 years (i.e. 1996). This was inconsistent.


             41.  The Appellant said that she started to receive money from
                  her mother in 1998. Mr [PE] was clear  that  in  1997  the
                  Appellant's mother was left unemployed and without a  home
                  and so started to live with him. The evidence on the money
                  transfer from 1996 shows that the Appellant's  mother  was
                  at that time living with Mr [PE].


             42.  During the hearing both the Appellant and Mr [PE] gave  a
                  piece of evidence in almost  identical  terms.  They  both
                  said that that the Appellant's mother suffered a stroke in
                  2011 and had been hospitalised every year since 2011.  The
                  latter part of that sentence being offered voluntarily and
                  not as a result of a direct question. It was  striking  to
                  me that the Appellant and Mr [PE] both voluntarily said at
                  the Appellant's mother had been "hospitalised  every  year
                  since 2011" without prompting and in identical  terms.  It
                  left me with the impression that some of the evidence  may
                  have been rehearsed.


             43.  It is  also  interesting  that  the  Appellant  had  held
                  employment whilst in the UK as a nanny but  that  Mr  [PE]
                  gave evidence that she had not been employed. I  found  it
                  hard to understand why Mr [PE] would not know that she had
                  been working when she lived in his household.


             44.  I note that the money was sent by the Appellant's  mother
                  and not Mr [PE] but I am less concerned with  this  factor
                  as I note that Mr [PE] said that  he  gave  money  to  the
                  appellant's mother for the appellant.


             45.  What I am less certain about  is  the  frequency  of  the
                  payments to the Appellant, these have certainly  not  been
                  established by the documentary evidence and  whether  each
                  and every of the payments made to the Appellant were  from
                  Mr [PE]'s  resources  and  not  that  of  the  Appellant's
                  mother.


             46.  I have been given no breakdown of  the  essential  living
                  expenses of the Appellant and I have some  concerns  about
                  the accuracy of the evidence on behalf  of  the  Appellant
                  due  to  inaccuracies  about  dates  and  concerns   about
                  reliability.


             47.  I am not satisfied that the Appellant has proved  on  the
                  balance of probabilities that she was dependent on Mr [PE]
                  prior to coming to the UK.


    25. Mr Saini submitted the Judge had erred as the requisite element  of
        dependency had been established on the evidence. The Judge accepted
        that funds had been sent  and  the  frequency  of  the  same  which
        satisfied the requirements of dependency.
    26. Mr Saini sought to reply upon the decision in  Rahman  [2012]  CJEU
        Case-83/11 (which followed a reference to the CJEU in  MR  and  Ors
        (EEA extended family members) Bangladesh [2010] UKUT 449 (IAC))  in
        which the CJEU considered the  issue  of  dependency  for  extended
        family members.
    27. What is important to note in relation to  his  submission  is  that
        Rahman was only concerned with the issue of dependency and not with
        being a member of the same household; and  second,  in  Rahman  the
        CJEU was not being asked about extended  family  members  who  were
        already in the  UK  seeking  leave  to  remain  here.   Rahman  was
        concerned with a Bangladeshi national seeking leave from Bangladesh
        to join an EEA national in the UK. In that context, the  CJEU  held
        that in order to fall within the  definition  of  'Extended  Family
        Member' on the basis of dependency on an EEA national, there is  no
        requirement for the applicant to reside in a country in  which  the
        Union citizen has previously resided, whether recently or  at  all.
        The term "Country from which they have come" is, in the case  of  a
        national of a third state who declares that he is a dependent of  a
        Union Citizen, the state in which he (the third  country  national)
        was resident on the date when he applied to accompany or  join  the
        Union citizen".  The CJEU went on to say that, while ties may exist
        without the family member and the Union citizen having  resided  in
        the same state or without there having been dependency on the Union
        citizen shortly before or at the time the Union citizen  coming  to
        the UK, "the situation of dependence must  exist,  in  the  country
        from which the family member concerned comes, at the time  when  he
        applies to join the Union citizen on whom he is dependent."
    28.  The  appellant  is  already  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Suggested
        approaches to this question in such circumstances  include  (i)  to
        proceed on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant  only  needs  to  show
        dependency in the country he is in  at  the  date  of  application,
        which would mean the UK if he is already here.  However, Rahman was
        not dealing with the situation where the Appellant was  already  in
        the UK and the CJEU in Rahman was not specifically asked to rule on
        that question. When the Appellant is in the  UK  such  an  approach
        would be hard to reconcile with the wording of Article 3.2 and  the
        EEA Regulations,   (ii) to  proceed  on  the  basis  that,  if  the
        Appellant must, as the  Article  states,  show  dependency  in  the
        "country from which he has come"  then,  in  line  with  the  broad
        thrust in Rahman, that means the last  country  the  Appellant  was
        resident in before she arrived in the UK and made her  application,
        there being no requirement for the applicant to have resided  in  a
        country in which the Union citizen has previously resided  (on  the
        dependency test), or (iii) to distinguish Rahman. The  approach  by
        the Judge is that set out at (ii) above.
    29. The Judge clearly examined the evidence of made available  and  the
        conclusion the appellant failed  to  establish  she  satisfied  the
        requisite test has not been shown to be an  irrational  finding  or
        one not reasonably available to the Judge on the evidence.
    30. It is also important to note another point recorded by the  earlier
        panel at [14] - [15] where it is written:


             14.  In respect of the issue of dependency, Mr Saini submitted
                  that this had been accepted by First Tier  Tribunal  Judge
                  Moan. His attention was drawn to the decision of the First-
                  tier Tribunal Judge at [38] and  [39]  of  the  First-tier
                  Tribunal Judge's decision and [47] where the Judge  stated
                  that she was not satisfied that prior dependency had  been
                  established. Consequently, the Appellant could not qualify
                  in any event as she did not previously live  in  the  same
                  household nor was she dependent on the  EEA  national,  on
                  the findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


             15.  Mr Saini sought to challenge these findings, however,  we
                  indicated that we were not prepared to permit at this late
                  stage a challenge to the findings  of  fact  made  by  the
                  First-Tier Tribunal and that it was  long  past  the  time
                  that challenge could be made, particularly given  that  no
                  reasons had been provided as to why  this  issue  was  not
                  dealt with in the  initial  grounds  and  it  was  not  an
                  immediately obvious point. In effect it was an out of time
                  application to challenge a decision on a particular  point
                  and it could  not  be  said  that  the  point  is  clearly
                  meritorious thus we refused the application to  amend  the
                  grounds of appeal.


    31. No further application to amend the grounds has been made  and  the
        situation remains as set out above, that there is no  challenge  to
        the factual findings of the Judge upon which permission  to  appeal
        has been granted. No obvious point warranting consideration of what
        may be a further grounds of challenge has been made out.
    32. I find the appellant has failed to discharge the  burden  of  proof
        upon her to the required standard to show that the Judge has  erred
        in law in a manner material to the decision to dismiss  the  appeal
        under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations.


Decision

    33. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    34. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 18 October 2018












