







Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

              Appeal Number: IA/24311/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 29 January 2016                    |On 8 April 2016                 |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mr frank owusu
                       (anonymity direction nOT mADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms H. Masih, Counsel instructed by Brys Immigration
Consultants



                            DECISION ON ERROR LAW

   1. For ease of reference I shall continue to refer to the parties as the
      Appellant and the Respondent as they were in the First-tier Tribunal,
      although it is the Secretary of State who brings this appeal to the
      Upper Tribunal.


   2. The Appellant's appeal is against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
      Judge J Pacey whereby she had dismissed his appeal against the
      Respondent's decision to refuse a Residence Card under the Immigration
      (EEA) Regulations.


   3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge J.M.
      Holmes noting that:


   a) The Respondent had considered that there was no lawful marriage or if
      there was then it was a marriage of convenience;
   b) It was arguable that the Judge either failed to apply guidance from
      case law or failed to give adequate reasons as to why the Appellant
      was a spouse as defined in the EEA Regulations;
   c) If the Appellant was an Extended Family Member then the Judge did not
      refer herself to the case law;
   d) Even if the requirements of Regulation 8 were made out, the Judge
      should not simply have allowed the appeal because in doing so neither
      she nor the Respondent had considered how the Regulation 17 discretion
      should be exercised. The grant of a Residence Card to an EFM is a two
      stage process and the second stage had yet to be undertaken.


   4. Mr Mills said that an agreement had been reached. The First-tier
      Tribunal Judge had allowed the appeal based on Regulation 7. The Judge
      had done this with reference to Kareem (Proxy marriages- EU Law)
      [2014] UKUT 24. The significance of Kareem was that the evidence was
      insufficient on its own. The Panel had said it did not know how it
      applies in practice. Had the Judge properly understood Kareem in this
      case then there needed to be specific evidence from the EEA country of
      nationality. References to codes are never sufficient. But then the
      Judge allowed the appeal outright. But the discretion is to Secretary
      of State to do so. It should be sent back for that discretion to be
      applied. Mr Mills said the decision should be set aside. It should be
      remade and then a lawful decision would be awaited before the
      Secretary of State in respect of Regulation 17(4).


   5. Ms Masih referred to the Rule 24 Reply. That said in summary that:


   a) Contrary to the grant of permission by Judge Holmes the Appellant had
      valid leave to remain at the time of the application and the Reasons
      for Refusal Letter does not detail a poor immigration history;
   b) There is no error of law in Judge Pacey's decision because (i) The
      Judge had noted that there was an expert report which confirmed the
      validity of the customary marriage, (ii) The Judge referred to the
      guidance in Kareem and she noted that there was no challenge by the
      Presenting Officer to the provisions of the Dutch Civil Code and (iii)
      it was open to the Judge to allow the appeal;
   c) Judge Pacey's findings in respect of "durable relationship" ought to
      be preserved because the Secretary of State had not challenged the
      same.

   6. Ms Masih said that the Judge was entitled to make the finding that she
      did. She said she had no evidence that Holland would accept the
      marriage as a valid marriage. Ms Masih said she did not have evidence
      one way or the other. However the case of TA and others (Kareem
      explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316 does say you need more. Ms Masih
      submitted that there were findings in respect of Regulation 8(5) and
      those findings ought to be preserved. The grounds were not challenged.
      The Respondent does not challenge Regulation 8(5) and the Appellant
      does not challenge Regulation 17(4) regarding the exercise of
      discretion. The grant of permission by Judge Holmes says that the
      Appellant is an overstayer but that is incorrect. Ms Masih said I
      should set aside the decision of the Judge. I should remake it and the
      send the matter to the Secretary of State for her to apply her
      discretion in respect of the durable relationship.


   7. Mr Mills in reply said that although marriage of convenience is
      referred to in the grant of permission it was never the Secretary of
      State's case that that it was such. I was invited to allow the appeal
      to the extent referred to.


   8. I had reserved my decision.


   9. I note the generally agreed position in respect of both parties. I
      also note the Judge's findings in respect of the alternative case in
      respect of the durable relationship. Those facts remain unchallenged
      and in view of the concessions made by both parties my decision is as
      follows.


  10. Firstly, there was a material error of law when the Judge found that
      there was a valid marriage according to Ghanaian Law. In view of the
      decision in TA that was the wrong decision. The parties were in
      agreement about this aspect. There was insufficient evidence of a
      valid marriage.


  11. Secondly, the remaining issue is in respect of Regulation 8 of the
      Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  The Appellant seeks to contend he
      is an Extended Family Member because he is in a durable relationship
      with Ms Abrebese, a Dutch national.


  12. Judge Pacey's decision at paragraphs 25 and 26 remains unchallenged
      and were conceded before me. The Judge found that the Appellant was
      indeed in a durable relationship. She noted the property documents,
      council tax documents, utility bills, business documents and more. The
      couple had been living together for much more than two years.


  13. In my judgment it is clear that therefore Regulation 8(5) is clearly
      met in this case. The evidence of the couple having lived together for
      more than two years (since at least March 2013) was and is strong. The
      evidence of their everyday bills and general life was clearly set out
      and accepted by the Judge and has remained the case with the further
      documents submitted before me. There is no aspect which is not met.


  14. I therefore conclude that Regulation 8(5) is met.


  15. The matter does not end there though. The issue of a Residence Card to
      an Extended Family Member is a two stage process. The second stage is
      a matter of discretion. That discretion has not yet been considered by
      the Secretary of State.  I allow the appeal to the extent of requiring
      that discretion to be applied. Namely I find that the Appellant is in
      a durable relationship for the purposes of Regulation 8(5). I leave
      the matter of whether discretion will be exercised in the Appellant's
      favour or not to the Secretary of State pursuant to Regulation 17(4).




Notice of Decision

    The Judge's decision contains a material error of law. I set it aside.
    I remake the decision and allow the appeal to the limited extent
    referred to above in respect of Regulation 8(5) of the Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006 with discretion to be considered by the
    Secretary of State pursuant to Regulation 17(4).

      There is no anonymity order made.








Signed                                             Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
