
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/24934/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 October 2013                            |On 9 December 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                              zahoor ullah khan

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr F Junior, UK Immigration Consultants
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and his  date  of  birth  is  25
    October 1983.

 2. This is an appeal against the decision dated 13 January 2013 of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart which dismissed the appellant's appeal
    against the respondent's decision of 19 October 2012 which refused  him
    further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under the
    points-based system.

 3. The only reason for refusal in the decision of 19 October 2012 was that
    the appellant  had  not  shown  that  he  could  meet  the  maintenance
    requirement as set out in paragraph 1A(h) of Appendix C of HC 395  (the
    Immigration Rules) and he therefore could not meet the requirements  of
    the substantive Immigration Rule which is  paragraph  245ZX(d)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  This was because he had submitted a bank  statement
    showing a balance only on one day, that being 3 July 2012.

 4. It was not disputed that by the time this matter came before First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart the appellant had  provided  an  additional
    bank statement to that which was before  the  respondent.   The  second
    bank statement, the original of which was before me, showed the balance
    in the same account from 1 June 2012 to 14 December 2012.

 5. It was accepted for the respondent that  this  document,  had  it  been
    before  the  respondent,  could  have  shown   that   the   maintenance
    requirements were met.

 6. However, at [8] of Judge Bart-Stewart's decision she indicates that she
    was precluded from accepting in evidence that second bank statement  by
    the provisions of Section 85(4) of the 2002 Immigration Act.

 7. Before me Mr Junior maintained that the provisions of  paragraph  245AA
    meant that the respondent should have contacted the appellant prior  to
    making the decision to request the more complete second bank statement.

 8. Paragraph 245AA states:

        245AA. Documents not submitted with applications

        (a) Where Part 6A or any appendices referred to in Part 6A state
        that specified documents must be provided, the UK Border Agency
        will only consider documents that have been submitted with the
        application, and will only consider documents submitted after the
        application where they are submitted in accordance with
        subparagraph (b).

        (b) If the applicant has submitted:

        (i) A sequence of documents and some of the documents in the
        sequence have been omitted (for example, if one bank statement from
        a series is missing);

        (ii) A document in the wrong format; or

        (iii) A document that is a copy and not an original document, the
        UK Border Agency may contact the applicant or his representative in
        writing, and request the correct documents. The requested documents
        must be received by the UK Border Agency at the address specified
        in the request within 7 working days of the date of the request.

        (c) The UK Border Agency will not request documents where a
        specified document has not been submitted (for example an English
        language certificate is missing), or where the UK Border Agency
        does not anticipate that addressing the omission or error referred
        to in subparagraph (b) will lead to a grant because the application
        will be refused for other reasons.

        (d) If the applicant has submitted a specified document:

        (i) in the wrong format, or

        (ii) that is a copy and not an original document,

        the application may be granted exceptionally, providing the UK
        Border Agency is satisfied that the specified documents are genuine
        and the applicant meets all the other requirements. The UK Border
        Agency reserves the right to request the specified original
        documents in the correct format in all cases where (b) applies, and
        to refuse applications if these documents are not provided as set
        out in (b).


 9. Mr Junior maintained that the original bank  statement  at  D1  of  the
    respondent's bundle and the corresponding letter from the  bank  at  D2
    should be considered as a  "sequence"  of  documents  as  described  in
    paragraph 245AA(b)(i).

10. I did not find that I could agree with Mr Junior.  It did not appear to
    me that the single bank statement showing a balance  on  a  single  day
    taken together with a letter from the bank  could  be  described  as  a
    "sequence of documents" from which  it  could  be  said  "some  of  the
    documents in the sequence have been omitted".  I therefore did not find
    that paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules required  the  respondent
    to contact the appellant to obtain a fuller bank statement.

11. In the alternative Mr Junior sought to rely on a more recent version of
    paragraph 245AA which allows for the respondent to contact an applicant
    for further documents where a specified document is missing.   However,
    Mr  Junior  conceded  that  this  additional  provision  at   paragraph
    245AA(b)(iv) was not in force until October 2013 and therefore  not  at
    the date of decision or even the date of  hearing  before  Judge  Bart-
    Stewart.  Where that was so, I  did  not  find  that  these  provisions
    applied to this appellant.  It is also difficult to see  that  in  this
    case a document was missing so as to require the respondent to  contact
    the appellant for  more  where  the  appellant  had  submitted  a  bank
    statement, albeit one that could not meet the maintenance  requirements
    in the Immigration Rules.

12. It was therefore not my view that Judge Bart-Stewart  erred.  Even  had
    she been asked to consider paragraph 245AA and had done so, this  could
    not have assisted the appellant.

13. I found that the appeal could not succeed  and  that  the  decision  of
    Judge Bart-Stewart did not disclose an error on a point of law.



Decision

14. It is my view that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not
    disclose an error on a point of law and shall stand.

Signed:  [pic]                               Date: 14 November 2013
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
