

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/24121/2014
                                                               IA/19921/2014
                                                               IA/20120/2014
                                                               IA/20122/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4 July 2016                            |On 7 July 2016                   |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN



                                   Between


                          ROBERT ALEXANDER BOSWELL
                      GEORGIA FELICIA FORSYTHE-BOSWELL
                            (AND TWO DEPENDENTS)
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J. Norman, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Pritchard, Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    In a decision promulgated on 02 December 2015 the Upper  Tribunal  set
    aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the  appellants'
    appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse leave to  remain  on
    human rights grounds [annexed]. A  brief  summary  of  the  appellants'
    immigration history is contained in the error of law decision [1-3].

2.    In November 2015 the central issue in the appeal was whether it  would
    be reasonable to expect the two dependent children  of  the  family  to
    leave the UK. Directions were made for the parties  to  serve  detailed
    skeleton arguments.  In  the  intervening  period  the  Upper  Tribunal
    discussed many of the relevant legal issues in PD and Others (Article 8
    - conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108.

3.    At the date of the resumed hearing  the  appellants'  oldest  daughter
    "R" had just turned 18 years old. She entered the UK in  December  2002
    and has been continuously resident for a period of over 14 years. Their
    youngest daughter "A" was born in the UK in October 2006. At  the  date
    of the hearing she is nine years old and has been continuously resident
    in the UK for a period just short of the 10 years required for  her  to
    be eligible to register as a British citizen.

4.     The  first  and  second  appellant  attended  the  hearing  and  gave
    evidence. I was told that R also attended  the  tribunal.  She  decided
    that she did not want to give evidence and waited outside  the  hearing
    room. I have taken into account the evidence given by the witnesses  as
    well as the documentary evidence before the tribunal. I have also taken
    into account the submissions made by both parties before  coming  to  a
    decision in this appeal.

Legal Framework

5.    Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights  protects  the
    right to private and family life. However, it is not an absolute right.
    The state is able to lawfully interfere with an appellant's private and
    family life as long as it is  pursuing  a  legitimate  aim  and  it  is
    necessary and proportionate in all the circumstances of the  case.  The
    starting point is the basic principle that a state  has  the  right  to
    control the entry and residence of people. There  is  a  strong  public
    interest in maintaining an effective  system  of  immigration  control.
    This is done through the immigration rules and policies, which set  out
    the requirements for leave to enter or remain in the UK.

6.    The immigration rules are said to reflect  the  respondent's  view  of
    where a fair balance should be struck between the right to respect  for
    private and family life and public interest considerations relating  to
    the  maintenance  of  an  effective  system  of   immigration   control
    (paragraph GEN.1.1 Appendix FM).  The rules should be  read  in  a  way
    that reflects a proper interpretation of  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention. However, there may  some  cases  where  the  rules  do  not
    address relevant Article 8 issues. In such cases it may be necessary to
    consider whether there are compelling circumstances that might  justify
    granting leave to remain outside the immigration rules:  Huang  v  SSHD
    [2007] 2 AC 167  &  SSHD  v  SS  (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387.   The
    assessment should be  made  with  reference  to  the  five  stage  test
    outlined by the House of Lords in R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] 3 WLR
    58.

7.    In assessing what weight  to  place  on  the  public  interest,  where
    relevant, the Tribunal must take into account  section  117B  (general)
    and 117C (deportation) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002 ("NIAA 2002"),  which  outlines  a  number  of  factors  that  the
    Tribunal must consider when assessing whether an  interference  with  a
    person's right to respect for private and family life is justified  and
    proportionate.

Decision and reasons

Article 8 assessment - immigration rules

8.    The appellants applied for leave to remain on human rights grounds  on
    10 October 2012. At the date of the application none of the  appellants
    had leave to remain. It  is  not  argued  that  the  first  and  second
    appellants met any  of  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM.  The  only
    immigration rule that could possibly be relevant is  paragraph  276ADE,
    which relates to applications for leave to remain  on  the  grounds  of
    private life in the UK. The respondent refused the  applications  in  a
    notice of decision dated 15 April 2014. At the  date  of  the  decision
    paragraph 276ADE(1) stated that  the  requirements  to  be  met  by  an
    application for leave to remain on the grounds of private life  in  the
    UK were to be met "at the date of application".

9.    At the date of application the first and  second  appellants  did  not
    meet  the  long  residence   requirement   of   20   years   (paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii))  and  were  unable  to  show  that  they  had  no  ties
    (including social, cultural or family) with the country to  which  they
    would have to go if required to leave the UK (paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)).



10.   R had been continuously resident in the UK for a period of  well  over
    seven years for the purpose of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv). At the date  of
    the application, her sister A fell a few days  short  of  a  continuous
    period of residence of  seven  years.  At  the  date  of  decision  the
    respondent appeared to exercise discretion.  For  the  purpose  of  the
    rules it was accepted that she had been continuously resident, at  that
    stage, for a period of seven years. However, both applications relating
    to the children were refused on the ground that it would be  reasonable
    to expect them to return to Jamaica as a family unit.

11.   R reached her majority two weeks before the hearing. Ms Norman  sought
    to argue that I should consider whether the  third  appellant  met  the
    requirements of the immigration rules at the date of the  hearing.  She
    argued that, despite the clear  wording  of  paragraph  276ADE(1),  the
    provisions of paragraph 276AO should allow the third appellant to  rely
    on the private life requirements contained  in  paragraph  276ADE(1)(v)
    (aged 18 years and under 25 years and has spent at least half her  life
    living continuously in the UK). The current wording of paragraph  276AO
    is as follows:

           "276A0. For the purposes of paragraph 276ADE(1) the  requirement
           to make a valid application will not apply when  the  Article  8
           claim is raised:
           (i)   as part of an asylum  claim,  or  as  part  of  a  further
                 submission  in  person  after  an  asylum  claim  has  been
                 refused;
           (ii)  where a migrant is in immigration detention. A migrant  in
                 immigration detention or their representative  must  submit
                 any application or claim raising  Article  8  to  a  prison
                 officer, a prisoner custody  officer,  a  detainee  custody
                 officer or a member of Home Office staff at  the  migrant's
                 place of detention; or
           (iii)        in  an  appeal  (subject  to  the  consent  of  the
      Secretary of State where applicable).

12.   It would appear to be an anomaly that an applicant  who  raises  human
      rights issues at one of the later stages outlined in  paragraph  276AO
      can benefit from the provisions  of  paragraph  276ADE  without  being
      required to make a valid application and would therefore  be  able  to
      have their case assessed at the date of decision  or  date  of  appeal
      hearing when those who have made a valid human rights application have
      to be assessed "at the date of the application".

13.   However, I see nothing in the wording of paragraph  276AO  that  would
      allow me to ignore  the  clear  wording  of  paragraph  276ADE,  which
      requires a person who  has  made  a  valid  application  to  meet  the
      requirements "at the date  of  the  application".  In  this  case  the
      appellant's parents made a valid application for leave to  remain  for
      the family on human rights grounds. The  clear  wording  of  the  rule
      states that the requirements should be assessed at  the  date  of  the
      application  and  not  the  date  of  the  hearing.  At  the  date  of
      application it is evident that R was under 18 years of age and did not
      meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(v). However,  even  if  I
      cannot allow the appeal with reference to the immigration rules it  is
      clear that if she made an application for leave to remain at the  date
      of the hearing she would now meet the requirements.  Neither  her  age
      nor her length of residence are in dispute.

14.   For the reasons noted above A did not meet the strict requirements  of
      paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the immigration rules because, at the  date
      of application, she had not been continuously resident in the UK for a
      period of at least seven years.

15.   The immigration rules are said to reflect  the  respondent's  view  of
      where a balance should be struck in relation to  human  rights  issues
      under Article 8. The strict requirement for a private life claim to be
      considered at the date of application might restrict a  tribunal  from
      considering the immigration rules as they stand at  the  date  of  the
      hearing. This would appear to  conflict  with  the  general  principle
      regarding the importance of  assessing  protection  and  human  rights
      issues at the date of a hearing: see Ravichandran v SSHD [1996] Imm AR
      97 and R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. However, in  order  to
      comply with the Human Rights Act  1998  it  is  open  to  a  court  or
      tribunal to consider the situation in relation  to  Article  8  issues
      arising outside the rules.  In  practical  terms  the  "reasonable  to
      expect the child to leave the UK" test set out under  section  117B(6)
      of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA  2002")  is
      the same as the one contained in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) so  there  is
      nothing to restrict the tribunal from  considering  all  the  relevant
      circumstances at the date of the hearing.

Best interests of the child

16.   At the date of the hearing R is no longer a child.  Her  sister  A  is
    nine years old so it is necessary to consider her best interests.

17.   In assessing the best  interests  of  the  child  I  have  taken  into
    account the statutory guidance "UKBA Every Child  Matters:  Change  for
    Children" (November 2009), which gives further detail about the  duties
    owed  to  children  under  section  55.  In  that  guidance  the   UKBA
    acknowledges the importance of a number  of  international  instruments
    relating to human rights including the UN Convention on the  Rights  of
    the Child (UNCRC). The guidance goes on  to  confirm:  "The  UK  Border
    Agency must fulfil the requirements of these instruments in relation to
    children whilst exercising its functions as expressed  in  UK  domestic
    legislation and policies." I take into account the fact that the  UNCRC
    sets out rights including a child's right to survival and  development,
    the right to know and be cared for by his or her parents, the right not
    to  be  separated  from  parents  and  the  enjoyment  of  the  highest
    attainable  standards  of  living,   health   and   education   without
    discrimination. The UNCRC also recognises the common responsibility  of
    both parents for the upbringing and development of a child.

18.   I have also taken into account the decisions in ZH (Tanzania)  v  SSHD
    [2011] UKSC 4, Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 and EV  (Philippines)  and
    others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874. The best interests of the child  are
    a primary consideration in this case  but  may  be  outweighed  by  the
    cumulative effect of other matters that weigh in the public interest. I
    take into account that the younger the child  the  more  important  the
    involvement of a parent is likely to be:  see  Berrehab  v  Netherlands
    (1988) 11 EHRR 322.

19.   I take into account the fact that A was born in the UK and  has  known
    no other life. She is nine years old and will be eligible  to  register
    as a British citizen when she is ten years old in October 2016. While I
    do not seek to treat this as a 'near miss', the fact that a  child  who
    was born and has been resident in the UK for a period of ten years  can
    apply to register as a British citizen is a reflection of the ties that
    a child is likely to have developed over that period of time. The  fact
    that A was born in the UK and has lived here for a period of nine years
    and eight months reflects the strong ties that she is  likely  to  have
    developed to the UK.

20.   It is in A's best interests to remain with her parents as  part  of  a
    single family unit. Although her sister is now 18 years old  she  still
    lives as part of the family unit. It  is  likely  that,  in  time,  her
    sister will mature and develop an independent life of her own. However,
    at the current time her  sister  forms  part  of  the  support  network
    provided to A within the family unit. A  is  not  currently  a  British
    citizen and could be removed to Jamaica. Unchallenged evidence from her
    mother and various other members of the family, as well as her teacher,
    indicates that A is a child who is likely to find it difficult to adapt
    to change. While this does not mean that she  could  not  overcome  the
    transition to living in another country with the assistance and support
    of her parents it is a factor that I take into account in assessing her
    best interests.

21.   In  evidence  A's  parents  told  me  that  they  lived  in  difficult
    circumstances in Jamaica. They lived  in  a  poor  neighbourhood  where
    crime was rife. A's mum lived in a one room house with her mother and R
    prior to coming to the UK. A's father said that he lived in a  compound
    with a number of other people where he had to sleep in a makeshift  bed
    in a disused toilet. Although both parents  were  working  they  earned
    very  little  and  their  evidence  indicates  that   they   lived   in
    circumstances of economic deprivation.  Both  parents  expressed  their
    concerns about being able to protect their daughter  from  the  harmful
    experiences they had  while  growing  up  in  Jamaica,  which  included
    witnessing violent crime. One of the motivating factors for Mr  Boswell
    to join the British army appears to have been his desire to  provide  a
    better life for his children.

22.   While the mere fact that a child is likely  to  return  to  a  country
    where they would face less favourable economic conditions, standards of
    education and healthcare to the UK is not a matter that would  normally
    be given significant weight, having assessed A's circumstances  in  the
    round, I conclude that her best interests point quite strongly  towards
    her remaining in the UK with her family.

Article 8 assessment - outside the rules

23.   The first appellant has been resident in the UK for  a  period  of  14
    years. His wife and oldest daughter for a period of about 13  �  years.
    Their youngest daughter was born in the UK and has been  resident  here
    for nearly 10 years. While the family could be removed as a single unit
    without any significant interference with their right to family life  I
    accept that the appellants' length of residence and other ties  to  the
    UK show that removal is likely to interfere with their right to private
    life in a sufficiently grave way as to engage the operation of  Article
    8 of the European Convention (questions (i) & (ii)  of  Lord  Bingham's
    five stage approach in Razgar v SSHD [2004] INLR 349)

24.   The appellants do not meet the strict requirements of the  immigration
    rules. The normal course of action would be to require  them  to  leave
    the UK. While the maintenance of effective immigration  control  is  an
    important  factor  the  balancing  exercise  under  Article  8   is   a
    complicated one and must  take  into  account  a  number  of  different
    factors. In this case the immigration rules relating to  private  life,
    in effect, stopped the clock at the date of the application (four years
    ago) and therefore do not provide an adequate vehicle to assess whether
    removal  in  consequence  of   the   decision   would   amount   to   a
    disproportionate interference with the appellants' rights at  the  date
    of the hearing.

25.   I give significant weight to the maintenance  of  immigration  control
    as a public interest consideration (section  117B(1)  NIAA  2002).  The
    first and second appellants entered the UK with  leave  to  remain  but
    since May 2007 they knowingly remained without  leave.  I  give  little
    weight to  the  private  life  established  by  the  first  and  second
    appellants at times when their immigration status was either precarious
    or unlawful (section 117B(4)-(5)). However, they both speak English and
    have, when they had permission to do so, worked to support the  family.
    The evidence would appear to show that, if permitted  to  remain,  they
    are unlikely to be a  burden  on  the  taxpayer.  The  public  interest
    considerations outlined in section 117B(2)-(3) are  neutral.  The  fact
    that  they  can  speak  English  and  are  able  to  achieve  financial
    independence does not add anything to their case.

26.   At the date of the hearing R is now 18 years old.  The  facts  of  her
    age and length or residence are not disputed. As such, if  she  made  a
    further application for leave to remain at the date of the  hearing  it
    seems clear that she  would  meet  the  private  life  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) of  the  immigration  rules.  In  a  real  world
    assessment  of  her  situation  the  fact  that  she  now   meets   the
    requirements of the immigration rules is a compelling circumstance that
    weighs strongly in her favour.

27.   Although she is now an adult I take into account  the  fact  that  the
    fact that her age is not a bright line  whereby  she  suddenly  reaches
    maturity. The evidence shows that R has begun to  develop  social  ties
    and relationships  outside  her  immediate  family  but  she  is  still
    dependent upon her parents and has not  yet  developed  an  independent
    life of her own. She is still very much a member of the family. In  the
    circumstances I am satisfied that her relationship with her parents and
    younger sister is still such that their separation would amount  to  an
    interference with her right to family life: see PT (Sri Lanka)  v  ECO,
    Chennai [2016] EWCA Civ 612.

28.   On behalf of the respondent is was argued  that  the  appellant  could
    live with her family if they returned to  Jamaica  but  either  way  it
    would engage her rights under Article 8.   She  would  have  to  choose
    between giving up a well established private life in the  UK  or  being
    separated from her family.

29.   In this case the crux of the proportionality assessment under  Article
    8(2) is the public interest consideration outlined in section  117B(6),
    which states that the public  interest  does  not  require  a  person's
    removal if they have a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship
    with a qualifying child and it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the
    child to leave the United Kingdom.

30.   In relation to the test of "reasonableness" the tribunal  in  PD  (Sri
    Lanka) made the following finding [39]:

           "We remind ourselves that the test to  be  applied  is  that  of
           reasonableness.  Other  legal  tests  which  have  gained   much
           currency in this sphere during  recent  years  -  insurmountable
           obstacles, exceptional circumstances, very compelling factors  -
           have no application in the exercise  we  are  performing.  Self-
           evidently, the test of reasonableness poses a less exacting  and
           demanding  threshold  than  that  posed  by  the   other   tests
           mentioned."

31.   In considering whether it would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  a  non-
      British citizen child to  leave  the  UK  the  respondent's  policy[1]
      states at paragraph 11.2.4:

           "The requirement that a non-British citizen child has  lived  in
           the UK for a continuous period  of  at  least  the  seven  years
           immediately preceding the date of application,  recognises  that
           over time children start put down roots and integrate into  life
           in the UK, to the extent that being required to leave the UK may
           be unreasonable. The longer the child has resided in the UK, the
           more the balance will begin  to  swing  in  terms  of  it  being
           unreasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK,  and  strong
           reasons will  be  required  in  order  to  refuse  a  case  with
           continuous UK residence of more than seven years."

32.   The policy goes on to outline  a  number  of  relevant  considerations
      including whether there would be a significant  risk  to  the  child's
      health, whether they would leave the UK with their parents, the extent
      of wider family ties in the UK and whether the child is likely  to  be
      able to integrate into life in another country as well  as  any  other
      factors that might have been raised.

33.   In this case I  have  already  found  that  A's  best  interest  point
      strongly in favour of her remaining in the UK with  her  parents  and,
      perhaps to a lesser  extent,  with  her  sister  who  still  forms  an
      integral part of the family unit. The fact that A was born in the  UK,
      has  spent  over  nine  years  here  and  has   other   close   family
      relationships in the UK with her grandmother and other  relatives  are
      factors should be given weight. The Supreme  Court  in  ZH  (Tanzania)
      made  clear  that  the  best  interests  of  a  child  are  a  primary
      consideration, albeit not a paramount consideration, which could  only
      be outweighed by the cumulative  effect  of  weighty  public  interest
      considerations. The respondent's own guidance suggests that the longer
      a child has resided in the UK "the more  the  balance  will  begin  to
      swing in terms of it being unreasonable to expect the child  to  leave
      the UK" and that "strong reasons" will be required to  refuse  a  case
      with continuous residence of more than seven years.

34.   In this case the first and second appellants remained in the UK for  a
      considerable period of time in the full knowledge  that  they  had  no
      permission to do so. While that is  a  matter  that  should  be  given
      weight as a public interest consideration  there  is  no  evidence  to
      suggest that they committed immigration offences at the  more  serious
      end of the scale e.g. use of deception or false documents. It is trite
      law that a child should not  be  penalised  for  the  actions  of  her
      parents.

35.   While it is not a matter that is in  any  way  determinative  of  this
      appeal, I also take into account the fact  that  the  first  appellant
      came to the UK in order to serve in the British army.  He  served  for
      three years during which time he was deployed to Iraq.  Little  detail
      is provided  about  his  time  in  the  army  or  the  nature  of  his
      dishonourable discharge. However, there is some evidence to show  that
      the appellant is likely to have been treated for mental health  issues
      as a result of his experiences in Iraq and  has,  in  the  past,  been
      treated for Post-traumatic Stress Disorder. The extent to  which  that
      might have contributed, if at all, to the incident  that  led  to  his
      discharge is unclear on the limited evidence before me.

36.   Recent evidence  indicates  that  the  appellant  has  been  suffering
      further difficulties with his mental health, which to some extent  may
      be exacerbated by his uncertain immigration status. Ms  Norman  sought
      to argue that The Armed  Forces  Covenant  recognised  the  duty  that
      society owes to support members of the  armed  forces  who  have  been
      injured (including mental injury) in the course of their  duty.  While
      the Covenant provides important recognition of the service provided by
      members of the armed forces nothing in the Covenant or the immigration
      rules suggests that the mere fact of service  would  justify  granting
      leave to remain. However, the service that the appellant gave  to  the
      UK, albeit that it ended in dishonourable discharge, is a matter that,
      in my view,  can  be  taken  into  account  as  part  of  the  overall
      assessment of what weight should be given to the public  interest.  It
      is also in the public interest that the service provided by members of
      the armed forces,  whether  they  are  British  citizens  or  not,  is
      recognised.

Conclusion

37.   Having weighed all the circumstances of this  case  I  find  that  the
      fact that the third appellant would now meet the requirements  of  the
      immigration  rules  relating  to  private   life   is   a   compelling
      circumstances that would render her removal  disproportionate  in  all
      the circumstances of her case.

38.   The best interests of her younger sister point  strongly  towards  her
      remaining in the UK within the family unit. Her length  of  residence,
      her strength of connections to the UK, as well as to some extent,  the
      difficulties she  would  face  in  adapting  to  life  in  Jamaica  in
      circumstances where the family is likely to  live  in  very  difficult
      economic circumstances, are not outweighed by strong  public  interest
      considerations. While not  seeking  to  diminish  the  fact  that  her
      parents overstayed for a number of years it is the  only  factor  that
      might weigh in the public interest. The fact that  her  father  served
      the UK in the army is a factor, albeit not a determinative one,  which
      reduces the weight to be placed on the public interest considerations.



39.   Each case is fact sensitive. On the facts of this case I find that  it
      would be unreasonable to expect A to leave the UK. It is not  disputed
      that she is a "qualifying child" who has been continuously resident in
      the UK for a period of seven years. There is no dispute that the first
      and  second  appellants  have  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
      relationship. Section 117B(6) states that in  such  circumstances  the
      public interest does not require removal.

40.   I conclude that the removal of the  appellants  would  interfere  with
      their right to private life in a sufficiently serious  way  to  engage
      the operation of Article 8. For the reasons given above  I  find  that
      removal  in  consequence  of  the   decision   would   amount   to   a
      disproportionate  interference  with  the  appellants'  rights   under
      Article 8 of the European  Convention  (points  (iv)  &  (v)  of  Lord
      Bingham's five stage approach in Razgar).


DECISION

I re-make the decision and ALLOW the appeals on human rights grounds


Signed   [pic]   Date 06 July 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
































ANNEX

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 11 November 2015                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                                LORD TURNBULL
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                          ROBERT ALEXANDER BOSWELL
                      GEORGIA FELICIA FORSYTHE-BOSWELL
                             (AND TWO CHILDREN)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D. Balroop, Counsel instructed by Greenland
Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The first appellant entered the UK as  a  visitor  in  July  2002.  He
    applied for further leave because he had joined the British  army.  His
    wife and daughter R (who is  now  17  years  old)  entered  the  UK  in
    December 2002 with leave to enter for three  years  in  line  with  the
    first appellant. He was discharged from the army in  April  2006.  They
    were granted a further period of leave to  remain  on  a  discretionary
    basis until February 2007 because his wife  was  heavily  pregnant  and
    unable to fly. Their second daughter A was born in the UK on 25 October
    2006 and is now 9 years old. The appellants applied for  further  leave
    to remain but the application was refused in May 2007.  Thereafter  the
    parents took the decision to overstay in the full knowledge  that  they
    had no leave to remain.

2.    In October 2012 the family  applied  for  leave  to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds. The application was refused without a right of  appeal.
    They sought to challenge the decision by way  of  judicial  review  and
    during the  course  of  those  proceedings  the  respondent  agreed  to
    reconsider the case. An appealable decision was made on 15 April  2014.
    The respondent refused the application on the ground that  the  parents
    did not meet the requirements of paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM and none
    of the appellants met the private life requirements of paragraph 276ADE
    because the respondent considered that it would be reasonable to expect
    the children to leave the UK with their parents in  order  to  continue
    their family life together in Jamaica.

3.    The appellants appealed against the  respondent's  decision  dated  15
    April 2014. First-tier Tribunal Judge Molloy dismissed the appeal in  a
    decision promulgated on 05 December 2014.

4.    The appellants applied and were granted permission to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal. They seek to challenge the decision  on  the  following
    grounds:

      (i)   The First-tier Tribunal erred in  failing  to  assess  the  best
           interests of the two children and whether it would be reasonable
           to expect them to return to Jamaica with their parents properly.



       (ii)   The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  findings  that  were  not  in
           accordance with the evidence and made inconsistent findings.

      (iii) The grounds were amended at the hearing (without opposition)  to
           include an argument that the First-tier Tribunal failed to  make
           findings as  to  whether  the  children  met  the  private  life
           requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1) of the immigration rules.

Decision and reasons

5.    After having considered the grounds of appeal and  oral  arguments  we
    are satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making
    of an error on a point of law.

6.    In a lengthy decision the First-tier Tribunal  sought  to  assess  the
    circumstances within the relevant legal framework. While we  accept  Mr
    Kotas' point that this is a detailed decision the structure  and  style
    of it means that it is somewhat difficult to read and it is not  always
    easy to follow the judge's reasoning. The  judge  summarised  the  oral
    evidence taken at the hearing [22-36] and the submissions made by  both
    parties [37-53]. The judge's main findings appear to start at paragraph
    54 of the decision.

7.    The judge began by considering whether the  first  appellant  met  the
    private life requirements contained in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    immigration rules but concluded that there were  no  "very  significant
    obstacles" to his reintegration in Jamaica. Despite the fact  that  the
    respondent quite clearly dealt with all  four  members  of  the  family
    under paragraph 276ADE the judge declined to do so on the  ground  that
    it was not formally pleaded in the grounds of appeal [67]. Although  he
    accepted  that  R  met  the  requirement  for  seven  years  continuous
    residence he concluded that A did not meet the requirement because  she
    had not lived in the UK for the required period of  time  at  the  date
    immediately preceding the date of the application [69]. While  this  is
    correct it should have been noted  that  in  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter the respondent exercised discretion and accepted that A met  the
    continuous residence requirement at the date of decision and  proceeded
    to assess the case on that basis.

8.    The judge then went  on  to  consider  whether  the  parents  met  the
    requirements of paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM [70-97]. In doing  so  he
    assessed whether it would be  reasonable  to  expect  R  to  return  to
    Jamaica. He directed himself to the decision in MK (Best  interests  of
    child)  India  [2012]  Imm  AR  2.  He  also  took  into  account   the
    respondent's duties contained in section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009 (BCIA 2009). He noted that the best  interests
    of the child are a primary consideration [73-74]. He took into  account
    R's length of residence and the fact that she wanted to remain  in  the
    UK to continue her  education.  He  found  that  it  was  in  R's  best
    interests to remain in a family unit with her parents  [80].  He  found
    that there were no practical obstacles to  the  family  being  able  to
    return to Jamaica and that as a citizen of Jamaica R was  not  divorced
    from her parents' cultural and religious practices. She had  no  health
    problems and would have no difficulty in communicating in Jamaica.  She
    would be able to continue her education in Jamaica [82-88].  The  judge
    went on to consider her links outside the family and took into  account
    the fact that she had other family members in the UK  and  Jamaica  and
    had developed links to the community through friends, church and  youth
    clubs [91-92]. It is  not  clear  why  the  judge  thought  information
    relating to the property the family lived in might be relevant  but  on
    the face of it this issue was immaterial to an assessment of whether it
    would be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK [90].

9.     Having  concluded  that  the  first  appellant  did  not   meet   the
    requirements of  paragraph  276ADE,  and  that  the  first  and  second
    appellants did not meet the requirements of paragraph EX.1,  the  judge
    went on to consider the case outside the  immigration  rules  [98].  In
    considering whether the appellants' circumstances engaged the operation
    of Article 8(1) of the European Convention (points (i)-(ii) of the five
    stage approach in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL  27)  the  judge  concluded
    that all four appellants had lived in the UK for  a  sufficiently  long
    period of time to have "acquired a private life which is  deserving  of
    respect" [101]. However, this finding  appears  to  conflict  with  his
    subsequent finding that the appellants had failed to  show  that  there
    would be a sufficiently grave interference with their rights to  engage
    the operation of Article 8 [103-104]. Again, the judge  made  reference
    to "evidential shortcomings" in relation to housing and employment,  as
    well as in relation to R's education, but it is  not  clear  how  those
    shortcomings affected his decision. In light of the above  we  conclude
    that the First-tier Tribunal's findings as to  whether  the  appellants
    had established a private life that engaged the operation of Article  8
    are somewhat confused and contradictory.

10.   Despite  finding  that  Article  8  was  not  engaged  the  First-tier
    Tribunal went on to consider whether removal would be disproportionate.
    In doing so the judge reminded himself that the best interests  of  the
    children were a  primary  consideration  [110].  He  went  on  to  make
    findings regarding the best interests of A, which were in very  similar
    terms to those outlined in relation to her sister.  The  focus  on  his
    assessment was the fact  that  A  could  return  to  Jamaica  with  her
    parents, continue her education and had "ancestry rooted  in  Jamaica".
    He concluded that her best interest lay in remaining with  her  parents
    [112-124].

11.   The judge took into account the immigration history  of  the  parents.
    He accepted that they initially entered and remained in  the  UK  on  a
    lawful basis but found that the fact that they  had  overstayed  for  a
    period of over five years was a matter  that  "counts  heavily  against
    them in the proportionality assessment" [127].  Once  again  he  seemed
    concerned that there was no up  to  date  evidence  relating  to  their
    domestic arrangements, employment history and health.  The  absence  of
    such evidence was said to "count against  them"  [128-129].  The  judge
    considered the factors outlined in section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (NIAA  2002)  before  concluding  that
    their  removal  would  be  reasonable  and  proportionate  in  all  the
    circumstances of the case [130-141].

12.   While the First-tier Tribunal mentioned the relevant circumstances  of
    the case we find that on an overall reading of the decision  the  judge
    failed to conduct a proper evaluative  assessment  of  what  weight  to
    place on those matters. The assessment of whether it is "reasonable" to
    expect the children to return to Jamaica with their parents within  the
    context of the human rights  framework  contained  in  the  immigration
    rules (paragraphs EX.1 and  276ADE(1)(iv))  and  the  relevant  statute
    (section 117B(6) NIAA 2002) cannot be devoid of  any  consideration  of
    the strength of the connections that the family might now have  in  the
    UK. The mere fact that there may not  be  practical  obstacles  to  the
    family returning to  Jamaica,  and  that  they  derive  their  cultural
    heritage from that country, does not preclude the need to consider  the
    effect of removal given their length  of  residence,  which  the  judge
    recognised was a sufficiently long period to  acquire  a  private  life
    "deserving of respect".

13.   We accept the submission made by Mr Kotas that it is not an  error  to
    fail to refer to specific case law. However, if in substance the First-
    tier Tribunal fails  to  adequately  engage  with  the  relevant  legal
    principles that failure can amount to an error of law. In this case  we
    find that the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  apply  the  principles
    outlined in decisions such  as  ZH  (Tanzania)  v  SSHD  [2011]  UKSC4,
    Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 and EV (Philippines) and  others  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874 in a coherent and structured way.

14.   We conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the  making
    of an error on a point of law and set aside the  decision.  The  appeal
    will be listed for a  resumed  hearing  to  remake  the  decision  with
    further argument relating to the interpretation of the "it would not be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK" test contained  in  the
    immigration rules and statutory provisions.

DIRECTIONS

15.   It is  agreed  that  the  factual  circumstances  of  the  appellants'
    immigration history and length of  residence  in  the  UK  are  not  in
    dispute and that no further oral evidence will need to be called at the
    resumed hearing.

16.   Both parties are directed to prepare and serve skeleton  arguments  at
    least 10 days  before  the  next  hearing,  which  should  address  the
    following issues.

      (i)   Arguments relating to the proper assessment  of  the  "it  would
           not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the  UK"  test
           outlined in paragraphs EX.1 and 276ADE(1)(iv) of the immigration
           rules and section 117B(6) of the NIAA 2002.

      (ii)  How the history  of  the  seven  year  concession  contained  in
           DP5/96 (as amended), and any other policy  statements,  informed
           the current wording and application of the immigration rules.

      (iii)  How  existing  judicial  guidance  on  the  best  interests  of
           children contained in cases such as ZH (Tanzania),  Zoumbas  and
           EV (Philippines) might be relevant to the assessment of the  "it
           would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the  UK"
           test.

      (iv)  How the statutory duties contained in section 55 BCIA  2009  and
           associated statutory guidance interrelate with the "it would not
           be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK" test.

17.   Both parties are to serve any further bundles of  evidence,  including
    any up to date evidence relating to  the  strength  of  the  children's
    connections to the UK and the likely effect of  removal,  at  least  10
    days before the next hearing.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is set aside and the case will be listed for a resumed hearing


Signed   [pic]   Date 30 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan



-----------------------
[1]  Immigration  Directorate  Instruction  Family  Migration:  Appendix  FM
Section 1.0b (Family Life (as a Partner or Parent)  and  Private  Life:  10-
year Routes) August 2015


