

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/24870/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 May 2014                                 |On 20 May 2014               |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                PRAVEZ AHMED

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Ahmed instructed by Eurasia Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Mr K Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 7 October  1985.   He
      entered the UK illegally in October 2006.  On 28 October 2008, he  was
      encountered working at a restaurant in Gloucester and was served  with
      notice that he was liable to be detained and  removed  as  an  illegal
      entrant.  He was granted  temporary  admission  subject  to  reporting
      conditions.

   2. On 25 August 2011, the appellant  married  a  British  citizen,  Sayra
      Ahmed.  On 18 February 2013, he was detained when  reporting.   On  22
      February 2013 he made an application for leave to  remain  in  the  UK
      under Article 8 of the ECHR based principally on his relationship with
      his wife.  On  7  June  2013,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
      appellant's application for leave under para 276ADE and Appendix FM of
      the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).   The  Secretary  of  State
      also considered that there were no "exceptional circumstances" such as
      to make the appellant's removal no longer appropriate under para  353B
      of the Rules.

   3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
      promulgated on 28 January 2014, Judge Page dismissed  the  appellant's
      appeal under para 276ADE, Appendix FM and Article 8 of the ECHR.

   4. On 19 February 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Keane) granted the
      appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the  following
      ground;

           "3.   The  Upper  Tribunal  at  paragraphs  27  and  28  of  its
                 determination in  The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
                 Department v Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) carried out an
                 Article  8  analysis,  although  paying  attention  to  the
                 applicable guidance and the respondent's conclusion in that
                 appeal under paragraph EX.1 of HC  395  (as  amended)  that
                 there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  preventing  the
                 continuation of family life  outside  the  United  Kingdom.
                 The judge made an arguable error of law in not carrying out
                 a Razgar style enquiry  and  in  failing  to  consider  the
                 proportionality  of  the  decision   under   appeal.    The
                 application for permission is granted."

   5. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Submissions

   6. In his oral submissions and written skeleton argument,  Mr  Ahmed  who
      represented the appellant submitted that the Judge had erred in law in
      three respects.

   7. First, in paragraph 23 of his  determination  the  Judge  had  made  a
      factual error by stating that the appellant's wife was a  national  of
      Bangladesh when she was in fact a British  citizen.   This,  Mr  Ahmed
      submitted tainted the Judge's finding that there was no reason why the
      appellant's wife could not return with the appellant to  live  (or  to
      seek entry clearance) in Bangladesh.

   8. Secondly, and more fundamentally, Mr Ahmed submitted  that  the  Judge
      had failed to carry out the two stage process set out by the Court  of
      Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  by  first
      considering the application of the Immigration Rules and then carrying
      out an assessment of Article 8 outside the  Rules  applying  the  five
      stage process in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.

   9. Thirdly, Mr Ahmed submitted that the Judge's reasoning was inadequate,
      in particular in finding that there were no "insurmountable obstacles"
      to the appellant and his wife  living  (or  returning  to  seek  entry
      clearance) in Bangladesh given the appellant's wife worked in  the  UK
      and her ties were here.

  10. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Hibbs accepted that the Judge had made
      a mistake in paragraph 23 but that  error  was  not  material  to  his
      decision as the Judge had fully considered the  circumstances  of  the
      appellant and his wife and, applying Gulshan (Article 8 - New Rules  -
      Correct Approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC), the Judge was  entitled  to
      find that there were "no exceptional circumstances" such as to require
      consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules.

Discussion

  11. I deal first with Mr Ahmed's  second  submission  on  the  fundamental
      point of whether the Judge erred in law because he did not carry out a
      "full" assessment under Article 8 outside the Rules.

  12. Mr Ahmed principally relied upon the case of MF (Nigeria).  That  case
      concerned  deportation  and  the  relationship  between  the  relevant
      Immigration Rule in paras 398-399A and Article 8  of  the  ECHR.   The
      Court of Appeal held that the Immigration Rules  in  relation  to  the
      deportation of a foreign national criminal were a "complete code" (see
      [44]).  The Court of Appeal noted ([40]-[46]) that under para 398  the
      rule stated that:

           "It will only be in exceptional circumstances  that  the  public
           interest in deportation will be outweighed by other factors."

  13. The Court of Appeal recognised (at [44]) that:

           "The exceptional circumstances to be considered in the balancing
           exercise involved the application of a proportionality  test  as
           required by the Strasbourg jurisprudence."

  14. At [46], the Court of Appeal considered whether there was a one or two
      stage process involving consideration of the new Art 8 Rules  followed
      by a consideration of Article 8 of the ECHR:

           "There has been debate as to whether there is a one stage or two
           stage test.  If the claimant succeeds on an application  of  the
           new rules at the first hurdle ie he shows that para 399 or  399A
           applies, then it can be said that he  has  succeeded  on  a  one
           stage test.  But if he does not, it  is  necessary  to  consider
           whether  there  are   circumstances   which   are   sufficiently
           compelling (and therefore exceptional) to  outweigh  the  public
           interest in deportation.  That is an exercise which is  separate
           from a consideration of whether para 399 and 399A  applies.   It
           is the second part of  a  two  stage  approach  which,  for  the
           reasons we have given, is required by the  new  rules.   The  UT
           concluded (para 41) that it is required because the new rules do
           not fully reflect Strasbourg jurisprudence.   But either way, it
           is necessary to carry out a two stage process.

  15. Mr Ahmed placed reliance upon the  Court  of  Appeal's  reasoning  and
      approach in MF (Nigeria).  He submitted  that  the  Judge,  therefore,
      erred in law  by  failing  to  carry  out  the  second  stage,  namely
      assessing the appellant's claim  under  the  five  stage  approach  in
      Razgar.

  16. In my judgment, Mr Ahmed's  submissions  misstate  the  effect  of  MF
      (Nigeria).  What the Court of Appeal required was not  that  a  "full"
      application of Razgar was necessitated in every case  where  a  person
      relied upon a claimed interference with his private or family life for
      the purposes of Article 8.  As the Court of  Appeal  makes  plain,  in
      determining whether there are "exceptional circumstances" in the sense
      that they are circumstances which are  "sufficiently  compelling  (and
      therefore exceptional) to outweigh the public  interest  "  (see  para
      [46]), the balancing exercise inherent in proportionality is, thereby,
      engaged.  The point with which the cases are grappling is  the  extent
      to which there is any issue left to be determined  in  a  private  and
      family life case once it has been determined that an individual cannot
      meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules set out,  for  example,
      in para 276ADE and Appendix FM.  Only  if  there  are  compelling  (or
      exceptional) circumstances will that be so because the public interest
      otherwise reflected in the new Rules will prevail.  If there are  such
      circumstances, then the appellant will succeed under  Art  8  "outside
      the Rules".

  17. In MF (Nigeria), the Court of Appeal cited with approval the  decision
      of Sales J in R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin).    In  that
      case, at [29] Sales J recognised that it would be  only  necessary  to
      consider an individual's claim  outside  the  Rules  by  reference  to
      Article 8 if there were "compelling  circumstances"  not  sufficiently
      dealt with under the Rules.  At [29], Sales J said this:

           "Nonetheless, the new rules do provide better explicit  coverage
           of the factors identified in case-law as relevant to analysis of
           claims under Article 8 than was formerly  the  position,  so  in
           many cases the main points  for  consideration  in  relation  to
           Article 8 will be addressed by decision-makers applying the  new
           rules.  It is only  if,  after  doing  that,  there  remains  an
           arguable case that there may be good grounds for granting  leave
           to remain outside the Rules by reference to Article  8  that  it
           will be necessary for Article 8 purposes to go  on  to  consider
           whether there  are  compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently
           recognised under the new rules to  require  the  grant  of  such
           leave."

  18. Having then  cited  from  the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision  in  Izuazu
      (Article 8 - New Rules) [2013] UKUT 0045 (IAC), Sales J at [30]  added
      this:

           "The only slight modification I would make, for the purposes  of
           clarity, is to say that if, after the process  of  applying  the
           new rules and finding that the claim for leave to  remain  under
           them fails, the relevant official or tribunal judge considers it
           is clear that  the  consideration  under  the  rules  has  fully
           addressed any family life or private life issues  arising  under
           Article 8, it would be sufficient simply to say that; they would
           not have to go on, in addition, to consider the case  separately
           from the rules.  If there is no arguable case that there may  be
           good grounds for granting leave to remain outside the  Rules  by
           reference to Article 8, there would be no point  in  introducing
           full separate consideration of  Article  8  again  after  having
           reached a decision on application of the Rules."

  19. That approach was, in my judgement, approved and applied by the  Upper
      Tribunal in Gulshan (Article 8 - New Rules - Correct Approach)  [2013]
      UKUT 00640 (IAC). There, the Upper Tribunal having cited Nagre and  MF
      (Nigeria) said this at [24(b)] that:

           "(b)  after applying the requirements  of  the  rules,  only  if
                 there may arguably be good grounds for  granting  leave  to
                 remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8  purposes
                 to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there   are   compelling
                 circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them:"

  20. Before leaving the case law and turning to Judge Page's determination,
      there are three matters which arise from the case law; one of which  I
      have already alluded to.

  21. The first concerns the issue of "insurmountable  obstacles"  found  in
      section EX.1 of Appendix FM.  In MF (Nigeria),  the  Court  of  Appeal
      rejected at [49] a literal meaning  that  only  obstacles  which  were
      impossible to surmount for the parties to carry on their  family  life
      abroad  would  suffice.   The  proper  approach  is  to  consider  the
      practical possibilities of relocation (see  Izuazu  at  [53]-[59]  and
      Gulshan at [24(c)]).

  22. The second is that to succeed in a claim based upon private or  family
      life outside the Immigration Rules, it is necessary to show that there
      are "compelling circumstances (MF (Nigeria) at [46]) such that removal
      will be "unjustifiably harsh" (Gulshan at [24(c)]).

  23. The third is that in Nagre Sales J, having cited the  Strasbourg  case
      law, pointed out that in the absence of  insurmountable  obstacles  to
      relocation abroad, it was likely that removal would  be  proportionate
      for the purposes of Article 8.  Sales J continued:

           "In order to show that, despite  the  practical  possibility  of
           relocation (i.e. the absence of insurmountable obstacles to it),
           removal in such a case will nonetheless be disproportionate, one
           would  need  to  identify  other  non-standard  and   particular
           features of the case of a compelling nature to show that removal
           would be unjustifiably harsh."

  24. I turn now to consider Judge Page's determination.

  25. Judge Page concluded that the appellant did not fall within  paragraph
      276ADE of the Rules based upon his private life.  That finding is  not
      challenged in the grounds or by Mr Ahmed in his  oral  submissions  or
      skeleton argument.

  26. Further, Judge Page concluded that the appellant could  not  meet  the
      requirement of Appendix FM.  In order to do so, it was  common  ground
      that the appellant had to show he met the requirements of Section EX.1
      of Appendix FM based  upon  his  relationship  with  his  wife.   That
      requires, so far as relevant:

           "(b)  The applicant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
                 with a partner who is in the UK and is a  British  citizen,
                 settled in the UK ...and there are insurmountable obstacles
                 to family life with that  partner  continuing  outside  the
                 UK."

  27. At para 15, Judge Page accepted that  the  appellant  and  his  wife's
      relationship was "genuine and subsisting".  Further,  at  [25],  Judge
      Page concluded that there were:

           "...no insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  continuing  in
           Bangladesh should the appellant's wife return with him while  he
           obtains the necessary entry clearance, alternatively, they could
           both return to Bangladesh to live there and pursue  family  life
           there."

  28. At paras 16-17, Judge Page set out the  correct  approach  in  Gulshan
      that "insurmountable obstacles"  did  not  mean  obstacles  that  were
      impossible to surmount" but concerned "the practical possibilities  of
      relocation" and the relevant IDI setting out  factors  that  might  be
      considered  in  determining   whether   there   were   "insurmountable
      obstacles" because of the degree of difficulty and  hardship  for  the
      individuals of relocating abroad.  At para 23, Judge Page said this:

           "I am not satisfied that the appellant's wife could  not  return
           to Bangladesh with him to pursue family life there with  a  view
           to obtaining the correct visa for him to return with  her.   She
           is a national of Bangladesh also.  It is not the case  that  she
           would have to adapt to a country that she  has  never  lived  in
           before."

  29. Whilst it is accepted that Judge Page miss-stated in paragraph 23 that
      the appellant's wife was a national of Bangladesh, he clearly set  out
      at paragraph 3 correctly that she was a "British citizen".  That error
      was not material to his decision.

  30.  I  reject  Mr  Ahmad's  first  submission  challenging  Judge  Page's
      decision.

  31. Mr Ahmed told me, on instructions, that the sponsor had come to the UK
      to live in 2005.  The sponsor's passport says that she was born  on  8
      June 1990 and, therefore, was 15 years old when she  came  to  the  UK
      from Bangladesh.  Part of the appellant's case to which I shall return
      shortly, was that the appellant and  his  wife  could  not  return  to
      Bangladesh because they were at risk because  the  appellant's  wife's
      family was angry because she had married  the  appellant  rather  than
      someone whom her family wished her to marry.  The Judge rejected  that
      evidence (a finding which is now not challenged) and so  the  position
      was that the sponsor had spent the first  15  years  of  her  life  in
      Bangladesh even though she was a  British  citizen  by  descent.   The
      Judge noted at para 12 that the sponsor had a full time job in the UK.
       The appellant was, himself, a Bangladesh national who  had  lived  in
      Bangladesh until 2006 (he was then 21 years old) before coming to  the
      UK illegally.  On these facts, having correctly  directed  himself  to
      the meaning of "insurmountable obstacles", Judge Page was entitled  to
      conclude that the appellant had failed to establish  that  there  were
      "insurmountable obstacles" (properly understood) to  the  continuation
      of his family life with his wife in Bangladesh.

  32. For those reasons, I reject Mr Ahmad's  third  submission  challenging
      Judge Page's decision.

  33. Having made that finding on  'insurmountable  obstacles',  Judge  Page
      went on to consider whether the appellant could succeed  "outside  the
      Rules" on the basis of "exceptional circumstances".  Again, Judge Page
      correctly directed himself,  consistently  with  the  case  law,  that
      exceptional circumstances meant circumstances  that  would  result  in
      "unjustifiably harsh consequences".   At para 20, Judge  Page  pointed
      out that:

           "The exceptional circumstances claimed in the extant case amount
           to a claim that the appellant and his  wife  could  relocate  to
           Bangladesh because both their lives would be at risk  by  reason
           of the appellant's wife's family being angry that they married."

  34. Judge Page concluded  that  the  appellant's  circumstances  were  not
      exceptional so as to justify a grant of leave outside the Rules  under
      Article 8.  I set out in full his reasons at paras 21-25 which are  as
      follows:

           "21.  I have to be circumspect about  the  appellant's  evidence
                 for two reasons.  Firstly he  entered  the  United  Kingdom
                 unlawfully and was found working illegally and had made  no
                 attempt to regularise his  status  in  the  United  Kingdom
                 until he was detained when found working illegally  at  the
                 Taste of India Restaurant in  Gloucester.   It  is  curious
                 that he married his wife in Manchester before  moving  back
                 to Gloucester which  suggests  they  lived  apart  at  some
                 point.  In any event it is plain that the appellant and his
                 wife married in the full  knowledge  that  he  was  in  the
                 United Kingdom unlawfully.  Now the appellant  relies  upon
                 his  marriage  as   part   of   his   claimed   exceptional
                 circumstances entitling him to remain in the United Kingdom
                 outside  the  Immigration  Rules  under  Article  8.    The
                 appellant knew of the procedure set down by law for him  to
                 seek settlement in the United  Kingdom  but  chose  not  to
                 return to Bangladesh to make the necessary entry  clearance
                 application.

             22. He has sought to circumvent  the  Rules  on  settlement  by
                 claiming a right to remain under Article 8.  The deliberate
                 flouting of the Rules is one of  those  circumstances  that
                 falls into the exception contemplated by the House of Lords
                 in  Chikwamba.   The  appellant  and  his  wife  might   be
                 inconvenienced  for  a  few  months  should  he  return  to
                 Bangladesh to obtain entry clearance but the damage to  his
                 family life goes no further than that.  There would  be  no
                 grave and unjustifiably  interference  with  his  right  to
                 family life should he be required to do that.

             23. I am not satisfied that  the  appellant's  wife  could  not
                 return to Bangladesh with him to pursue family  life  there
                 with a view to obtaining the correct visa for him to return
                 with her.  She is a national of Bangladesh also.  It is not
                 the case that she would have to adapt to a country she  had
                 never lived in before.  I now turn to the issue of risk  to
                 both the appellant and her from her family.

             24. I could not consider there were  exceptional  circumstances
                 unless I was satisfied that this risk from her family  were
                 genuine.   Both  the  appellant  and  his  wife  have  evry
                 incentive to claim such a risk.  I am  not  satisfied  that
                 her family in Bangladesh wanted her to marry someone there.
                  She has been settled in the United Kingdom for some years.
                  The evidence of both the appellant and his wife  was  only
                 that she feared that her  life  and  the  appellant's  life
                 would not be safe in Bangladesh  because  she  married  the
                 appellant  against  her  family's  consent.   I   find   it
                 difficult to understand why she would marry someone against
                 her  family's  will  if  that  person  faced   removal   to
                 Bangladesh.  She would be marrying in  circumstances  where
                 her marriage was  precarious  and  where  she  was  placing
                 herself at risk.  I am not satisfied upon  the  balance  of
                 probabilities that this claimed risk is genuine.  There has
                 been no evidence of threats or other problems, just a  bare
                 assertion that this threat exists.  I did not  find  either
                 the appellant or his wife credible on this issue.

             25. Therefore I determine the appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
                 appellant married in the United  Kingdom  in  circumstances
                 where he had no leave to remain after  entering  illegally.
                 He cannot meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules
                 and having taken  into  account  the  guidance  in  Gulshan
                 above, I find there are no exceptional circumstances and no
                 insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  continuing  in
                 Bangladesh should the  appellant's  wife  return  with  him
                 while   he   obtains   the   necessary   entry   clearance.
                 Alternatively, they could both return to Bangladesh to live
                 there and pursue family life there.  For these reasons  the
                 appeal is dismissed. "

  35. Judge Page's rejection of the appellant's account that he and his wife
      were at risk from her family on return  to  Bangladesh  has  not  been
      challenged.  As a  consequence,  the  appellant's  circumstances  were
      "standard" and there were no particular  features  demonstrating  that
      his  removal  (whether  temporarily  to  obtain  entry  clearance   or
      permanently to live  in  Bangladesh)  was  unjustifiably  harsh.   The
      appellant had had no lawful basis  for  being  in  the  UK  since  his
      arrival in October 2006 and he and his wife had married in August 2011
      when it was clear that he had no basis to remain in  the  UK.   Theirs
      was an example of "precarious family life".  Whilst it is said  by  Mr
      Ahmed that the appellant's wife would suffer hardship if  she  had  to
      relocate (whether temporarily or  permanently)  to  Bangladesh,  those
      consequences  (put  in  relation  to  her  job)  were  an   inevitable
      consequence of their decision to marry at a time  when  the  appellant
      had no right or expectation of being  in  the  UK.   Ms  Ahmed  placed
      reliance upon the House of Lords' decision in Chikwamba v SSHD  [2008]
      UKHL 40 which,  he  submitted,  told  against  imposing  a  procedural
      requirement (such as leaving the UK to  seek  entry  clearance)  where
      that was  the  only  matter  weighing  on  the  public  interest  when
      assessing Article 8.  The difficulty in this submission  is  that  the
      appellant is an illegal entrant and has been so  since  October  2006.
      For that reason, the appellant's reliance upon Chikwamba cannot assist
      his argument that Judge Page was not entitled  to  conclude  that  the
      appellant failed in his claim outside the Rules.

  36. For those reasons, I reject Mr Ahmad's second  submission  challenging
      Judge Page's decision.

  37. In my judgment, Judge Page was entitled to conclude that the appellant
      could not  succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  (para  276ADE  and
      Appendix FM) and further that his circumstances were  not  exceptional
      in that there would be unjustifiably harsh  consequences  if  he  were
      removed to Bangladesh and that there were no insurmountable  obstacles
      to the appellant continuing his family life in Bangladesh either on  a
      temporary basis whilst entry clearance was sought  or  permanently  if
      the appellant and his wife could only live in Bangladesh.   The  Judge
      did not fall into legal error in dismissing the appellant's appeal.

Decision

  38. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to  dismiss  the
      appellant's appeal did not involve the making of an error of law.  The
      decision stands.

  39. The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:










