
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24090/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 January 2017                    |On 17 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DUPTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR MD RAYHAN UDDIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr Tariq Bin Aziz


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals from  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal allowing the claimant's appeal against the decision to  refuse
    to grant him leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  migrant.   The
    application was refused on general grounds and  point-scoring  grounds.
    The common basis for the refusal on these grounds was an  assertion  by
    the SSHD that the claimant had submitted  false  documents  purportedly
    originating from Brac Bank Ltd dated 4  December  2012  relating  to  a
    purported bank account ending with the numbers 5005 held in the name of
    the proposed third party funder(s).  The SSHD was  satisfied  that  the
    documents were false because Brac Bank Ltd  had  confirmed  that  their
    bank records indicated that this account did not exist.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do
    not consider that the claimant requires anonymity for these proceedings
    in the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background

 3. The claimant is a national of  Bangladesh.   On  13  December  2012  he
    applied for leave to remain as a Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  migrant.   As
    evidence of access to funds, he provided a bank statement  (C1)  and  a
    bank letter (C2) purportedly issued by Brac Bank Ltd, a bank whose head
    office is in Gulshan, Dhaka, Bangladesh.  In the letter at C2, the bank
    certified that the claimant's uncle had 28.2 million BDT  in  his  bank
    account which was available for investment in the United Kingdom by the
    appellant and his entrepreneurial team member, to whom the third  party
    funder was related as a cousin.

 4. On 19 February 2015 a member of the Home  Office  fraud  team  sent  an
    email to Brac Bank Ltd.  He said that he was making contact  on  behalf
    of the SSHD from the British Home Office with regard to the  appellant.
    They had received numerous letters claiming  to  have  been  issued  by
    "yourselves all in the same format".  He was going  to  send  a  random
    sample of five.  If these were issued  "by  yourselves"  he  would  not
    bother sending the rest.  But if they were false documents, he asked if
    it would be OK to send  the  other  documents  which  they  had.   With
    respect to the appellant, the bank was asked to confirm  the  following
    details:

         "Was the document  submitted  to  the  Home  Office  (see  attached
         scanned copy) genuine / not genuine as issued?

         Did the account number ending 5005 belong to  Md  Tofazzal  Hossain
         Bablu, Fahiman Rahman?

         What was the account balance as of 23/02/12- and if  possible,  the
         current balance too?"

 5. On 22 February 2015 a representative of Brac Bank Ltd  replied  to  the
    email.  He stated as follows:

         "For your kind information that following attached certificates and
         statements Not issued by our branches".

The Hearing before, and the decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The claimant's appeal came before a panel of judges sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross on 15 June 2016.  The panel consisted of  Judge  Mill  and  Judge
    Froom.  Judge Mill wrote the subsequent decision.

 7. Both parties were legally represented, and the panel  had  before  them
    the evidence to which I have referred and the original of a copy letter
    which had been included in the appellant's bundle of documents received
    at Hatton Cross on 3 June 2016.  The original  was  handed  up  at  the
    hearing.

 8. In a letter dated 28 April 2016, Mr Ariful Islam, Branch Manager at the
    Natun Bazar branch of Brac Bank Ltd in Dhaka, confirmed that  the  bank
    statements and letters issued to Mr Bablu and Mr Rahman by "our branch"
    were genuine and authentic.  He had been informed by "our client"  that
    a verification check was made by way of  an  email  to  some  Associate
    Project Manager of their bank.  But it  was  quite  impossible  for  an
    Associate Project Manager to  verify  an  account  in  a  branch.   The
    appropriate official to be able to verify an  account  was  the  Branch
    Manager.  He had not received any verification  email.   The  Associate
    Project  Manager  was  not  in  a  position  to  verify  "my  client's"
    (singular) personal account without his knowledge.

 9. In  the  subsequent  decision,  Judge  Mill  reviewed  the  documentary
    evidence.  He noted that the emails evidencing enquiries carried out by
    the Fraud Team had been redacted.  He observed that full details of the
    emails were not available for scrutiny, although there was a  reference
    to a sample of documents being attached to the email  for  analysis  by
    the bank.  However, the attached documents had not  been  produced  and
    there was no evidence as to their content.   Only  two  documents,  the
    aforementioned items at C1 and C2, were relied upon by the SSHD in  the
    appeal.  Judge Mill noted that the response to the email enquiry  dated
    22 February 2015 was brief and "grammatically incorrect".

10. At paragraph [24], Judge Mill referred to the  submissions  which  were
    made by the Presenting Officer about the documents at C1  and  C2.   He
    had "attacked the terms" of these documents.  He drew attention to  the
    fact that the bank statement summary at C1 did not have  any  phone  or
    email number.  He drew attention to the fact that there was a reference
    to a "last purge date" of 27.2.2011 and that the account  opening  date
    was given as 28.2.2011.  The claimant was unable to explain this in his
    evidence:

         "We do not find such criticisms to be material given the nature  of
         the document.  Such observations are merely neutral."

11. The Presenting Officer had attacked the letter reproduced  at  C2  with
    reference to the fact that the email address of the letter  was  not  a
    personal one, although purportedly signed by the Bank Manager  himself,
    but was a generic enquiry email address:

         "We do not consider that that of itself seriously call the document
         into question."

12. The judge concluded at paragraph [26] that the nature and extent of the
    SSHD's enquiries were not extensive,  and  that  the  full  nature  and
    extent of the enquiries was not transparent.  The lack of detail in the
    response from Brac Bank Ltd, "causes us to pause to consider  carefully
    the weight which can be attached to it."

13. At paragraph [27], Judge Mill held that it  was  significant  that  the
    claimant had now produced a further up-to-date letter  dated  28  April
    2016, sent to him by his uncle.   The  original  was  produced  at  the
    hearing, and the document appeared authentic.  The letter was  executed
    by the same author as the letter of the document produced in support of
    the original application, reproduced at page  C2  in  the  Home  Office
    bundle.

14. At paragraph [28], Judge Mill summarised the panel's conclusions:

         "The evidence relied on by the [Secretary of State] to  refuse  the
         [claimant's] application is not the best evidence.   The  Secretary
         of State has not  discharged  their  duty  to  establish  that  the
         banking documents, which the claimant relies upon,  are  forged  or
         false.  Our view on this is supported by the terms  of  the  up-to-
         date letter from Anwar Sedat, Branch Manager of Brac Bank Ltd.   On
         balance we find the documents  produced  and  relied  upon  by  the
         claimant are genuine and the appeal succeeds accordingly."

The Application for Permission to Appeal

15. A member of the Specialist Appeals Team settled the SSHD's  application
    for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.  He  argued  that  the
    Tribunal had had inadequately explained  how  the  final  decision  was
    arrived  at.   The  relevance  of  the  response  being   grammatically
    incorrect and brief was not clear.  It was apparent from content of the
    enquiry sent to Brac Bank that the bank letter and statement  mentioned
    in the refusal decision were attached  to  the  email.   The  bank  had
    confirmed that none of  the  documents  attached  to  the  verification
    check, which had clearly included those  referred  to  in  the  refusal
    letter, had been issued by its branches.  The Tribunal had observed  at
    paragraph [27] that as a consequence of the copy email being  redacted,
    it was not possible to identify the  individual  who  stated  that  the
    account did not exist.  But this should not have made  any  difference,
    as there was no doubt that the email had been received from Brac  Bank,
    as  the  sender's  email  address  confirmed  this.   Furthermore,  the
    claimant was completely unable to explain the  discrepancy  surrounding
    the account opening date, and the SSHD had no opportunity to carry  out
    a verification check on the latest letter from the Branch Manager which
    was produced at the hearing.

The Reasons for the Grant for Permission to Appeal

16. On 24 November 2016 Judge Hollingworth granted permission to appeal  as
    it was arguable that the judges had attached insufficient weight to the
    claimant's inability to explain the matter  referred  to  at  paragraph
    [24] of the decision,  and  that  also  insufficient  weight  had  been
    attached to the content of  the  original  response  from  the  banking
    question.

The Appeal Hearing

17. At hearing before me to determine whether an error of Law was made out,
    Ms  Brocklesbury-Weller  developed  the   arguments   raised   in   the
    application for permission to appeal.  In reply, Mr Bin Aziz  submitted
    that the panel had given adequate reasons, and had reached a conclusion
    that was reasonably open to them on the evidence.   He  submitted  that
    the decision to allow the  appeal  outright  should  not  be  disturbed
    although the SSHD had not applied her mind to the question  of  whether
    the appellant was, or remained, a genuine entrepreneur.  The  SSHD  was
    not bound to grant the claimant leave to remain as a consequence of his
    appeal  being  allowed.   Pursuant  to  paragraph  245DD(l),  the  SSHD
    retained the right to carry out an assessment of the genuineness of the
    application.



Discussion

18. Having carefully considered the relevant documentary evidence alongside
    the reasons given by the panel for finding in favour of the  appellant,
    I find that a material error  of  law  is  made  out.   The  panel  has
    inadvertently deprived the SSHD of a fair hearing because they have not
    been even-handed in their approach to the documentary  evidence  relied
    on by the SSHD, as against the documents  proffered  by  the  claimant.
    The panel has not displayed the same anxious scrutiny to the claimant's
    documents as it has to the exchange of emails between the SSHD and Brac
    Bank.  As a result, the panel has overlooked material matters, and  the
    panel's assessment of the probative value of the evidence  relied  upon
    by the claimant is fatally flawed.

19. As I raised with the representatives at the hearing, there is  a  clear
    error in the following assertion at paragraph  [27]  of  the  decision:
    that the bank letter of 28 April 2016 was executed by the  same  author
    as the letter of the document reproduced at page C2 of the Home  Office
    bundle.  The signatory  of  the  letter  at  C2  is  Anwar  Sadat.  The
    signatory of the April 2016  letter  is  Ariful  Islam.   Mr  Bin  Aziz
    submitted that the panel were not in error, as Mr Islam was the  Branch
    Manager of the same branch.  However, Mr Sadat does not claim to  be  a
    Branch Manager of the same branch as the signatory to  the  April  2016
    letter.  The address given by Mr Sadat at the top of the letter is  the
    Head Office address of the bank in Gulshan, Dhaka.

20. Not only does the letter at C2 have a different author,  but  the  logo
    and format of the letter is significantly different from the April 2016
    letter.  In the letter at C2, the bank logo in the top left-hand corner
    has the word 'Limited' in different type appearing just under the  word
    'bank'.  In contrast, the logo on the April 2016 letter does  not  have
    the word 'limited' under the word 'bank'.   Moreover,  the  address  is
    given at the bottom of the letter, whereas in  the  letter  at  C2  the
    address is given in the top right-hand corner.

21. As is apparent from the contents of the enquiry made by the Fraud Team,
    the concern which triggered the enquiry about the  documents  proffered
    by the claimant was a concern over the format of  the  documents.   The
    panel has overlooked some  glaring  anomalies  in  the  format  of  the
    documents at C1 and C2.  Although purportedly issued contemporaneously,
    the bank logo at C1 is clearly  different  from  the  bank  logo  which
    appears on C2.  The bank logo at C1 does not have the  words  'limited'
    under the word 'bank'.  Moreover, it is superimposed over other  words,
    which are barely discernible.  It is also apparent from the positioning
    of the bank authentication stamp on the  far  right-hand  side  of  the
    document at C1 that this stamp  has  purportedly  been  applied  to  an
    incomplete document. For, aside from the stamp, all the writing on  the
    far right-hand side of the page has been cut off.

22. These formatting anomalies were not highlighted in either the  response
    of  the  bank,  or  in  the   refusal   letter.    This   is   entirely
    understandable, as the SSHD was entitled to proceed on the premise that
    it was sufficient  to  obtain  confirmation  from  the  bank  that  the
    documents were false, and  it  was  not  necessary  to  go  further  by
    explaining why they were  false.   But  the  fact  that  there  was  no
    exploration of the formatting anomalies in the refusal decision did not
    relieve the First-tier Tribunal of the obligation to give the documents
    anxious scrutiny in evaluating the probative value  of  the  claimant's
    case in rebuttal.

23. There are also anomalies in the content of the documents at C1 and  C2,
    some of which were relied  upon  by  the  Presenting  Officer  for  the
    purposes of casting doubt on the credibility of the rebuttal  evidence.
    As I discussed with the representatives at the  hearing,  there  is  an
    apparent inconsistency between the summary at the top of  C1  with  the
    information given in the body of C1.  According to the summary  at  the
    top of C1, the opening balance in the joint account  was  28.2  million
    BDT, and the closing balance in the account was also 28.2 million  BDT.
    But this is not consistent with the detailed  information  given  about
    transactions on the account.  All the relevant transactions  apparently
    took  place  on  23  February  2012.   On  that  day,  there  were  two
    withdrawals and one deposit.  As the result of  these  withdrawals  and
    deposits, the balance in the account changed on three occasions  during
    23 February 2012.  At one point the balance was 28 million BDT, but  on
    the two other occasions the balance was  slightly  higher  or  slightly
    lower.   Read  chronologically,  the  implication  of  the  transaction
    details is that the closing balance was less than 28.2 million BDT.

24. The panel cannot be criticised for not addressing anomalies in  content
    which were not relied on by the Presenting Officer.  But in respect  of
    the anomalies in content which the  Presenting  Officer  did  raise,  I
    consider that the panel has not given adequate reasons  for  dismissing
    as "neutral" the apparent discrepancy between an opening  account  date
    of 28 February 2011 with a last purge date of 27 February 2011.

25. The lack of an even-handed approach is typified by the panel  attaching
    adverse weight  to  the  fact  that  the  response  from  the  bank  is
    grammatically incorrect, while overlooking  a  significant  grammatical
    error in the bank letter at C2: this is the use  of  the  singular  (as
    required by paragraph 41-SD of the Rules - see below), where the use of
    the plural is called for grammatically.

26. As confirmed by the panel at paragraph [19] of the decision,  the  Brac
    Bank documents which were submitted by  the  claimant  to  support  his
    application relate to a joint account said to be held by his uncle  and
    his aunt, Fahiman Rahman.

27. Although the funds are held in a joint account, the claimant's case was
    that his sole third party funder was his uncle.  This is  reflected  in
    the fact that the third party letter is only signed by the  appellant's
    uncle.  It is not also signed by the appellant's aunt.

28. However, while the letter at C2 is expressed in the singular, as  would
    be  necessary  for  a  single  third-party  funder,  the  letter  makes
    continued reference to the appellant's aunt alongside  the  appellant's
    uncle.  For example, the letter says:

         "Md. Tofazzal Hossain Bablu, Fahiman Rahman has 200 thousand pounds
         .... available for investment in the United Kingdom on deposit with
         this financial institution on this date of 4th December 2012."

29. There is also a table at the bottom of C2 which has in the first column
    the name of the third-party contributor (singular).  However, the  name
    of the third-party contributor is given as both the appellant's aunt as
    well as his uncle.  On the other hand,  the  relationship  to  the  two
    applicants is stated as being "uncle and cousin".  Clearly, Mrs  Rahman
    is not related to the appellant as his uncle.

30. Pursuant to 245DD(h)(iii), the SSHD must be satisfied  that  the  money
    referred to in table 4 of Appendix A  is  genuinely  available  to  the
    applicant, and will remain available to him until such time  as  it  is
    spent for the purposes of his business or businesses.  Since the  funds
    relied on are held  in  a  joint  account,  the  funds  belong  to  the
    appellant's aunt just as much as they do to the appellant's uncle,  and
    prima face she is free to spend them as she wishes.  If she  is  not  a
    third-party funder, she is not bound by the declarations  made  in  the
    specified documents provided with the  application.  Alternatively,  if
    she is a third-party funder, then the requirements of  paragraph  41-SD
    of Appendix A are not met, as her signature  does  not  appear  on  the
    third-party declaration.

Future Disposal

31. As the SSHD has in effect been deprived of a fair hearing in the First-
    tier Tribunal, the appropriate course is for this appeal to be remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

Conclusion

32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law  such
    that it must be set aside and remade.



Directions

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross for a  de
novo hearing (Judges Froom and Mill not compatible).

None of the findings  of  fact  made  by  the  previous  Tribunal  shall  be
preserved.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date

Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

