
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24170/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th April 2018                            |On 20th April 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                               mr rahman iqbal
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Jones, Counsel instructed by Farani Taylor
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan whose appeal was  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Chowdhury in a decision promulgated  on  12th
    April 2017.  The judge did not find that the Appellant had demonstrated
    he had a genuine marriage relationship with his EEA  Sponsor  and  gave
    reasons for that going on to dismiss the appeal.

 2. Grounds of application were lodged.  It was said  that  the  judge  had
    failed  to  properly  set  out  the  burden  and  standard  of   proof.
    Furthermore, the Appellant and his wife had been willing to  give  live
    evidence but the Home Office Presenting Officer said that  he  did  not
    wish to cross-examine the Appellant.  When the judge said that she  had
    heard submissions from both advocates and the matter had  proceeded  by
    way of submissions only that gave an  unfair  impression  on  the  real
    position.  Further grounds were mentioned.

 3. Permission to appeal was initially refused but granted by Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Zucker in a decision dated 20th February  2018  when  he
    said it was not clear upon what basis it was  agreed  that  the  appeal
    would proceed by way of submissions only.

 4. Thus the appeal came before me on the above date.

 5. Ms Jones appeared for the Appellant and said that  while  the  way  the
    judge had set out the burden and standard of proof was  convoluted  she
    was not making a  point  on  that  score.   However  the  position  was
    slightly but importantly different to that set  out  by  the  judge  in
    terms of hearing the appeal on submissions only.  She had a  note  from
    the previous Counsel (Mr Collins)  who  said  that  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor had adopted their witness statements and there  was  no  cross-
    examination after that point.

 6. Ms Jones submitted that the case therefore  needed  a  proper  hearing.
    The facts were in dispute.  The case should be remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 7. The position of the Home Office was very much in line with Ms Jones  in
    that given the fact that there was a note from Counsel saying that  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor had given evidence then it was  difficult  to
    see that there had been a proper  hearing.   There  was  a  fundamental
    dispute of the facts.  On the basis of the note provided by Counsel the
    decision should be set aside and the case should  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusions

 8. It seems clear that there is a flaw in the approach taken by the  judge
    when she says that she was viewing the case on  submissions  only.   In
    fact what now  transpires  is  that  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  gave
    evidence adopting their statements  and  were  not  challenged  in  any
    aspect of that because the Home Office Presenting Officer said  he  did
    not need to ask them any questions.  However it is then  arguably  very
    unfair for the Appellant and Sponsor to be told that despite  the  fact
    that no one was asking  them  any  questions  points  were  then  taken
    against them by the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  and  ultimately
    accepted by the judge.  What should have happened in this case is  that
    the evidence of the Appellant and Sponsor should have  been  thoroughly
    tested in cross-examination so that when the  judge  heard  submissions
    the judge could decide on what facts she accepted and  what  facts  she
    did not accept and whether there were  other  findings  she  wished  to
    make. If the evidence of the Appellant and Sponsor was really not to be
    challenged in any way it is difficult to see a proper basis  for  their
    evidence not being accepted.    Fundamentally, as parties agreed, there
    has not been a proper hearing in this case and the judgment is not safe
    and therefore has to be set aside.

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement  7.2  the
    nature and extent of  the  judicial  fact  finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

10. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

11. I set aside the decision.

12. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

13. No anonymity order is made.


Signed   JG Macdonald                            Date 19th April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonal





