
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/24027/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 25th June 2015                    |17th July 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                PARVEZ IQBAL
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Duffy, Senior Home Office presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr M Moksud, of First Global Immigration.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this  appeal  to
the Upper Tribunal but in order to avoid confusion the parties are  referred
to as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

2.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  against  a  decision  of
First-tier Tribunal Judge Bradshaw, promulgated on  19  August  2014,  which
allowed the appellant's appeal to the extent that the case was  remitted  to
the respondent to consider the appellant's case on  the  basis  of  the  law
prior to the amendment to the Immigration Rules which came into force  on  9
July 2012.

Background

3.    The appellant was born on 4 May 1958. He is a citizen of Pakistan.  He
entered the UK on 14 February 2007 with entry clearance  as  a  work  permit
holder. That entry clearance was valid until 19 December  2010.  On  16  May
2008, the appellant's wife and two children (the  oldest  of  whom  has  now
attained majority)  entered  the  UK  as  the  appellant's  dependents.  The
appellant, his wife and his children have remained in  the  UK  even  though
their leave to do so expired on 19 December 2010.

4.    On 22 June 2011, the appellant sought leave to remain in the UK  under
Article 8 ECHR. That application was refused by the respondent on 23  August
2011. On 7 May  2014,  the  appellant  submitted  a  further  claim  to  the
respondent, seeking leave to remain in terms of Articles 3 and  8  ECHR.  On
20 May 2014, the respondent refused the appellant's application. On  24  May
2014, the respondent served a decision to  remove  the  appellant,  together
with separate decisions to remove  the  appellant's  wife  and  one  of  the
appellant's sons. Only  the  appellant  appealed  against  the  respondent's
decision to remove.

The Judge's Decision

5.    The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal.  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Bradshaw ("the Judge") allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  but
only to  the  extent  that  he  directed  the  respondent  to  consider  the
application made by the appellant on the basis  of  the  law  prior  to  the
amendment to the Immigration Rules, introducing Appendix  FM  to  the  Rules
from 9 July 2002. The Judge placed reliance on the case of  Edgehill  [2014]
EWCA Civ 402.

6.    The respondent sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  and
on 7 October 2014, First Tier Tribunal Judge  Nicolson  gave  permission  to
appeal, noting inter alia:

         "5.      First in this case the appellant could not  show  that  he
         met the requirements of the old rules. His case was synonymous with
         that of the appellant HB in Edgehill, whose appeal was dismissed.

         6. Secondly, there is a tension between Edgehill and Haleemudeen.

         7. Thirdly, in this case the appellant appears to have had no right
         of appeal against the decision to refuse him leave. On the  judge's
         summary of facts, that was not  an  immigration  decision  for  the
         purpose of Section 82(2)(d) of the 2002 Act because  the  appellant
         appears to have been  an  overstayer  before  the  application  was
         submitted. If that was the position, his appeal  only  lay  against
         removal to Pakistan.

         8. Whilst the transitional provisions identified by  the  Court  of
         Appeal in Edgehill stated that  applications  for  entry  or  leave
         prior to 9 July 2012 should be considered on the basis of  the  old
         rules, they did not specifically restrict the respondent's approach
         to a  decision  to  remove.  That  was  not  a  point  specifically
         considered in Edgehill..."

The Hearing

7.    Mr Duffy for the respondent relied on Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ  74
in which it was held that the Secretary  of  State  was  entitled  to  apply
Appendix  FM  to  decisions  following  the  statement  of  changes  from  6
September 2012,  regardless  of  when  that  decision  was  made,  but  that
decisions made between 9 July  and  5  September,  both  2012,  fall  to  be
decided under the "old rules".

8.    Mr Moksud, for the appellant, submitted that we should ignore Singh  v
SSHD [2015] because the judge found that  the  appellant's  application  was
originally submitted on 20 September 2011.  Mr  Moksud  complained  that  it
took the respondent two years and eight months to reach a decision.

Analysis

9.    HC 194, which introduced Appendix FM to  the  Immigration  Rules  came
into force on 9 July 2012. It contained an "implementation provision"  which
stated  "if  an  application  for  entry  clearance,  leave  to  remain   or
indefinite leave to remain  has  been  made  before  9  July  2012  and  the
application has not been decided it will be decided in accordance  with  the
rules in force on 8 July 2012". A further  statement  of  changes,  HC  595,
came into force on 6 September 2012. HC 595 contained Paragraph A277C  which
provided "subject to  paragraphs  A277  to  A280  and  Paragraph  GEN1.9  of
Appendix FM of these rules, where the Secretary of State is considering  any
application to which  the  provisions  of  Appendix  FM  (Family  life)  and
Paragraphs 276ADE to 276DH (Private life) of  these  rules  do  not  already
apply, shall also do so in line with those provisions".  In  Singh  v  SSHD,
Underhill LJ found that Paragraph A277C in HC 595 was  intended  to  reverse
the effect of the implementation provision.

10.   We were addressed by  both  representatives  on  whether  or  not  the
appellant could fulfil the requirements of either Appendix FM  or  Paragraph
276ADE. It is not disputed that the appellant is an overstayer. He  has  not
had leave to remain in  the  UK  since  19  December  2010.  His  Article  8
application was refused by the respondent.  There  is  no  right  of  appeal
against that refusal. The right of appeal is against the decision to  remove
the appellant. The appellant enjoys an in-country right  of  appeal  against
the decision to remove because he has previously intimated a claim in  terms
of Article 8 ECHR (s.92(4) of the 2002 Act).  Removal  decisions  have  been
taken against the appellant, his wife and at least one  of  his  sons.  Only
one of his sons  is  still  in  minority.  None  of  the  remainder  of  the
appellant's family has appealed  against  removal  decisions,  so  they  are
awaiting removal to Pakistan.

11.   We are told that the appellant is not working and we can see from  the
documents before us that he  relies  on  his  brother  (in  Manchester)  for
support. At the date of application, none of the appellant's  children  have
lived in the UK  for  seven  years.  Because  of  the  length  of  time  the
appellant has  been  in  the  UK,  he  cannot  fulfil  the  requirements  of
Paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules. The appellant and his family  are
subject to immigration control and so cannot  satisfy  either  EX1.1  or  R-
LTRP1.1(d) of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. Having listened  to  the
appellant's agent's submissions, we  are  unable  to  identify  anything  to
suggest that it would  be  unreasonable  for  the  appellant  to  return  to
Pakistan.

12.   Notwithstanding what is said by the appellant's agent,  Singh  v  SSHD
applies. The ratio of Singh v SSHD did not change the law, it clarified  the
law as the law existed at the date of decision.

13.   The appellant cannot satisfy the Immigration Rules. In SS (Congo)  and
Others [2015] EWCA Civ  387  Richards  LJ  said  at  paragraph  33  "In  our
judgment, even though a test of exceptionality does not apply in every  case
falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it is  accurate  to  say  that  the
general position outside the sorts of special contexts referred to above  is
that compelling circumstances would need  to  be  identified  to  support  a
claim for grant of LTR outside the new Rules in Appendix FM."

14.    We  consider  whether  or  not  there  is  anything  exceptional  (or
compelling) in this case. This is an appeal by one member  of  a  family  of
four. At least two other  family  members  have  been  served  with  removal
directions. None of the other family members  have  appealed  against  those
removal directions. The appellant and his family have  overstayed  leave  to
remain in the UK since December 2010. There is nothing exceptional  in  this
case which would merit consideration outwith the Immigration Rules.

Conclusion

15.   We therefore find that the Judge's decision is tainted by  a  material
error of law. We remake the decision. We  set  aside  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal as containing a material error  of  law.  We  substitute
the following decision.

Decision

16.   The appeal is dismissed.



Signed      Date

                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
