
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24604/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13 January 2016                       |On 8 March 2016                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         KATHLEEN MARGARET FAIRCHILD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Tetey, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. In this decision, I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent, and
    to the respondent as  the  appellant  (as  they  appeared  respectively
    before the First-tier  Tribunal).   The  appellant,  Kathleen  Margaret
    Fairchild, was born on 16 March 1955 and is a female citizen  of  South
    Africa.  The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  29  September
    2013 with leave to enter as a visitor valid until 13 March 2014.  On 11
    March 2014, she applied for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on
    the basis of her marriage.  The respondent refused the  application  on
    22 May 2014.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    N P Dickson) which, in a decision promulgated on 5 May 2015 allowed the
    appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  The Secretary of State now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The Secretary of State's primary complaint as expressed in the  grounds
    of appeal is that the judge has failed completely to address  the  fact
    that the appellant could not meet the relevant provisions of HC 395 (as
    amended).  Instead, the judge has, in his decision, directly  addressed
    Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules and has allowed the appeal
    on that basis.  I find that this ground of appeal has merit.  In Izuazu
    (Article 8 - new Rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT  45  and  also  SS  (Congo)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387, it is made clear  that  there  is  a  "two  stage"
    process involved in appeals of this kind.  Whilst  I  acknowledge  that
    there is no need for an appellant to satisfy any threshold criteria for
    Article 8 ECHR to be engaged, there is, as the  law  currently  stands,
    nonetheless a requirement on the First-tier  Tribunal  to  address  any
    appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds outside the Rules in the context of an
    appellant's inability to comply  with  those  Rules.   In  the  present
    appeal, the judge has done no more than to summarise  the  contents  of
    the respondent's refusal letter of 2 May 2014 [15] and to  observe  (as
    had the respondent) that the appellant could not meet the  requirements
    of  paragraphs  E-LTRP2.1  and  E-LTRPT3.1  of  Appendix  FM   of   the
    Immigration  Rules.   Likewise,  the  appellant  could  not  meet   the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE [16].  However paragraphs  [15-17]  of
    the judge's decision are, as I have noted, no more than  a  summary  of
    the respondent's reasons for refusing the appellant's application.  The
    judge  has  not  attempted  to  identify  those  circumstances  of  the
    appellant which engaged both the  relevant  parts  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and Article 8 ECHR but which failed to satisfy  the  former.   As
    the judge has carried out that part of the analysis, it is  unclear  as
    to whether aspects of the appellant's case which  failed  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules have, nonetheless, led the judge to allow the
    appeal outside the Rules.  It is possible that the  judge  has  allowed
    the appeal on Article 8 grounds for the very same reasons that  it  may
    have failed under the Immigration Rules; it was,  at  the  very  least,
    necessary  for  the  judge  to  consider  which  of   the   appellant's
    circumstances lay beyond the ambit of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  to
    explain why those circumstances engaged Article 8 ECHR.  As it is,  the
    judge has simply conducted a freestanding Article 8 assessment  without
    any reference to the Immigration Rules.  By doing so, he has  erred  in
    law such that his decision falls to be set aside.  It will be necessary
    for  there  to  be  a  further  fact-finding   exercise   and   further
    determination of the appeal, both by reference to the Immigration Rules
    and, should it prove necessary, on Article 8 ECHR.

Notice of Decision

 3. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 5  May  2015  is
    set aside.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  that
    Tribunal to re-make the decision.



 4. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 20 February 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


