
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/24781/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 June 2015                               |On 19 June 2015              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Mr AZEEM RAZA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery; Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Miah; Counsel, (instructed by Farani Javid
Taylor Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1.     The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
         granted on 16  April  2015  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Colyer
         against the decision  and  reasons  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Clayton allowing the Respondent's appeal seeking  the  issue  of  a
         residence card under regulation  8  of  the  Immigration  (European
         Economic  Area)   Regulations   2006   (as   amended)   ("the   EEA
         Regulations").  The decision and  reasons  was  promulgated  on  23
         January 2015.

    2.     The Respondent is a national of Pakistan, born on 7 August 1991.
          He claimed that he was in  a  durable  relationship  with  an  EEA
         national exercising free movement rights  in  the  United  Kingdom.
         The Respondent had no other basis of stay in the United Kingdom.

    3.     Permission to appeal was granted  by  Judge  Colyer  because  he
         considered that the  judge  had  erred  when  allowing  the  appeal
         outright, whereas under regulation 8(5) the Secretary of State  had
         a discretion to exercise pursuant to regulation 17(4).

    4.     Mr  Avery  for  the  Appellant  submitted  that  the  judge  had
         manifestly erred as the grant of permission to appeal indicated.

    5.     Mr Miah for the Respondent agreed.  The judge had found  in  the
         Respondent's favour on  the  regulation  8(5)  issue,  the  durable
         relationship.  That finding should be  preserved.   The  discretion
         under regulation 17(4) could only be exercised by the Secretary  of
         State.

    6.     The parties were in agreement  that  the  judge  had  materially
         erred  by  ignoring  the  Secretary  of  State's  discretion.   The
         tribunal agrees and sets  aside  the  decision  and  reasons.   The
         decision and reasons must be remade to that  limited  extent.   The
         tribunal finds that the  judge  found  that  there  was  a  durable
         relationship akin to marriage between the  original  Appellant  and
         his EEA national sponsor, a finding which was not challenged by the
         Secretary of State and is  accordingly  preserved.   There  was  no
         indication  that  regulation  17(4)  had  been  considered  by  the
         Secretary  of  State,  because  she  had  denied  that  a   durable
         relationship   existed.     The   Respondent's   application   must
         accordingly  be  returned  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  that
         discretion to be exercised.

    DECISION

    There was a material error of law in part of the First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination, which is set aside  to  the  extent  that  the  original
    Appellant's appeal under regulation 8(5) was not correctly  determined.



    The following decision is substituted:

    The original Appellant's appeal under regulation 8(5) is allowed to the
    limited extent that the Secretary of State's mandatory discretion under
    regulation 17(4) has not yet been exercised.  The original  application
    is accordingly returned to the Secretary of State for regulation  17(4)
    to be applied in the light of the findings in this determination.






    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell








    TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE
    FEE AWARD

    The appeal succeeded in substance and a full fee award is made.






    Signed       Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
