

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/24973/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19 July 2017                           |On 19 September 2017             |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL

                                   Between

                            HABIBUR RAHMAN ANSARY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                    Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K. Mustafa, of Counsel, instructed by Kalam
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

Background

1.    This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Moran  (hereafter  "the  FtTJ")  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision to refuse him leave to  remain  under
    the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") as a Tier 4 (General) Migrant.

2.    The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  He  has  remained  in  the
    United Kingdom (UK) since his entry in 2006  as  a  student.  His  last
    period of leave expired on 4 June 2013. On 31 May  2013,  he  lodged  a
    further application for leave to remain as a student; that  application
    was refused on 10 July 2013. The sole ground  of  refusal  was  that  a
    grant of leave would exceed the limit of five years  for  students  and
    that none of the exceptions applied. The Appellant appealed.

3.    Before the FtTJ the Appellant was represented but the  Respondent  was
    not. While the original grounds of  appeal  argued  that  the  proposed
    course of study would not exceed the five-year limit, by the  time  the
    appeal was heard on 21 November 2016, the Appellant had resided in  the
    UK for a period of ten years. He thus pursued his appeal  on  the  sole
    ground that he met the requirements of paragraph  276B  of  the  Rules.



The Decision of the FtTJ

4.    The FtTJ dismissed the appeal on all grounds. In  his  self-direction,
    the FtTJ said this at [7]: "Given the dates involved this is an  appeal
    where all of the 'old' appeal rights  are  available."  The  FtTJ  then
    noted the sole basis of appeal pursued by the Appellant, but found that
    as it was not raised by the Appellant until 4 November 2016,  he  could
    not consider it as the "respondent had not consented to this additional
    ground being added as is required by section 85(5) of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002" [8].  The  FtTJ  thus  determined  and
    dismissed the appeal on the basis of the original decision and grounds,
    observing that it was for the Appellant to  make  a  fresh  application
    under paragraph 276B of the Rules.

5.    The Appellant sought permission to appeal. Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Murray on 8  June  2017
    on all grounds.

Error of Law

6.    This decision is brief due to the concession rightly made by Mr  Singh
    on behalf of the Respondent at the hearing, that  the  FtTJ  materially
    erred in law. There is no dispute between the parties that this  appeal
    is governed by the regime in place prior to the amendments made to  the
    2002 Act by the Immigration Act 2014 (Commencement  No.4,  Transitional
    and Savings Provisions and Amendment) Order 2015; hence  section  85(5)
    of the 2002 Act was of no application. The FtTJ thus plainly  erred  in
    law in concluding that he had no jurisdiction to  consider  the  appeal
    under paragraph 276B of the Rules. Therefore, the decision must be  set
    aside.

7.    The parties did not agree on the issue of disposal. Mr Mustafa  stated
    that I should find the Respondent's decision is not in accordance  with
    the law on account of her failure to consider  paragraph  276B  of  the
    Rules. Mr Singh argued that that was not  the  appropriate  course  and
    invited me to remit the matter to the First-tier-Tribunal. I find  that
    the proposal adopted by Mr Singh is the correct  course.  The  original
    decision refusing the Appellant's  student  application  has  not  been
    shown to be unlawful and is not vitiated by the Appellant's reliance on
    paragraph 276B of the Rules, which was  inapplicable  at  the  date  of
    decision. The Appellant is entitled of course to  raise  an  additional
    ground of appeal under the regime governing this appeal, and the First-
    tier Tribunal has jurisdiction to consider it and  should  do  so.  The
    appropriate forum in which to do so is the First-tier Tribunal.



DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law such that the decision is set aside. The appeal  is  remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing to be  heard  by  a  Judge  other
than FtTJ T. Moran.




Signed                                             Dated: 4 September 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral










