
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24416/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th October 2016                          |On 8th November 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                           wajahat hussain suhail
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Lourdes, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, appeals with  permission  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, against the decision of a  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Samini) promulgated on 2nd March 2016, dismissing  his  appeal  against
    the Respondent's refusal to grant him leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
    Entrepreneur Migrant under the points-based system.  The appeal  before
    the First-tier Tribunal was heard on the papers.

Background

 2. On 20th June 2015 the Appellant  submitted  an  IAFT-1  form  appealing
    against the Respondent's refusal to grant  him  leave  to  remain.   He
    ticked the box indicating that he wished the appeal to be dealt with as
    a paper hearing. The requisite fee was paid.

 3. On 13th August 2015 a Notice of Hearing  was  sent  to  the  Appellant,
    indicating that the appeal was to be heard on the papers and  notifying
    him that any further submissions should be received by the Tribunal  by
    10th September 2015.

 4. In response to that direction, the Appellant wrote on the  28th  August
    2015 to the Appellate Authority saying he did not wish to have a  paper
    hearing, but wanted to have an oral  hearing  so  he  could  attend  in
    person and bring further evidence. He requested the Appellate Authority
    to send him the documentation so that he could pay the upgrade fee  for
    the oral hearing.

 5. Nothing was heard by the Appellant in response to that request from the
    Appellate Authority until 2nd March 2016 when  the  Appellant  received
    the First-tier Tribunal's unsigned and undated decision, dismissing his
    appeal. The Appellant appealed the decision to the Upper Tribunal.

Error of Law Hearing

 6. Following the grant of permission, I  heard  brief  evidence  from  the
    Appellant and submissions from Mr Lourdes  who  attended  to  represent
    him.  In the event, I did not need to call upon Ms Isherwood.  She  was
    agreeable to the course of action which I proposed and which is set out
    below.

 7. I am satisfied that the FtT's decision discloses an  error  of  law  on
    account of the fact that the Appellant has not had a  fair  opportunity
    to present his case.  I say this  for  the  following  reasons.   I  am
    satisfied that the Appellant relied upon his advisors to  fill  in  the
    IAFT-1 form for him.  That  form  contains  contradictory  information.
    Whilst it is acknowledged that the box requesting a paper  hearing  was
    ticked, nevertheless the answer to Question I reads as if the Appellant
    had chosen to have an  oral  hearing.   He  says  he  will  attend  the
    hearing.

 8. Once the Appellant received notification that the matter was  set  down
    as a paper appeal, he wrote soon thereafter to the Appellate  Authority
    in an apparent attempt to right matters and to pay the requisite  extra
    fee for an oral hearing.  It would seem that this information  was  not
    acted upon and importantly did not reach the judge making the decision,
    as she makes no mention of it.  The decision itself is unacceptable  in
    form; it is neither signed nor dated and one can only wonder if it  was
    intended for publication.

 9. In these circumstances, the fairest disposal of this matter is  to  set
    aside Judge Samini's decision in its entirety.  The decision will  need
    to be re-made afresh.   It  is  right  therefore  that  the  matter  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, for that Tribunal to  re-make  the
    decision.

10. The matter should be set down as an oral hearing with the proviso  that
    if the upgrade fee is not paid by the Appellant then  the  matter  will
    proceed as a paper hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  The  matter  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Samini) for that Tribunal  to
re-make the decision.
Directions

      1) The remitted appeal will be set down for an oral  hearing,  subject
         to the Appellant paying the requisite fee, within 28 days  of  this
         decision.

      2) Time estimate one hour.

      3) Any further documentary evidence which  the  Appellant  intends  to
         rely upon must be  served  on  the  Respondent  and  the  Appellate
         Authority 21 days before the new hearing date.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     07 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

