
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24275/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Field House                                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Determined on the papers                      |On 5th February 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                              MD QUAMRUL HASAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of  Bangladesh  born  5  October  1984.  He
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  a  decision  made  by  the
    Respondent on 14 May 2014. It is not in dispute that on 20 August  2014
    the Respondent withdrew the immigration decision of 14 May 2014.

 2. As a consequence of the operation of  rule  17(2)  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 "an appeal shall be treated
    as withdrawn of the respondent notifies the Tribunal that the  decision
    to which the appeal relates has been withdrawn." The evidence before me
    discloses that the First-tier Tribunal was notified of  the  withdrawal
    of the immigration decision by fax on 20 August. As a consequence,  the
    appellant's appeal ought to have been treated as having been withdrawn.



 3. However, First-tier Tribunal Horvath, in ignorance of the Secretary  of
    State's  withdrawal  of  the  immigration  decision,   determined   the
    appellant's appeal by way of a decision promulgated on the  20  October
    2014. She had no jurisdiction to do so.

 4. Consequently, the determination of Judge Horvath is  set  aside,  there
    having been no appeal before her to determine.  None  of  the  findings
    made therein are to be preserved.

 5. By section 12 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 if  the
    Upper Tribunal sets aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal it must
    either remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for  further  decision
    or re-make the decision for itself. The Act permits of no other  course
    of action. Consequently, if it is necessary for me to do so in order to
    formally dispose of the appeal before the Upper Tribunal in  accordance
    with the 2007 Act, I re-make the decision  dismissing  the  appellant's
    appeal solely because of a want of jurisdiction. I have not  considered
    the merits of the appellant's case in coming  to  this  conclusion  and
    nothing in this decision should be construed as casting any light on my
    view as to such.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  and  for  the
reasons set out above the appellant's appeal before the  Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 5 February 2015



