
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24652/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 November 2017                          |18 December 2017              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                 ailero [o]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop of Counsel, instructed by Greenland
Lawyers LLP   (London)
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This  appeal  comes  back  before  the  Tribunal  listed  for  a  Case
    Management Review hearing, further to the 'error of law' hearing before
    me on 11 October 2017.  At the previous hearing I found that First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Walters' decision promulgated on  12  October  2016  was
    vitiated for error of law.  Given the developments in  the  case  since
    the occasion of the hearing before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Walters,
    it was considered prudent that rather than simply relisting the hearing
    for a reconsideration of all issues that in the first matter  the  case
    should be listed for a Case Management Review.

2.   The developments in the case were  essentially  two-fold.   Firstly  it
    was said that the  Appellant  had  reconciled  with  her  partner,  the
    position having been that  they  had  separated  at  the  date  of  the
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal.  Secondly, and perhaps more
    significantly, the Appellant's eldest child, 'S', had acquired  British
    citizenship pursuant to the application for registration that had  been
    referred  to  in  the  course  of  proceedings  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The appeal was adjourned in the  hope  that  the  Respondent
    might review the position of the Appellant in light of the registration
    of S as a British citizen.

3.   So far  as  the  Appellant's  partner,  [FA],  was  concerned,  it  was
    discussed at the previous hearing that it might be necessary for him to
    provide further evidence as to the reconciliation  with  the  Appellant
    and  that  there  was  a  continuing  parental  relationship  with  the
    children.  It was also indicated at the previous hearing  that  it  was
    entirely possible that a favourable decision might be made  in  respect
    of the Appellant without such a decision being made in  respect  of  Mr
    Akpomuvwe.

4.   Since the last hearing the Appellant's representatives  have  forwarded
    to the Respondent items of evidence in  support  of  the  assertion  of
    reconciliation and  a  continuing  parental  role  in  respect  of  the
    children.  The evidence is by way  of  a  supporting  letter  from  the
    Appellant, a letter  from  the  family's  church,  a  letter  from  the
    children's school, and a number of photographs showing the father  with
    the children.

5.    Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  informs  me  that  in  the  time  available  the
    Respondent has not had an opportunity to review these materials and  to
    reach any decision in respect of the children's  father.   Nor  in  the
    circumstances has the  Secretary  of  State  reached  any  decision  in
    respect of the Appellant.       However Ms Willocks-Briscoe,  in  light
    of the policy of the Home Office which is extensively  referred  to  in
    the 'error of law' decision, acknowledges that in the  ordinary  course
    of events leave to remain would be granted to the primary  carer  of  a
    British citizen child.  It is in all such circumstances that  today  Ms
    Willocks-Briscoe  indicates  that  she  offers  no  resistance  to  the
    Appellant's appeal.

6.   In consequence I conclude that the decision in  the  appeal  should  be
    remade in favour of the Appellant and accordingly I allow her appeal on
    human rights grounds.

7.   As discussed previously, the remaining dependants (i.e. the partner  of
    the Appellant and the younger child  'E')  are  not  strictly  speaking
    appellants within these proceedings.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe has indicated
    that in the circumstances of the mother being granted leave  to  remain
    it will follow that E  will  be  granted  leave  to  remain  'in-line'.
    Accordingly, this is the expectation of the  Tribunal  further  to  the
    favourable outcome for Ms [O]. (S, of course, does  not  require  leave
    because of his status as a British citizen.)

8.   So far as [FA]'s position is concerned -  it  remains  outstanding  for
    consideration before the Secretary of State.  As discussed, he does not
    have an appeal in his own right before the Tribunal and accordingly  it
    is not for the Tribunal  to  reach  any  decision  in  respect  of  his
    individual circumstances and case; it seems to me, therefore, it  would
    be inappropriate to  list  the  appeal  for  a  substantive  'remaking'
    hearing in effect merely to determine issues in respect  of  [FA]  that
    are not directly within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.   Accordingly
    the appeal is now brought  to  a  conclusion  on  the  basis  that  the
    mother's appeal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

9.   The appeal is allowed.

10.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.


Signed:                                 Date: 15 December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal. However as the premise for  allowing  the  appeal
is based on a new circumstance that did not  pertain  at  the  date  of  the
Respondent's decision, I decline to make a fee award.

Signed:                                 Date: 15 December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
