
                                                [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: IA/24541/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |        Decision & Reasons        |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On 26 February 2016                      |        On 4 March 2016           |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before


                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                            MR. MOHAMMED NEFISSI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss. K. Cann, Counsel instructed by Good Advice UK


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy promulgated on 14 August  2015  which
    allowed Mr. Nefissi's appeal against the Secretary of  State's  refusal
    to issue him with an EU residence card as the extended family member of
    Ms Zuzana Seligova, a citizen  of  Slovakia,  in  accordance  with  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 (the "Regulations").

 2. For the purposes of this decision,  I  refer  to  Mr.  Nefissi  as  the
    Appellant and to the Secretary of State as the  Respondent,  reflecting
    their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The grounds of appeal  submit  that  Judge  Herlihy  erred  in  law  by
    allowing the Appellant's  appeal  outright.   The  Respondent  had  not
    exercised her discretion under regulation 17(4) of the  Regulations  to
    grant a residence card.  As the Appellant  had  been  found  to  be  an
    extended family member under regulation 8(5), it was submitted that the
    judge should have remitted the case to the Respondent for consideration
    under regulation  17(4),  instead  of  allowing  the  appeal  outright.
    Reliance was placed on the case of Ihemedu  (OFMs  -  meaning)  Nigeria
    [2011] UKUT 00340.

 4. Ihemedu states in the headnote, paragraph (iii):

         "Regulation 17(4) makes  the  issue  of  a  residence  card  to  an
         OFM/extended family  member  a  matter  of  discretion.  Where  the
         Secretary of State has not yet exercised that discretion  the  most
         an Immigration Judge is entitled to do is to allow  the  appeal  as
         being not in accordance with the law leaving the matter of  whether
         to exercise this discretion in the appellant's favour or not to the
         Secretary of State."

 5. It was submitted by Miss. Cann that the decision  did  not  contain  an
    error of law.  The judge had not stated that the  Appellant  should  be
    issued with a residence card under regulation 17(4),  but  had  allowed
    the appeal on the basis that regulation 8(5) had been met.

Error of law

 6. The Appellant applied for a residence card.  He  appealed  against  the
    Respondent's decision to refuse to issue a residence card on the  basis
    that he was not an extended family member.  Although  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter does not mention regulation 17(4)  but  focuses  on  the
    Appellant's failure to meet regulation 8(5), the Respondent's  decision
    of the same date is clear that, as the Respondent does not accept  that
    the Appellant falls within  regulation  8(5),  his  application  for  a
    residence card under regulation 17(4) is refused.  This is the decision
    under appeal.

 7. In her skeleton  before  me  Miss.  Cann  accepts  that  the  Appellant
    appealed against the decision to "refuse to issue a residence  card  as
    an extended family member" [2].  Although she  later  states  that  the
    decision of the Respondent  was  "that  the  [Appellant]  and  his  EEA
    partner were not in a "durable relationship" [7], this is not the  full
    decision under appeal.  The Appellant did not apply to  the  Respondent
    for a decision recognising that he and his partner were  in  a  durable
    relationship.  He applied for a residence card.

 8. Therefore, the judge's decision to allow  the  appeal  outright  is  to
    allow the appeal against the Respondent's decision to refuse to issue a
    residence card.  Although the judge does not expressly state  that  the
    Appellant is entitled to a residence card under regulation  17(4),  she
    allows the appeal against the decision to  refuse  to  issue  one,  the
    effect of which is the same.  It is clear that the judge  is  aware  of
    what the appeal is against.  In  paragraph  1.1  she  states  that  the
    Appellant "appeals against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated  the
    28th May 2014 to refuse to issue  a  residence  card  as  the  extended
    family member of an EEA national".   Therefore,  when  she  allows  the
    appeal in paragraph 7.3,  stating  "the  appeal  is  allowed",  she  is
    allowing the appeal against the decision to refuse to issue a residence
    card which, following Ihemedu, she is not entitled to do.

 9. Once the judge had found that the  Appellant  was  an  extended  family
    member for the purposes of Regulation 8(5), given that  the  Respondent
    had  not  considered  whether  to  exercise  discretion  to  issue  the
    Appellant with a residence card under regulation 17(4), she should have
    remitted the matter to the Secretary of State.  It is an error  of  law
    to have allowed the appeal outright.

Notice of Decision


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on
a point of law.

The reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal is preserved up to and including
paragraph [6.6].


Paragraph [7] of the decision is set aside.  The decision is remade as
follows.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that the refusal is not in
accordance with the law.  The matter is remitted to the Secretary of State
to consider whether she will exercise discretion to issue a residence card
in accordance with regulation 17(4) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations
2006.

I do not make an anonymity direction.

Signed                                  Date 28 February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


