
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA246202015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th June 2017                             |On 27th June 2017             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                            Mr YOUNIS BHUDURKHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Fitzsimons (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Metzer, promulgated on 3rd October 2016, dismissing the appeal of
    the Appellant against  the  refusal  of  his  application  for  an  EEA
    residence card, as a family member (spouse) of an EEA national  with  a
    permanent right of residence in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Malawi, who was born on 24th  May
    1969.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  20th
    June 2015 refusing to grant him a right to a permanent residence  card.



The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge, in what was a short determination, stated that  he  accepted
    that the Appellant had found  it  difficult  to  acquire  the  relevant
    evidence from his wife to demonstrate  that  she  had  been  exercising
    treaty rights for the five years' continuous residence period owing  to
    the breakdown of their marriage.  Nevertheless, the Appellant  had  not
    been able to provide pay slips for any of the relevant period  and  the
    P60s did not cover the sole period of the four years when the Appellant
    maintains that his wife was working for  Shaw  Healthcare.   The  judge
    also added that there was a further missing period from April  2011  to
    March 2012 when the Appellant's wife's employment with Shaw  Healthcare
    had apparently ceased, which could not be accounted for.  He also  held
    that the Appellant could not take advantage  of  Regulation  6(iii)  in
    satisfying the judge that his wife had been unemployed for greater than
    six months and she had a genuine chance of being engaged in  vocational
    training or in work.

 4. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge had been both factually
    wrong as well as had erred  in  law  in  relation  to  the  distinction
    between Regulation 6(iii) and Regulation 6(c).

 6. On 2nd May 2017, permission to appeal was granted by  the  Tribunal  on
    the basis that the reference to the  constituent  parts  of  Regulation
    6(2) is a reference to the subparagraphs at (a) to (d)  and  these  are
    alternatives, and if this is so, then the  Tribunal  erred  in  law  in
    appearing to treat them as cumulative requirements, and thus failing to
    consider them on an individual basis.

Submissions

 7. At the  hearing  before  me  on  15th  June  2017,  the  Appellant  was
    represented by Ms Fitzsimons, of Counsel, and she submitted that  there
    were two basic factual errors in the Tribunal's determination.   First,
    there was the employment of the Appellant's former spouse, and although
    the judge referred to the fact that  "she  did  have  a  job  offer  to
    commence work in October 2008, there is no evidence of  her  commencing
    that work before April 2009" (paragraph  8).   This  was  quite  simply
    wrong because she had commenced work.  Second,  the  reference  by  the
    Tribunal to there being "a further missing period from  April  2011  to
    March 2012 when her employment with Shaw Healthcare apparently  ceased"
    (paragraph 8) was also factually  incorrect,  because  the  Appellant's
    bundle shows that at page 119 (paragraph 60) there are the end of  year
    P60s for 2009 to 2010.  At page 20 there is another  P60  for  2010  to
    2011.   Moreover,  at  page  121  there  is  a  P45  showing  that  the
    Appellant's wife left her job on 31st March 2012.  Plainly,  therefore,
    she had started work earlier and continued.

 8. As far as the legal errors  are  concerned  in  the  determination,  Ms
    Fitzsimons  submitted  that  when  they  get  to  paragraph  9  of  the
    determination, it is clear that  the  judge  is  confused  because  the
    different parts of Regulation 6 are meant to be in the alternative, and
    yet the Judge applies them cumulatively.  Given  that  the  Appellant's
    wife had been employed until 31st March 2012, whereafter she engaged in
    nine months of job seeking from April 2012  until  December  2012,  she
    would have benefited from Regulation 6(2)(b)  because  she  would  have
    retained her worker status.  Ms Fitzsimons submitted that the  evidence
    at pages 122 to 142 shows that the Appellant's wife was registered as a
    jobseeker, so that under the Regulations  she  would  have  managed  to
    retain  her  status  as  a  worker  for  nine  months.   The   evidence
    particularly at pages 136 to 138 is so detailed that it shows that with
    her registration at the Jobcentre she was looking for  a  job  actively
    and would have been able to satisfy the  "compelling"  test  after  six
    months of unemployment.  The conclusion of Judge Metzer at paragraph  9
    was therefore erroneous.

 9. In reply, Mr P Singh submitted on behalf  of  the  Respondent  that  he
    would agree that there were material errors and  that  the  appropriate
    course of action here was for the appeal to be  remitted  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal so that it could be heard again.

Error of Law

10. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law such that under Section  12(1)
    of TCEA 2007 the determination should be set  aside.   Moreover,  under
    Practice Statement 7.2(b) the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact-
    finding which is necessary in order for the decision in the  appeal  to
    be re-made is such that having regard to the  overriding  objective  in
    Rule 2, it is appropriate, I find, that this matter be remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, to be determined  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Metzer.

Notice of Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I re-make the decision as follows.  This appeal is
    remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under  Practice  Statement
    7.2(a) to be determined by a judge other than Judge Metzer.

12. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 26th July 2017
