
[pic]

|Upper Tribunal Appeal No.  aplno   |Appeal Number: IA/24767/2014       |
|                                   |IA/24768/2014                      |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)   |                                   |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |Determination Promulgated           |
|On 14th May 2015                   |     On 24th June 2015              |
|                                   |                                    |
|                                                                        |
|Before                                                                  |
|                                                                        |
|THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS                                            |
|UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON                                             |
|DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI                                       |
|                                                                        |
|Between                                                                 |
|                                                                        |
|MR TAE HEE LEE                                                          |
|MRS HYELIN CHOI                                                         |
|Appellants                                                              |
|and                                                                     |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                              |
|Respondent                                                              |
|                                                                        |
|Representation:                                                         |
|                                                                        |
|For the Appellant:      Mr D Magne, Magne & Co Solicitors               |
|For the Respondent:  Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting       |
|Officer                                                                 |


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants are citizens of South Korea. They are  husband  and  wife
    whose dates  of  birth  are  15  October  1975  and  30  September  1974
    respectively. The Appellants applied for further leave to  remain  as  a
    Tier 1 Entrepreneur and dependent spouse under the Points  Based  Scheme
    on 1 May 2014. An immigration decision was made on 28 May 2014  refusing
    the Appellants' applications and proposing to remove them.
 2. Their appeal was heard before Judge Powell of the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    who, in a determination promulgated on 27 January  2015,  dismissed  the
    appeals on immigration and on human rights grounds.


 3. This matter comes before the panel for consideration as  to  whether  or
    not there was a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's
    determination

Grounds for Permission to Appeal

 4. The Appellants submitted grounds  for  reconsideration.  The  Appellants
    submitted that the First-tier misunderstood  the  nature  of  the  rules
    relating to specified  documents  when  they  assessed  those  documents
    submitted at the time of the application.


 5. The grounds may be summarised as follows:


        a. Regarding paragraph 15 of the Determination, the Appellants  had
           produced an electronic bank statement duly endorsed by the  bank
           which met the provisions of  paragraph  41-SD(c)(ii)(7)  of  the
           Immigration Rules;
        b. Regarding paragraph 16 of the Determination, the judge erred  in
           assessing  the  requirement  to  provide  accounts   that   were
           statutorily compliant and which turned on an  interpretation  of
           section 226A of the Companies Act 1985;
        c. Regarding paragraph 17 of the Determination, the entrepreneurial
           activity does not involve trading online and therefore there was
           no need to adduce ownership of the domain  under  paragraph  41-
           SD(e)(iii)(1);
        d. Regarding paragraph 18 of the Determination, the judge erred  in
           finding that the Appellants needed to provide  a  contract  'for
           services' as the relevant rule only required  a  'contract'  and
           the lease provided described  the  general  nature  of  services
           provided. It limited use of premises to D2 use as defined by the
           Town and Country Planning  (Use  Classes)  Order  1987  and  the
           Appellant's business is an entertainment business and the  lease
           confirms the type of business he offers.

Permission to Appeal

 6. In a decision dated 19 March 2015,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Simpson
    granted permission to appeal for the following reasons:


    The Appellant's application was made on 1 May 2014 and the decision made
    on 28 May 2014. It is not immediately clear however which version of the
    Immigration Rules was referred to by the decision maker and/or the Judge
    and whilst it is acknowledged that Paragraph 41-SD  is  quite  specific,
    i.e. all the required documents must be submitted with the  application,
    which documents are required, and  in  what  form,  can  vary  from  one
    version to another. It is arguable that the version that ought  to  have
    been used given the date of application was not the version referred  to
    in preparation of this decision.

Rule 24 Response


 7. The respondent opposed the appeal by way of a response  dated  30  March
    2015  which  states  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  "directed   itself
    appropriately" and "properly considered the version of  the  Immigration
    Rules in force at the date of decision [paragraph 6, First-tier Tribunal
    determination]: Odelola v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2009] UKHL 25 (20 May 2009)". The respondent requested an oral hearing.

Immigration Rules

 8. The immigration rules,  so  far  as  relevant,  state  as  follows  (the
    following excerpts of the rules reflect how they would have appeared  on
    13 May 2014 when captured for the National Archive database):


    Investment: notes


    41-SD. The  specified  documents  in  Table  4  and  paragraph  41,  and
    associated definitions, are as follows:
      ...


      (c) The specified documents to show evidence of the funding  available
      to invest, whether from the applicant's own funds or from one or  more
      third parties, are one or more of the following specified documents:
           (i) A letter from each financial institution holding the  funds,
           to confirm the amount of money available. Each letter must:
                (1) be an original document and not a copy,
                (2) be on the institution's headed paper,
                (3) have been issued  by  an  authorised  official  of  that
                institution,
                (4) have been produced within the three  months  immediately
                before the date of application,
                (5)  confirm  that  the  institution  is  regulated  by  the
                appropriate body,
                (6) state the applicant's name, and his team partner's  name
                where relevant,
                (7) show the account number and,
                (8) state the date of the document,
                (9)  confirm  the  amount  of  money  available   from   the
                applicant's own funds (if applicable) that are held in  that
                institution,
                (10)  for  money  available  from  any   third   party   (if
                applicable) that is held in that institution,  confirm  that
                the third party has informed the institution of  the  amount
                of  money  it  intends  to  make  available,  and  that  the
                institution is not aware of the third party having  promised
                to make that money available to any other person,
                (11) confirm the name of each third party and their  contact
                details, including their full address including postal code,
                and where available landline  phone  number  and  any  email
                address, and
                (12) confirm that if the money  is  not  in  an  institution
                regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA)  and  the
                Prudential Regulation Authority  (PRA),  the  money  can  be
                transferred into the UK; or
           (ii) For money held in the UK only, a recent  personal  bank  or
           building society statement from each  UK  financial  institution
           holding the funds, which confirms the amount of money available.
           Each statement must satisfy the following requirements:
                (1) the  statements  must  be  original  documents  and  not
                copies;
                (2) the bank or building society holding the money  must  be
                based in the UK and regulated by the Financial Conduct
                Authority (FCA)  and  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority
                (PRA);
                (3) the money must be in cash in the account, not Individual
                Savings Accounts or assets such as stocks and shares;
                (4) the account must be in the applicant's own name only (or
                both names for an entrepreneurial team), not in the name  of
                a business or third party;
                (5) each statement must be  on  the  institution's  official
                stationery showing the  institution's  name  and  logo,  and
                confirm the  applicant's  name  (and,  where  relevant,  the
                applicant's  entrepreneurial  team  partner's   name),   the
                account number and the date of the statement;
                (6) each statement must have been issued  by  an  authorised
                official of that institution and produced within  the  three
                months immediately before the date of the application; and
                (7)  if  the  statements   are   printouts   of   electronic
                statements, they must either be accompanied by a  supporting
                letter from the bank, on the bank's headed paper, confirming
                the authenticity of the statements,  or  bear  the  official
                stamp of the bank in question on each page of the  statement


      ...


      (e) If the applicant is applying under the provisions in (d) in  Table
      4, he must also provide:
           (i) his job title,
           (ii) the Standard Occupational Classification (SOC) code of  the
           occupation that the applicant is working in, which  must  appear
           on the list of occupations skilled  to  National  Qualifications
           Framework level 4 or above, as stated in the Codes  of  Practice
           in Appendix J,
           (iii) one or more of the following specified documents:
                (1) advertising or marketing material,  including  printouts
                of online advertising, that has been  published  locally  or
                nationally, showing the applicant's name (and  the  name  of
                the business  if  applicable)  together  with  the  business
                activity  or,  where  his  business   is   trading   online,
                confirmation of his ownership of  the  domain  name  of  the
                business's website,
                (2) article(s) or online links to article(s) in a  newspaper
                or other publication showing the applicant's name  (and  the
                name of  the  business  if  applicable)  together  with  the
                business activity,
                (3) information from a trade fair, at  which  the  applicant
                has had a stand  or  given  a  presentation  to  market  his
                business, showing the applicant's name (and the name of  the
                business if applicable) together with the business activity,
                or
                (4) personal registration with a UK trade body linked to the
                applicant's occupation; and
           (iv) one or more of the following documents showing trading:
                (1) a contract.  If  a  contract  is  not  an  original  the
                applicant must sign each page. The contract must show:
                       (_a)  the  applicant's  name  and  the  name  of  the
                 business,
                       (_b)  the  service  provided   by   the   applicant's
                 business; and
                       (_c) the name of the other party or parties  involved
                       in the contract and their contact details,  including
                       their full address, postal code and, where available,
                       landline phone number and any email address; or
                (2)  an  original  letter  from  a  UK-regulated   financial
                institution with which the applicant  has  a  business  bank
                account, on the institution's headed paper, confirming  that
                the business is trading
      ...

    Investment and business activity: notes


    46. Documentary evidence must be provided in all  cases.  The  specified
    documents in paragraph  46-SD  must  be  provided  as  evidence  of  any
    investment and business activity that took place when the applicant  had
    leave as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant or a Tier 1  (Post-Study  Work)
    Migrant, and any investment made no more than 12 months (or 24 months if
    the applicant was last granted leave as a Tier 1 (Graduate Entrepreneur)
    Migrant) before the date of the application for which the  applicant  is
    claiming points.


    46-SD. The specified documents in paragraphs 45 and 46 are as follows:
      (a) The applicant must provide all the appropriate specified documents
      needed to establish the amount of  money  he  has  invested  from  the
      following list:
           (i) If the applicant's business is a registered company that  is
           required to produce audited accounts, the audited accounts  must
           be provided;
           (ii) If the applicant's business  is  not  required  to  produce
           audited accounts, unaudited accounts and an accounts compilation
           report must be provided from an accountant who is a member of  a
           UK Recognised Supervisory Body (as defined in the Companies  Act
           2006);
           (iii) If the applicant has made the investment in the form of  a
           director's loan, it  must  be  shown  in  the  relevant  set  of
           accounts provided, and the applicant must also provide  a  legal
           agreement, between the applicant (in the name  that  appears  on
           his application) and the company, showing:
                 (1) the terms of the loan,
                 (2) any interest that is payable,
                 (3) the period of the loan, and
                 (4) that the loan is unsecured and subordinated  in  favour
                 of third-party creditors.
           (iv) If the applicant is claiming points for  investing  �50,000
           from a Venture Capital firm,  Seed  Funding  Competition  or  UK
           Government Department, and has not  been  awarded  points  in  a
           previous application for having those funds available,  he  must
           provide a letter as specified in paragraph 41-SD(c)(iii) (except
           that the letter does not need to have been produced  within  the
           three months immediately before the date of the application)  as
           evidence of the source of those funds.
      (b) Audited or unaudited accounts must show the  investment  in  money
      made directly by the applicant, in his own name or on his behalf  (and
      showing his name). If he has invested by  way  of  share  capital  the
      business accounts must show the shareholders, the amount and value  of
      the shares (on the date of purchase) in the  applicant's  name  as  it
      appears on his application. If the  value  of  the  applicant's  share
      capital is not shown in the accounts, then share certificates must  be
      submitted as documentary evidence. The accounts must clearly show  the
      name of the accountant, the date the accounts were produced,  and  how
      much the applicant has invested in the business. The accounts must  be
      prepared and signed off in accordance with statutory requirements,

Error of Law hearing

Submissions

 9. Prior to the hearing a bundle was submitted on behalf of the  Appellants
    dated 4 May 2015. The bundle contained a Skeleton Argument and contained
    53 pages of evidence and tabulated analysis of that evidence.  Mr  Magne
    sought permission to adduce that bundle of evidence  and  explained  its
    tardiness was due to his being abroad and only discovering recently, via
    a subject access request, that part of the  evidence  submitted  by  the
    Appellants to the Home Office with their application was lost. Mr  Magne
    submitted that  due  to  these  facts,  the  appeal  should  be  allowed
    outright. Mr Magne further sought permission to  amend  his  grounds  to
    raise this point as the subject access bundle arrived on 28  March  2015
    after the grounds of appeal were filed on 9 February 2015. We shall come
    to this later.


10. Mr Magne relied on his grounds of  appeal  and  enlarged  upon  them  as
    follows.


11. Regarding paragraph 15 of  the  Determination,  he  submitted  that  the
    judge erred in considering the bank letter, as the letter submitted  met
    the terms of  rule  41-SD(c)(ii)(7)  (the  version  extant  at  date  of
    decision on 26/06/14). In reply to our query, he confirmed that the bank
    letter did not meet rule 41-SD(c)(ii)(4).


12. Regarding paragraph 16  of  the  Determination,  he  accepted  that  the
    Appellants must meet rules 41 and 46  if  the  funds  are  invested.  He
    further accepted that rule 46-SD(b) requires that audited  or  unaudited
    accounts be provided which must be prepared and signed off in accordance
    with statutory requirements but the Appellants had not done so. Mr Magne
    submitted that this omission was understandable due to  section  396  of
    the Companies Act 2006, which required that individual accounts comprise
    a balance sheet as at the last day of the financial year  and  a  profit
    and loss account. Mr Magne did not seek to take us to section 226 of the
    Companies Act 1985 referred to in the grounds of appeal  (presumably  as
    that section of the 1985 Act was repealed by the Companies Act 2006 on 6
    April 2008). He submitted that  section  396  dictates  that  a  company
    accounts require a balance sheet and a profit and  loss  account,  which
    cannot be met by the Appellants because the business had not completed a
    year at the time of  the  application  and  consequently  the  rule  was
    impossible  to  meet  and  could  not  therefore  be  imposed  upon  the
    Appellant. He also accepted, however, that  there  may  be  pre-existing
    companies which have existed for over a financial year  which  would  be
    able to submit such accounts.


13. Regarding paragraph 17 of the Determination in relation  to  advertising
    he submitted that rule 41-SD(e)(iii)(1) states  that  one  must  provide
    confirmation of ownership of a  domain  name  only  if  one  is  trading
    online; however, as the Appellant proposed to run a dance company,  this
    requirement did not apply to him. Mr Magne expanded upon his grounds and
    submitted that the  advertising  material  provided  by  the  Appellants
    consisted of a letter containing a screen capture of a single page  from
    the Appellant's website (the "About Us" page) which had been pasted into
    the body of the letter. Mr Magne highlighted that answer G25 on the Tier
    1 application form showed the Standard Occupational Code applied for was
    "3414 Dancers and choreographers". He submitted that the screen  capture
    demonstrated that the Appellant had  written  a  musical  and  that  the
    screen capture showed links at the top of the website  to  pages  marked
    "Academy" which also suffice to meet  the  advertising  requirement.  He
    further noted that the Respondent's Refusal Letter  commented  that  the
    website was not live but submitted that no evidence  had  been  provided
    that this was so.


14. Regarding paragraph 18 of the Determination,  Mr  Magne  submitted  that
    the lease contract should be analysed against rule  41-SD(e)(iv)(1),  as
    it was at the date of decision. He alleged that the judge had  erred  in
    considering the rules at the  date  of  hearing,  not  at  the  date  of
    decision. It was submitted that the rule at date of hearing  required  a
    "contract of service" whereas the rule at the date  of  decision  merely
    asks for a "contract". Pursuant to that issue,  he  submitted  that  the
    lease submitted covered trading as one of  the  primary  purposes  of  a
    small business is a lease and thus leasing premises constitutes trading.
    He referred to the terms of the sub-lease, specifically  page  6,  which
    mention the terms of "Permitted Use" for an entertainment  establishment
    and according to class D2(d) of  the  Town  and  Country  Planning  (Use
    Classes) Order 1987, a dance hall is amongst those permitted uses.


15. In response to our queries, he confirmed that  the  bank  card  for  the
    company account submitted showed both the name of the applicant and  the
    company and that it met the  rules.  Mr  Magne  submitted  that  if  the
    account was in the Appellants' name, he would not need to show the funds
    were invested, as he is the Director, but would still need to meet  rule
    46. He went on to say that rule  45  governs  46-SD  and  whether  those
    requirements are met and that if rule 46-SD  fell  aside  the  Appellant
    would still need to meet the requirements of paragraph 41.


16.  Mr  Whitwell  submitted  that  paragraph  14   of   the   Determination
    demonstrated that the judge had spent a great deal of  time  determining
    what documentation was submitted. He submitted that the Appellants  were
    attempting to re-argue the appeal.


17. Regarding paragraph 15 of  the  Determination,  he  submitted  that  the
    Appellant had already conceded  that  he  did  not  meet  the  rule.  Mr
    Whitwell submitted that the bank statement was insufficient to meet rule
    41-SD(c)(i) as the judge found.


18. He submitted inter alia that the Appellant's  submissions  took  a  very
    wide view of the rules, trading and business activity.


19. Regarding paragraph 16 of  the  Determination,  he  submitted  that  the
    Companies Act referred to accounts that were to be submitted at the  end
    of the financial year, as opposed to full year accounts. He acknowledged
    that the company was incorporated a few months earlier in  January  2014
    before the application.


20. Regarding paragraph 17 of  the  Determination,  he  submitted  that  the
    website screen capture did not provide details of  a  dance  school  and
    teaching but referred to shows and musicals that the Appellant  puts  on
    and that the webpage was merely a  biography.  He  suggested  that  from
    reading the website one would not infer one  could  take  dance  classes
    from the Appellant. He accepted that there was no evidence to show  that
    the website gateway was faulty or unavailable and that consequently this
    criticism of the webpage could only be taken so far.


21. Regarding paragraph 18 of the Determination, Mr Whitwell submitted  that
    it was not clear that the judge was applying the rules at  the  date  of
    hearing as opposed to the date of application.  He  submitted  that  the
    contract provided was in  fact  a  sub-lease  which  simply  showed  the
    relationship between landlord and tenant. It did not purport to show the
    level of trading or that the Appellant had an ongoing  client  base.  He
    further submitted that the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order
    1987 did not assist the Appellant as it shows that the premises  can  be
    used for any of the permitted uses, which includes  an  ice  rink  or  a
    cinema also.


22. He submitted that even if the Appellant were able to establish that  the
    bank account statement met the rules he would still  need  to  meet  the
    advertising and trading requirements, which he could not do.


23. Regarding the allegation that  Home  Office  had  lost  the  Appellant's
    documentation, he contended that simply because  the  Appellant  alleges
    documents were sent which do not appear in the respondent's  bundle,  it
    does not necessarily mean they were ever sent in  the  first  place.  He
    did, however, acknowledge that one document allegedly submitted  by  the
    Appellant was mentioned in an internal GCID note, which contradicted his
    stance, but none of the other documents were mentioned in that note  and
    on balance, it had not been  shown  that  the  documents  were  in  fact
    submitted.


24. In reply to our query regarding rule  41-SD  SD(e)(iii)(1)  and  whether
    the Appellant needed to submit confirmation  of  his  ownership  of  the
    domain name, Mr Whitwell conceded that as the  business  did  not  trade
    online the judge had erred in this regard.


25. In reply, Mr Magne submitted that rule  41-SD(c)(i)  was  not  the  sole
    path to success as one could meet 41-SD(c)(ii) in the alternative.

Discussion and Reasons

26. At the end of the hearing we indicated that we  reserved  our  decision,
    which we now give along with reasons.


27. We heard submissions from both representatives on the issue of error  of
    law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's Determination. We have  read  the
    Determination prepared by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Powell  with  great
    care  and  in  great  detail.  We  are  however   satisfied   that   the
    Determination must stand as it is  not  infected  by  error  that  would
    materially affect the outcome of the appeal for the following reasons.


28. Regarding paragraph 15 of  the  Determination,  rule  41-SD(c)  requires
    evidence of funding  available  to  invest  to  be  evidenced  in  three
    alternate ways listed in sub-paragraphs (i)-(iii). It is clear that  the
    Appellant cannot meet 41-SD(c)(i) as a letter was not filed as the judge
    observed. However, it is true to note that the judge failed to note  the
    alternative methods  by  which  the  Appellant  could  evidence  funding
    available to him under 41-SD(c)(ii) or (iii). We consider those  matters
    ourselves. Rule 41-SD(c)(iii) is not applicable in this  scenario.  Rule
    41-SD(c)(ii) might conceivably have been relevant however Mr  Magne  did
    not seek to  persuade  us  that  the  bank  statement  submitted  was  a
    "personal" one and accepted that the statement was that of the  company.
    Consequently, the Appellant is unable to meet the terms of rule 41-SD(c)
    regarding evidence of funding  available  to  invest  and  there  is  no
    material error found within this section of the Determination.

29. Regarding paragraph 16 of  the  Determination,  rule  46-SD(b)  requires
    that audited or unaudited accounts be provided which  must  be  prepared
    and signed off in accordance with statutory requirements, which Mr Magne
    confirmed had not been  done.  It  is  true  that  section  396  of  the
    Companies Act 2006 requires individual  accounts  comprising  a  balance
    sheet as at the last day of the financial year and  a  profit  and  loss
    account; however section 394 concerning the duty to  prepare  individual
    accounts states inter alia that "The directors  of  every  company  must
    prepare accounts for the company for each of its financial years...". We
    understand from this that company accounts must be prepared at  the  end
    of each financial year. In short, if the  company  was  incorporated  in
    January 2014 and it had not completed a financial year, there cannot  be
    a statutory compliant account that could be submitted. Consequently,  we
    do not read rule 46-SD(b) as requiring a newly established company  that
    has been in existence for  less  than  one  financial  year  to  provide
    accounts which could be statutorily compliant.


30. As a matter of judicial notice, we observe that  small  private  limited
    companies, similar to that of the Appellant, do not  need  undertake  an
    audit of their annual accounts unless the articles of association or the
    shareholders require it. We have not been shown  any  evidence  to  that
    effect and consequently, we find that the Appellant's company is not one
    that is required to produce audited  accounts  under  rule  46-SD(a)(i).
    However, given that conclusion, the Appellant equally has  not  supplied
    unaudited accounts and an accounts compilation report as  both  required
    by rule 46-SD(a)(ii), as observed by the judge at paragraph  16  of  the
    Determination. Consequently, no material error  arises  in  relation  to
    this ground.


31. Regarding paragraph 17 of the Determination, Mr Whitwell  was  right  to
    concede that the Appellant was not required to produce  confirmation  of
    ownership  of  the  domain  name  for  his  business  under   rule   41-
    SD(e)(iii)(1) as it does not trade online. Mr Magne was right to address
    us concerning the business activity of the Appellant because whilst  the
    judge accepted that the website screen  capture  stated  the  Appellants
    name and business address the advertising material also needs  to  state
    the  business  activity.  We  were  given  the  original  copy  of   the
    advertising material which was on the Home Office's file  and  which  is
    legible. The information given on the Appellant's  application  form  at
    question G25 is that the standard occupational classification (SOC) code
    that most closely fits the work he intends to do is that of Dancers  and
    Choreographers (3414). Mr  Whitwell  is  correct  to  suggest  that  the
    webpage screen capture reads as a biography. This is  true  and  natural
    given that the webpage printed is an "About Us" page. Mr  Magne  submits
    that the Appellant has written a musical for the stage. This is true and
    quite a commendable achievement. What Mr Magne failed  to  draw  to  our
    attention was the following passage which appears in the webpage: "...it
    is Mr Lees' intention to...open this new show on stages in the  UK".  It
    appears to us that this does state the Appellant's business activity, in
    terms which match the SOC code for Dancers and choreographers as  stated
    in the application form. After all, writing a musical for the stage  and
    opening that  show  on  stage  would  involve  dance  and  choreography.
    Therefore, although the judge did not have the benefit of a legible copy
    of the advertising material, we observe that  it  does  just  manage  to
    refer to the relevant business activity for this entertainment company.


32. Regarding paragraph 18 of the Determination, we agree with  Mr  Whitwell
    that it does not appear from that that the judge  was  referring  to  an
    incorrect version of the rule, particularly  given  the  affirmation  at
    paragraph 6 of the Determination that the rules at the date of  decision
    are those to be applied. We note that the contract provided was in a sub-
    lease which in truth simply shows the relationship  between  a  landlord
    and tenant. We do not think that the level  of  trading  or  an  ongoing
    client base are necessary or minimal requirements for a contract to show
    trading. As stated at rule 41-SD(e)(iv)(1)(b), the  contract  must  show
    "the service provided by the applicant's business".


33. We do not find that the Town and Country Planning  (Use  Classes)  Order
    1987 assists the Appellant at all. It shows the types of use  for  which
    the premises leased may be used, but this use is not confined to a dance
    hall and can also include a cinema, concert hall, bingo hall or  casino,
    or even a swimming bath or skating rink. This clearly is insufficient as
    a contract to demonstrate trading because it does  not  demonstrate  any
    service provided by the applicant's business other than payment of  rent
    for premises rented for a class D2 purpose.


34. Consequently, we find that the judge erred in his consideration  of  the
    bank statement (at  paragraph  15)  and  in  his  consideration  of  the
    requirement for confirmation of ownership of the  domain  name  for  the
    advertising material (at paragraph 17).


35. However, we do  not  find  that  the  judge  erred  in  respect  of  his
    consideration of the failure to submit unaudited accounts given that the
    rules required those documents be submitted  (at  paragraph  16)  or  in
    respect of the assessment of the sub-lease as  contractual  evidence  of
    trading given that it does not  specify  the  services  offered  by  the
    Appellant (at paragraph 18).


36. In relation to the Mr Magne's application seeking  permission  to  amend
    the grounds to raise the  issue  of  documents  allegedly  lost  by  the
    Respondent, we decline to entertain the application it in  view  of  its
    lateness. However, even had we considered the application we  would  not
    have been persuaded by the material in any event. The reasons  for  this
    are that we agree with Mr  Whitwell's  submission  that  simply  because
    documents do  not  appear  in  the  Respondent's  bundle,  it  does  not
    necessarily follow that the documents were  sent  in  the  first  place.
    Although one document allegedly submitted was mentioned in  an  internal
    GCID note, no other  documents  were  mentioned  in  that  note  and  on
    balance, we do not find that the Appellant has discharged the burden  of
    proving that the documents were in fact submitted. Even if we are  wrong
    in finding that the documents were not shown to be sent,  we  find  that
    the documents themselves taken at face value do not assist the Appellant
    in his argument that the rules were met in their entirety at the time of
    application.


37.  In  conclusion,  although  we  have  found  an  error  in  the  judge's
    assessment at paragraph 17 of the Determination; it is not  material  to
    the outcome of the appeal given the  failure  to  meet  the  Immigration
    Rules identified at paragraphs 15, 16 and 18 of the Determination.


38. Consequently, the decision concerned did not involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law such that it should be set aside  under  section
    12 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.


39. We observe in postscript that it is of course open to the Appellants  to
    lodge a fresh application, armed with  the  correct  specified  evidence
    (should they be so advised) after their statutorily extended leave under
    section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 has expired  in  accordance  with
    the  analysis  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gill  in  Patel,  R  (on  the
    application of) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  (s.3C(4):
    simultaneous application - withdrawal) (IJR) [2015] UKUT 273 (IAC).


40. Such an application from the  Appellants,  even  though  they  would  be
    overstayers, would nonetheless be considered substantively should it  be
    lodged within a 28-day period of overstaying calculated from the end  of
    any extension of their leave under sections 3C or 3D of the  Immigration
    Act 1971 in accordance with the immigration rules.

Notice of Decision

41. We therefore dismiss the appeal.


42. The Determination shall stand.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made no  anonymity  direction.  There  has  been  no
request for anonymity and the Upper Tribunal makes no anonymity order.

TO THE APPELLANT/RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed. There is no fee award.


|                                   |                                   |
|Signed                             |                                   |
|Lord Matthews                      |                                   |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan        |                                   |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini  |                                   |

