
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA243892014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On Thursday 5 May 2016                        |On 17 June 2016               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     N V
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Loughran, Counsel, instructed by Wilson
solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   As  this  is  a
protection  based  claim  it  is  appropriate  to  continue  that  anonymity
direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant challenges the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Levin promulgated  on  9  February  2015.  Judge  Levin  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal on a preliminary issue, finding that  there  was  no
    valid in country right of appeal.  Permission to appeal was granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker on the basis that it was arguable that
    certification or purported certification  was  of  no  effect  for  the
    reasons given in the Appellant's grounds.  The matter comes  before  me
    to decide whether Judge Levin's decision contains a material  error  of
    law and, if it does, to either re-determine the appeal or remit  it  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for redetermination.

 2. The hearing before me proceeded on the basis of  legal  submissions  on
    the fundamental issue whether there is a  valid  in  country  right  of
    appeal in this case.  The issue is therefore one of law,  applying  the
    relevant statute and case law.  As such, little is to be gained from an
    analysis of Judge Levin's decision.  If he is right that  there  is  no
    valid right of appeal in country in this case, then, even if there were
    an error in his reasoning, this could not be material.  If he is wrong,
    then since he did not go on to determine the substantive issues in  the
    appeal, the appeal should be remitted for re-hearing before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  Both representatives agreed  that  this  would  be  the
    appropriate course.  Therefore, although  Ms  Loughran  did  make  some
    limited submissions about what she says are  errors  in  Judge  Levin's
    reasoning, I do not need to deal with those.

 3. The issue as formulated in discussions at the hearing  is  as  follows.
    Is the certification contained in the original  decision  made  by  the
    Respondent overtaken by a later human rights  claim  which  is  however
    made prior to the lodging of the appeal?

Factual background

 4. As this is an issue of law, I do  not  need  to  go  into  the  factual
    background  of  the  Appellant's  case  in  detail.   It  is,  however,
    necessary to deal with certain aspects  of  the  Respondent's  decision
    making process and the Appellant's claim(s) in order to deal  with  the
    way in which the relevant legal provisions apply.

 5. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran.  She  arrived  in  the  UK  on  the
    Eurostar on 14 June 2013 and claimed asylum.  Enquiries carried out  by
    the Respondent's officers ascertained that she had  previously  claimed
    asylum in Italy.  Her case is therefore  a  so-called  "Third  Country"
    case.

 6. On 14 August 2013, the Respondent served the Appellant with a  decision
    refusing her leave to enter the UK and giving notice of her removal  to
    Italy ("the  First  Immigration  Decision").   The  Appellant  was  not
    removed on that occasion as she attempted  suicide.   Another  decision
    was made on 27 August 2013 again refusing her leave to enter and  again
    directing her removal to Italy ("the Second Immigration Decision").  It
    is not entirely  clear  to  me  why  the  Respondent  made  the  Second
    Immigration Decision but nothing turns on that. The  First  and  Second
    Immigration Decisions both include a certificate under paragraph  5  of
    Schedule 3 to the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants)  Act
    2004 ("the 2004 Act") which I set out below in the section dealing with
    the legislative framework.

 7. On 4 July 2013, the Appellant solicitors  made  a  human  rights  claim
    (that is to say a claim that her removal  to  Italy  would  breach  her
    human rights) ("the First Human Rights Claim").  The First Human Rights
    Claim was in brief form and simply asserted that removal to Italy would
    breach the Appellant's human rights under Article 3  ECHR  due  to  the
    lack of appropriate support for asylum seekers in that country.

 8. By letter wrongly dated 8 May 2013 but apparently  served  on  24  July
    2013, the Respondent rejected the Appellant's First Human Rights Claim,
    finding that there would be no breach of Article 3 ECHR by  removal  to
    Italy and certified the First Human Rights Claim under  paragraph  5(4)
    of Schedule 3 to the 2004 Act  ("the  First  Certification  Decision").
    The Respondent relied in so doing on the Court of Appeal's judgment  in
    EM (Eritrea) & others v SSHD [2012] EWCA  Civ  1336  ("EM  (Eritrea)").
    At that time, there was an application for  permission  to  appeal  the
    Court of Appeal's judgment in that case pending in the Supreme Court.

 9. The First Certification Decision preceded in time the First and  Second
    Immigration  Decisions.  It  is  clear  from  the  face  of  the  First
    Certification Decision that what was there under  consideration  was  a
    human rights claim that removal to Italy would breach  the  Appellant's
    human rights by virtue of the conditions in that country.  It  is  also
    important to  note  that  the  certification  contained  in  the  First
    Certification Decision is under paragraph 5(4) of  Schedule  3  to  the
    2004 Act (see in particular [23] to [24] of that letter).

10. On 11 September 2013, the Appellant's  solicitors  made  another  human
    rights claim this time in more detailed form as part of a letter before
    action ("the Second Human Rights Claim").  By the time  of  the  Second
    Human Rights Claim, the Supreme Court had granted permission to  appeal
    the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  EM  Eritrea.  By  letter  dated  11
    September 2013, the Respondent rejected the Second Human  Rights  Claim
    and again certified that claim under paragraph 5(4) of  Schedule  3  to
    the 2004 Act ("the Second Certification Decision").

11. On 12 September 2013, the Appellant  lodged  a  judicial  review  claim
    challenging the First  and  Second  Immigration  Decisions.  A  further
    letter was sent on 3 October 2013 again rejecting the Appellant's human
    rights claim and certifying it under paragraph 5(4) of  Schedule  3  to
    the 2004 Act ("the Third Certification Decision").  Both the Second and
    Third Human Rights  Claims  and  the  Second  and  Third  Certification
    Decisions post-date the First and  Second  Immigration  Decisions.  The
    Appellant also challenged the Second and Third Certification  Decisions
    in the judicial review.

12. On 19 February 2014, the Supreme  Court  handed  down  judgment  in  EM
    (Eritrea) ([2014] UKSC 2) overturning the Court  of  Appeal's  judgment
    and providing guidance about the correct approach to  consideration  of
    human rights claims in Third Country cases.  As  a  result,  a  consent
    order was signed on 13 May 2014 providing that the judicial  review  be
    withdrawn on the following proviso:-

         "UPON the Defendant having withdrawn the decisions dated 11
         September and 3 October 2013 on the Claimant's human rights claim
         and agreeing to make a decision on the Claimant's human rights
         claim, including consideration of the material submitted by the
         Claimant in the course of these proceedings and any further
         material submitted by the Claimant within 28 days of signature of
         this order"

    It is worth noting that the effect of the consent order was to withdraw
    the Second and Third Certification Decisions.  There is no  mention  in
    the consent order of the First Certification Decision  which  does  not
    appear to have been the subject of the judicial review  challenge  (see
    [2] of the Appellant's grounds of appeal).

13. This appeal was lodged on 13 June 2014.  The  appeal  was  said  to  be
    against the First and Second Immigration Decisions.

14. For completeness, I note that the Respondent issued  a  further  letter
    dated 28 September 2014, in accordance with the consent order dated  13
    May 2014, again certifying  the  Appellant's  Second  and  Third  Human
    Rights Claims under paragraph 5(4) of Schedule 3 to the 2004 Act.

Legislative Framework

15. The right of appeal in this case arises  under  the  appeal  provisions
    prior to the Immigration Act 2014.  The right of  appeal  is  therefore
    generated by an "immigration decision" of a kind  set  out  in  section
    82(2) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").

16. It is common ground that the First and  Second  Immigration  Decisions,
    being a refusal of leave to  enter  are  immigration  decisions  within
    section 82(2)(a) of the 2002 Act and  the  Appellant  therefore  has  a
    right of appeal. There are however limitations on that right of appeal.

17. Section 89(1) of the 2002 Act provides as follows:-

         "(1) A person may not appeal under section 82(1) against refusal of
         leave to enter the United Kingdom unless -

               a) On  his  arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom  he  had  entry
                  clearance, and

               b) The purpose of entry specified in the entry  clearance  is
                  the same as that specified in his application for leave to
                  enter.

         (2)  Subsection (1) does not prevent the bringing of an  appeal  on
         any or all of the grounds referred to in section 84(1)(b), (c)  and
         (g)"

18. The grounds under section 84(1) (b), (c) and (g) are that the  decision
    is contrary to the Race Relations Act 1976, the Human Rights  Act  1998
    or the Refugee Convention.  However, there are further limitations in a
    Third Country case by schedule 3 to the 2004 Act as follows:-

         "[paragraph 5]

         (3)  The person may not bring an immigration appeal  by  virtue  of
         section 92(4)(a)  of  that  Act  (appeal  from  within  the  United
         Kingdom: asylum or human rights) in reliance on -

             (a)  an asylum claim which asserts that to remove  the  person
             to a specified State to which this part applies  would  breach
             the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention,
             or

             (b)  a human rights claim in so far  as  it  asserts  that  to
             remove the person to a specified  State  to  which  this  Part
             applies would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human  Rights
             Act 1998 because of the possibility of removal from that State
             to another State."

19. As a result of the foregoing, the only ground of  appeal  available  to
    the Appellant (apart from one of racial  discrimination  which  is  not
    relied upon) is that her human rights would be breached by  removal  to
    Italy because of the treatment that she would receive in that country.

20. There is however a limitation also as  to  the  forum  of  the  appeal.
    Section 92 of the 2002 Act provides as follows:-

         "(1) A person may not appeal under section 82(1) while he is in the
         United Kingdom unless his appeal is of a kind to which this section
         applies.

         (2)  This section applies  to  an  appeal  against  an  immigration
         decision of a kind specified in section 82(2)(c),  (d),  (e),  (f),
         (ha) and (j). "

    I pause there to note that a refusal of leave to enter is  not  one  of
    those provisions and section 92(3) which does provide for an in country
    right of appeal  against  a  refusal  of  leave  to  enter  in  certain
    circumstances does not apply in this case.  In any event, by  paragraph
    5(2) of Schedule 3  to  the  2004  Act,  a  person  may  not  bring  an
    immigration appeal relying on section 92(2) or  section  92(3)  of  the
    2002 Act in a Third Country case.

21. The Appellant does not dispute that she is not able to appeal on asylum
    grounds from within the UK and that the First  and  Second  Immigration
    Decisions give her a right of appeal which, by combination  of  section
    82 and section 92(1) read with paragraph 5 of schedule 3  to  the  2004
    Act, can only be exercised in general from outside the UK.

22. The central focus of the Appellant's claim to have an in country  right
    of appeal arises  from  section  92(4)(a)  of  the  2002  Act  (section
    92(4)(a)") which provides as follows (so far as relevant):-

         "This section also applies to  an  appeal  against  an  immigration
         decision if the appellant -

          a) Has made an asylum claim, or a human rights  claim,  while  in
             the United Kingdom, or

          b) ..."

23. The effect of that section is that a person who "has made" an asylum or
    human rights claim while in the UK  can  appeal  from  within  the  UK.
    Claim is defined in section 113 of the  2002  Act  ("section  113")  as
    follows (in relation to definition of a "human rights claim"):-

         "'human rights claim' means  a  claim  made  by  a  person  to  the
         Secretary of State at a place designated by the Secretary of  State
         that to remove the person from or require him to leave  the  United
         Kingdom would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act
         1998 (c42) (public authority not to act contrary to Convention)  as
         being incompatible with his Convention rights"

24.  That is however subject to the  Respondent's  right  to  certify  such
    claims, either under section 94 of  the  2002  Act  ("section  94")  or
    section 96 of the 2002 Act.  A certification under section 94 that  the
    claim is "clearly unfounded" has the effect of requiring the person  to
    bring the appeal from outside the UK.  A certificate under  section  96
    is issued by the Respondent where a person should have and  could  have
    raised the claim earlier either in  an  appeal  or  in  response  to  a
    section 120 (one stop) notice.  The effect of a section 96  certificate
    is that there is no right of appeal at all. Section 96 has no relevance
    to this case.

25. The position in Third Country cases is slightly different.   The  power
    of certification arises under paragraph 5(4) of Schedule 3 to the  2004
    Act rather than section 94 of the 2002 Act.  Paragraph 5(4) provides as
    follows  (or  did  at  the  time  of  the  First,  Second   and   Third
    Certification Decisions in this case):-

         "(4) The person may not bring an immigration appeal  by  virtue  of
         section 92(4)(a) of that Act in reliance on a human rights claim to
         which  this  sub-paragraph  applies  if  the  Secretary  of   State
         certifies that the claim is clearly unfounded; and the Secretary of
         State shall certify  a  human  rights  claim  to  which  this  sub-
         paragraph applies unless satisfied that the claim  is  not  clearly
         unfounded.

         (5)  Sub-paragraph (4) applies to a human rights claim if, or in so
         far as, it asserts a matter  other  than  that  specified  in  sub-
         paragraph (3)(b)"

26. In cases where a claim has been certified and a further claim is  made,
    the Supreme Court decided (in ZT (Kosovo) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2009] UKHL 6) that paragraph 353  of  the  Immigration
    Rules  applies  so  that  the  further  claim  is  treated  as  further
    submissions.  That was not the way in which the Second and Third  Human
    Rights Claims were treated in this case and  the  Respondent  does  not
    submit that paragraph 353 should have been applied to those claims.   I
    assume that this arises from the different source of the  certification
    power and the slightly different definition of a "human  rights  claim"
    in Schedule 3 to the 2004 Act.  Certification however appears  to  have
    the same effect.

27. Finally, for completeness, paragraph 5(6) of Schedule 3 to the 2004 Act
    provides as follows:-

         "(6) A person who is outside the United Kingdom may  not  bring  an
         immigration appeal on any ground that is inconsistent with treating
         a State to which this Part applies as a place -

               a) Where a person's life and liberty are  not  threatened  by
                  reason of his race, religion, nationality, membership of a
                  particular social group or political opinion,

               b) From which a person will not be sent to another  State  in
                  contravention of his Convention rights, and

               c) From which a person will not  be  sent  to  another  State
                  otherwise than in accordance with the Refugee Convention."

28. The effect of the foregoing provisions is that in a Third Country case,
    a person may appeal from within the UK if he/she makes a  human  rights
    claim concerning the impact on his/her human rights by removal  to  the
    third country which claim is not certified as  clearly  unfounded.   If
    the human rights claim is certified, the person may  judicially  review
    the decision as to certification but may not appeal from within the UK.



The Appellant's grounds

29. The Appellant asserts that she has an in country  right  of  appeal  on
    human rights grounds.  The factual and legal premise for this assertion
    is that the right of appeal arose from the First and Second Immigration
    Decisions.  She says that she "has made" a human rights claim while she
    is in the UK which has not been certified.  The human rights claims  on
    which she relies are the Second and  Third  Human  Rights  Claims.  The
    reason she asserts that certification has not taken  place  is  because
    the Second and Third Certification  Decisions  were  withdrawn  by  the
    terms of the consent order dated 13 May 2014.

30. I note that the First Certification Decision was not withdrawn  by  the
    consent order.  It appears to be the Appellant's  contention  that  the
    Respondent must accept that the First Certification Decision no  longer
    remains valid as otherwise she would not have made the Second and Third
    Certification Decisions.  The First Certification Decision preceded the
    First  and  Second  Immigration  Decisions.   The  Second   and   Third
    Certification Decisions post-date  the  First  and  Second  Immigration
    Decisions.  The Appellant submits that the First Certification Decision
    cannot apply to the Second and Third Human Rights  Claims.   Thus,  she
    says that she has both an immigration decision (giving rise to  an  out
    of country right of appeal) and has made a human rights claim which has
    not been certified.  Those are she says the essential  ingredients  for
    an in country right of appeal against the decision to refuse her  leave
    to enter.

31. The Respondent has not issued any immigration  decision  subsequent  to
    the First and Second Immigration Decisions (at least not prior  to  the
    lodging of this appeal; a further decision may have been made following
    the later certification in  September  2014).   The  First  and  Second
    Immigration Decisions on their face give rise only to an out of country
    right of appeal.   The  Appellant  says  that  this  does  not  matter.
    Whether there is a right of appeal and  the  forum  of  that  right  of
    appeal is governed by statute and is not conferred by  the  actions  of
    the Respondent.  She says that she can waive due notice of a  right  of
    appeal and the fact that there is no immigration decision conferring an
    in country right of appeal is, she says, therefore of no relevance.

32. In the course of discussions at  the  hearing,  I  pointed  out  to  Ms
    Loughran the potential impact of her submissions if she  were  correct.
    As she submitted, and I accept, however, even  if  the  effect  of  the
    Appellant's arguments is as far reaching as  might  be  the  case  that
    cannot undermine her case if that  is  what  the  plain  words  of  the
    statute require.  If there is any ambiguity of meaning, however, if the
    impact of the construction for  which  she  contends  has  consequences
    which appear illogical in the context of the statutory scheme, this may
    suggest that the construction which she advances is incorrect.

Relevant case law

33. At the hearing before me,  the  representatives  drew  attention  to  a
    number of cases which are potentially relevant to the issue.    I  also
    drew the representatives' attention to several  other  cases  which  it
    seemed to me were of potential relevance and I received submissions  in
    relation to those.

34. I can deal quite shortly with some  of  the  cases.   The  case  of  BA
    (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2009]  UKSC  7
    on which Ms Loughran relied is of no relevance (at least insofar as she
    relies on the Supreme Court's judgment).   The  issue  in  the  Supreme
    Court was whether certification or paragraph 353 applies in the case of
    further submissions made after the exercise of an in country  right  of
    appeal in circumstances where the Secretary of State is obliged to make
    a further immigration decision (there a decision refusing to  revoke  a
    deportation order).  That much is  clear  from  [14]  to  [15]  of  the
    Supreme Court's judgment and [1]  to  [2]  of  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    judgment there under appeal (see [2009] EWCA Civ 119).   It  is  common
    ground in this case that paragraph 353 has no application.

35.  Equally,  it  is  not  disputed  that  the  Appellant  can  waive  her
    entitlement to notice of a right of appeal by lodging the appeal if  by
    law she has such a right (and the right of appeal is one which she  can
    exercise from within the UK) (see R v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department ex parte Jeyeanthan [2000] 1 WLR 354 and Abiyat  and  others
    (rights of appeal) Iran [2012] UKUT  314  (IAC);  see  also  BJ  (Singh
    explained) Sri Lanka  [2016]  UKUT  00184  (IAC)).   The  issue  cannot
    therefore be determined by the fact that the Respondent has not  issued
    notice of a decision conferring an in-country right of appeal.

36. Ms Loughran relies on the case of R (AM (Somalia)) v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 114 ("AM (Somalia)").  That  is
    a Third Country case as  here  and  is  helpful  as  providing  a  very
    succinct synopsis of how appeal rights and certification operate in the
    third country context (albeit  in  the  context  of  earlier  statutory
    provisions) as follows:-

         "[5] In short, what was the Dublin Convention and is now  known  as
         the Dublin Regulation (EC343/2003) seeks to prevent  forum-shopping
         among EU states by requiring the country of first arrival, if asked
         to do so, to process an asylum-seeker's claim.  Because removal for
         this purpose is capable in some cases of undercutting  individuals'
         Convention rights, the combined effect of s.11 of  the  Immigration
         and Asylum Act 1999 and s.93 of the 2002 Act was to bar  in-country
         appeals once a third country certificate has been issued save where
         a human rights claim has been made and has not  been  certified  by
         the  Home  Secretary  as  clearly   unfounded.    Absent   such   a
         certificate, s.82 of the 2002 Act gave a right  of  appeal  against
         removal without requiring the appellant first to leave  the  United
         Kingdom.  It followed that a "clearly unfounded" certificate was  a
         necessary accompaniment to a third country certificate  if  an  in-
         country appeal was to be prevented.

         [6]  The 2004 Act repealed and replaced  these  provisions,  though
         without altering their substantial effect, from a date which was in
         due course fixed by statutory instrument as 1  October  2004.   The
         same instrument made transitional provision for the continuance  in
         effect of s.11 certificates "issued" before that date.

37. Ms Loughran apparently relies on this case in support of her submission
    that a certification decision made after an immigration decision cannot
    operate to take away the in-country right of appeal  generated  by  the
    immigration  decision.   As  a  general  proposition,  I  accept   that
    submission.  As such, it can make no difference that the Respondent  in
    this case has, after the lodging of the appeal, in September 2014, made
    a further decision certifying the Second and Third Human Rights Claims.
    However, the case of AM (Somalia) can be distinguished from the present
    case.  Crucially in that  case,  the  original  certification  decision
    which preceded the immigration decision under appeal had been  declared
    a nullity. That is because the  certification  decision  preceding  the
    immigration  decision  had  been  issued  under  the  wrong   statutory
    provision (see [7] of the judgment).   Therefore,  it  is  unsurprising
    that the Court of Appeal held that there was a valid in  country  right
    of appeal.

38. A case which is of greater potential relevance  is  SS  &  ors  (Ankara
    Agreement - no in-country right of appeal) Turkey  [2006]  UKAIT  00074
    ("SS (Turkey)").  The main issue in that case  was  whether  the  human
    rights claim had been made to the Secretary of State.  That is  not  in
    dispute in this case.  All of the First, Second and Third Human  Rights
    Claims were made to the Secretary of State.  However, what is  said  by
    the Tribunal at [72] to [84] of the judgment may be of  some  relevance
    to the Appellant's case and I therefore set out that extract in full:-

          "[72]   Mr Chatwin's second main submission was that human  rights
         claims under  s92(4)(a)  had  in  any  event  been  raised  by  the
         appellants in the grounds of appeal...That, he said, was sufficient
         to bring all but the first appellant within the scope of s92(4)(a).
          For there to have been a human rights claim within the meaning  of
         s92(4)(a), he submitted, the only prerequisite  was  that  a  human
         rights question had been raised at any time prior to the hearing of
         the appeal or at least by the time of receipt of notice of  appeal:
         a human rights claim did not, he said, need to be made prior to the
         immigration decision.

         [73] In our view this line  of  argument  has  some  unsatisfactory
         features.  Firstly, it appears to conflate the concept of  a  human
         rights claim with the concept of a human rights  ground.   It  also
         clouds the apparent logical distinction made in Part 5 of the  2002
         Act between s92 (whose function  is  solely  to  determine  whether
         there is an in-country right of appeal against  the  s82  decision)
         and s84 (which is solely concerned with the grounds  the  appellant
         may rely upon in any type of appeal, in-country or out-of-country).
          Furthermore, the logical sequence embodied for the  most  part  in
         Part 5 of the  Act  appears  to  be:  (1)  claim,  (2)  immigration
         decision and (3)  appeal/grounds  of  appeal:  see  s83,  83(1)(a),
         s94(2), s96 (and also paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules....

         [74] However, whilst we think that the drafters  of  the  2002  Act
         intended for the most part to employ the logical sequence  we  have
         just described, we do not think that they fully completed the  job.
         Here it is important to bear in mind first of all that the previous
         legislation, in the form of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999,
         did provide by s65  that  a  person  could  make  a  "human  rights
         allegation" and that was something which could be  made  after  the
         decision in the form of an additional  statement  of  grounds:  see
         ss74, 75 of the 1999 Act.  Under this  Act  a  human  rights  claim
         could take the form of a human rights allegation.

         [75] We can find nothing in the 2002 Act that expressly  says  that
         it is no longer possible for a human rights claim to be made  post-
         decision in the form of human rights grounds of appeal.

         [76] Regard must also be had to s120 of  the  2002  Act.   Although
         this is concerned with the requirement to state additional  grounds
         for  an  application,  it  clearly  contemplates  that   where   an
         immigration decision within the meaning of  s82  has  already  been
         taken, the Secretary of State or  an  immigration  officer  may  by
         notice in writing require a person  to  state  additional  grounds.
         Subsection (3) states that:

             "A statement under subsection (2) need not repeat  reasons  or
             grounds  set  out  in  -  (a)  the  application  mentioned  in
             subsection  (1)(a),  or  (b)  an  application  to  which   the
             immigration decision mentioned in subsection (1)(b) relates."

         [77]  This  wording  suggests   that   there   is   a   degree   of
         interchangeability about  the  concepts  of  claiming/applying  and
         stating grounds, since it is contemplated here that grounds can  be
         stated either at the application/claim stage or at a  post-decision
         stage.

         [78] Then there is s8 of the Asylum and Immigration  (Treatment  of
         Claimants etc) Act 2004.  Subsection (1) states:

             "In determining whether to believe a statement made by  or  on
             behalf of a person who makes an asylum claim or a human rights
             claim, a deciding authority shall take  account,  as  damaging
             the claimant's credibility, of any  behaviour  to  which  this
             section applies."

         [79] Subsection (5) states:

             "This section also applies to failure by the claimant to  make
             an asylum claim or human rights claim before being notified of
             an immigration decision, unless the  claim  relies  wholly  on
             matters arising after the notification (emphasis added)"

         [80]  It  is  difficult  to  see  how  subsection  (5)  would  have
         application in an AIT appeal if an asylum  or  human  rights  claim
         could only be made before the person was notified of an immigration
         decision.

         [81]  There  is  also  the  contents  of  paragraph  5(7)  of   the
         Immigration (Notices) Regulations  2003.   Although  this  arguably
         deals with the situation of what is to happen  where  a  notice  of
         decision is served which need not comply with  requirements,  inter
         alia, to advise of a right of appeal, it nevertheless,  allows,  at
         least in respect of a particular sub-set of immigration  decisions,
         for a claim to be made post-decision.

         [82] To adopt the view that in all cases a claim  had  to  be  made
         prior to the decision would also conflict with existing  case  law.
         As was pointed out in the additional written submission made by the
         appellants' representatives in response to our concerns  about  the
         relevance of the  Mehmet  Parmak   case,  the  recent  starred  AIT
         determination, JM (Rule 62(7):  human  rights  unarguable)  Liberia
         [2006] UKAIT 00009 states at para [33] that:

             "The human rights position is different.  The  Appellant  does
             not claim to have a status: he simply claims  that  he  should
             not be removed.  It is important to appreciate  that,  in  any
             case in which this issue arises and to which the  transitional
             appeal provisions apply, the Appellant is  a  person  who,  by
             asserting human rights grounds in his notice of appeal or one-
             stop notice to the Secretary  of  State,  has  made  a  "human
             rights claim" within the meaning of  s113(1)  and  hence  also
             s92(4) of the 2002 Act.  He thus has an  in-country  right  of
             appeal  against  the  decision  to  issue  removal  directions
             against him under s10 of the 1999 Act as an overstayer if such
             a removal decision is ever made... For all these  reasons,  if
             there are human rights issues to be  raised,  they  should  be
             raised at the moment when removal is threatened, not simply at
             the moment when it becomes theoretically possible."

         [83] This case (which was  of  course  a  transitional  case)  does
         confirm that a human rights claim could in principle be raised in a
         notice of appeal.  What was being considered in JM  was  whether  a
         human rights claim which had been made in the course of  an  appeal
         against a decision refusing  to  vary  leave  could  be  raised  in
         subsequent proceedings (involving a removal decision).  We need say
         no more about this, since  the  historic  claim  argument  was  not
         relied on by Mr Chatwin in any of the appeals before us.

         [84] We conclude that (subject to a further  requirement  we  shall
         come to in a moment) a claim can qualify  as  an  asylum  or  human
         rights claim under s113 even though made post-decision even if  not
         made until (but no later than) the time of lodging  of  the  notice
         (and grounds) of appeal.  We say no later than because  although  a
         human rights claim may be made to the Secretary  of  State  at  any
         time, including after the decision, that claim can have  no  effect
         on the validity of an existing appeal.  An appeal is  either  valid
         or invalid at the point in  time  when  the  notice  of  appeal  is
         served, or it is not.  No subsequent human rights claim can  affect
         that."

39. This decision is not binding  on  me.   It  has  to  some  extent  been
    overtaken by later case law to which I  refer  below.   In  any  event,
    insofar as the Tribunal relied on section 65 of the 1999 Act,  I  would
    decline to follow the decision as it seems to me that the appeal scheme
    which preceded the coming into force of the 2002 Act (which  introduced
    the concept of appeals generated  by  immigration  decisions)  is  very
    different to that in force at the time of section  65.   Whilst  it  is
    true that section 120 of the 2002 Act and section 8  of  the  2004  Act
    both permit of a claim which post-dates an  immigration  decision,  the
    fact that such a claim can be made to the Secretary of State does  not,
    with respect to the Tribunal, answer the question of whether the making
    of the claim at that time operates to change the forum of the appeal by
    reference to  section  92(4)(a).  The  decision  in  JM  (Liberia)  was
    overturned by the Court of Appeal (see [2006] EWCA Civ 1402).   In  any
    event, as the Tribunal points out at [83] of SS (Turkey)  (above)  that
    case was concerned with the justiciability of a human rights  claim  in
    the context of an in-country appeal where removal was  not  threatened.
    As such, it is of no relevance in the present context.

40. In the case of ST (s92(4)(a): meaning  of  "has  made")  Turkey  [2007]
    UKAIT 00085 ("ST (Turkey)"), the Tribunal had yet again to grapple with
    the issue of the timing of the human rights claim.  In that  case,  the
    issue arose (as in SS (Turkey)) in the context of an appeal  against  a
    decision refusing leave to enter as a businessman  under  the  1963  EC
    Turkish  Association  Agreement  (there  referred  to  as  the   Ankara
    Agreement).  In ST (Turkey) the Appellant was a failed  asylum  seeker.
    He sought to rely on further submissions which he had  made  on  asylum
    and human rights grounds which were rejected by the Respondent applying
    paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules  at  the  same  time  but  in  a
    separate decision to that refusing leave  to  enter  under  the  Ankara
    Agreement.  He argued that those  submissions  were  a  claim  for  the
    purposes of section 113 and that therefore the appeal conferred by  the
    immigration decision which was only an out of country right  of  appeal
    should proceed in country.   The  Tribunal  dealt  with  the  competing
    arguments regarding timing as follows:-

         "[10]    Put broadly, the burden of the appellant's case is that he
         has an in-country right of appeal because he  had  an  undetermined
         human rights claim, based on the May 2004 representations,  at  the
         time of the present  decision:  or,  precisely,  that  the  present
         decision is a response to representations in May 2004 that had  not
         previously been dealt with.  The respondent's position, as set  out
         in the documents to which we  have  made  reference,  is  that  the
         appellant  has  no  in-country  right   of   appeal   because   the
         representations of May 2004 do not amount to a human  rights  claim
         for these purposes.  In our judgment, neither of those positions is
         correct.

         [11] We must start with the wording of  the  Act  itself.   Looking
         first at s113, we note that the definition  is  surprisingly  rich.
         As the Tribunal pointed out in SS & Others  (Turkey)  [2006]  UKAIT
         00074, the requirement that the claim be made to the  Secretary  of
         State means that if the only claim is in  grounds  of  appeal,  the
         requirements of s113 are met if the appeal was  to  an  Adjudicator
         before 4 May 2005 because the appeals process was then that an  in-
         country right of appeal had to be  lodged  with  the  Secretary  of
         State.  A claim made only in grounds of appeal  to  this  Tribunal,
         however, is not lodged with  the  Secretary  of  State  and  cannot
         therefore meet the requirements of  s113.   Further,  as  has  been
         observed on a number of occasions, there do not appear  to  be  any
         places formally designated for  the  purposes  of  s113:  it  seems
         clear, however, that the various addresses that  the  Secretary  of
         State makes available for those intending to lodge asylum or  human
         rights claims must be considered as designated for these  purposes.
         (The requirement that the claim be to the Secretary of State or  at
         any particular place is removed by the  prospective  amendments  to
         s113.)  In the present appeal there is no doubt that any asylum  or
         human  rights  claims  made  by  the  appellant  fall  within   the
         definitions of such claims in s113.

         [12] We turn then to s92(4)(a).  Is the appellant to be treated  as
         a person who "has made an asylum claim, or  a  human  rights  claim
         while in the United Kingdom"?  The literal meaning of  those  words
         would appear to be absolutely clear.  The  literal  meaning  would,
         however, encompass not only a person whose asylum or  human  rights
         claim is the subject of the appeal, but  also  (1)  a  person  who,
         having made such a claim, chooses now  not  to  pursue  it  but  to
         appeal on other grounds; (2) a person who has made such a claim  in
         the past, had it dealt with, and makes it again; (3) a person  who,
         having made such a claim in the past, does not make it  again,  but
         raises completely different reasons for being allowed  to  stay  in
         the United Kingdom, and appeals against a refusal  without  raising
         asylum or human rights issues at all; and even  (4)  a  person  who
         makes such a claim, leaves the United Kingdom, returns and  repeats
         this or makes any  other  claim.   It  may  well  be  said  that  a
         restriction on in-country rights of appeal must have been  intended
         to have an effect narrower than the literal meaning of the words in
         s92(4)(a)  would  suggest.   Circumstance  (4)  is  a  particularly
         glaring example of the type of case that might be regarded  as  not
         justifying a right of appeal from within the United Kingdom.

         [13] In SS & Others, the Tribunal, having concluded that, on  their
         true construction, s113(1) and s92(4)(a) attributed  an  in-country
         right of appeal to a person making a human rights claim only  in  a
         notice of appeal to an Adjudicator, after a refusal of claims  made
         on a completely different basis said [at 91]: "We are bound to  say
         that we have reservations ...Whilst  that  seems  to  us  a  wholly
         unintended consequence of the 2002 Act, we have applied the law  as
         it seems to us to be."

         [14] We must do the same.  There is no doubt that  s92(4)(a)  could
         have taken a different form.   It  could  have  provided  that  s92
         applies to an appeal made on asylum, or human rights grounds  by  a
         person in the United Kingdom.  It  could  have  provided  that  the
         section applied to an appeal against an immigration decision if the
         appeal related, in whole or in part, to an asylum  claim  (for  the
         meaning of these words see HH [2007] UKAIT 00036).  It  could  have
         provided that s92 did not apply to a person who had made no  asylum
         or human rights claims since he last entered  the  United  Kingdom.
         It does none of these things.  In the  circumstances,  despite  the
         breadth that the literal meaning of the words has,  we  see  little
         reason  to  import  into  them  a  meaning  which   would   require
         substantial  re-writing,  and  which  would  have  the  effect   of
         restricting an appellant's rights of appeal in a manner not clearly
         authorised by the Statute."

41.  The Tribunal went on to analyse the Secretary of State's arguments  in
    relation to paragraph 353 (the  point  which  subsequently  became  the
    central focus in the Supreme Court in BA (Nigeria) -  see  [34]  above)
    before concluding as follows:-

         [18] It does not appear to us  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has
         established any basis for restricting the meaning of s92(4)(a) to a
         narrower compass than that of the  clear  literal  meaning  of  the
         words used.  It follows that a person has, because of that section,
         an in-country right of an appeal against an immigration decision if
         he is a person who has, at any time in the past, made an asylum  or
         human rights claim within the meaning of that section whilst in the
         United Kingdom.

         [19] The position put by the appellant emphasises the  strength  of
         the appellant's claim to have an in-country right of appeal in  the
         present case, but is, in our judgment unnecessary.  He has  an  in-
         country right  of  appeal  not  because  the  immigration  decision
         against  which  he  appeals  is   a   response   to   the   further
         representations, but because he is a person who has  made  a  human
         rights claim whilst he is in the United Kingdom."

42. ST (Turkey) is of limited relevance because it concerns historic claims
    ie those which pre-date the  immigration  decision.   Furthermore,  the
    arguments raised in ST (Turkey) were re-considered by Blake  J  in  the
    cases of Etame v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  and  AIT;
    Anirah v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2008]  EWHC  1140
    (Admin) ("Etame and Anirah").  One of the  central  arguments  in  that
    case  surrounded  the  application  of  paragraph  353  to  second   or
    subsequent claims and formed the basis  for  what  became  the  central
    issue in the Supreme Court in  BA  (Nigeria).   However,  the  starting
    point for the Claimants' argument was whether they had made claims  for
    the purpose of section 113.  The factual basis for their  argument  was
    the making of further submissions prior to the immigration decision  in
    question (there the decision refusing to revoke the deportation order).
     The Judge therefore considered the issue of the timing  of  the  claim
    prior to considering the argument concerning paragraph 353 as follows:-

         "Has made a claim"

         [31] It is clear that on  the  literal  meaning  of  the  words  in
         s92(4)(a) any historic claim to asylum or human  rights  protection
         would generate a right of appeal to be  determined  before  removal
         where an immigration decision is taken.  Mr Husain submits that the
         literal meaning of the statutory language is to be deployed and  he
         relies on recent Tribunal authority to that effect."

43. Having canvassed the parties' competing submissions on ST (Turkey)  and
    the principles of statutory construction  which  the  Judge  considered
    applied, he concluded as follows:-

         "[41]  On  this  first  issue  I  prefer  the  submissions  of  the
         defendant.  Parliament has carefully defined the cases where  there
         is a right of appeal; the grounds of an appeal that may be advanced
         and the circumstances when the right of appeal may be exercised  in
         the United Kingdom prior to removal.   It  is  obviously  important
         that there is an in-country  appeal  in  asylum  and  human  rights
         claims at least engaging Article 3 ECHR.  A claimant with a current
         well-founded fear of  persecution  may  face  irreparable  harm  on
         return if his or her claim is dismissed and the appeal can only  be
         exercised from abroad but there is no reason why a purely  historic
         protection claim should require or deserve an in country appeal.

         [42] Whilst there may be cases where the process of  admission  and
         removal may give rise to two immigration decisions and  potentially
         two occasions for an appeal, this is no indication  that  in  every
         case Parliament concluded that every subsequent  appeal  should  be
         heard in country.  If two claimants seek to  revoke  a  deportation
         order purely on the basis of compassionate  circumstances  personal
         to them that do not engage a protection claim too  it  is  entirely
         illogical that they should be treated  differently  as  to  whether
         their  appeal  should  be  heard  in  country  by  the   irrelevant
         happenstance of whether one of them had made a protection claim  in
         the past that has no bearing on their present predicament or  claim
         to remain.

         [43] I have no difficulty in concluding that  the  consequences  of
         the literal construction of s.92(4)(a) would indeed be  absurd  and
         give rise to arbitrary distinctions between  individuals  similarly
         placed for all relevant purposes.  Parliament  must  have  intended
         that the in-country right of appeal was  to  be  given  only  where
         there  was  a  nexus  between  the  immigration  decision  formally
         generating the appeal and the representations or  application  that
         the immigration decision was responding to.  Such a construction is
         consistent with the requirements of an effective  remedy  where  an
         important right  is  concerned  and  consistent  with  the  minimum
         procedural rights the UK  is  required  to  afford  asylum  seekers
         whether by extrapolation from the binding international  obligation
         of non refoulement  reflected  in  Article  33(1)  of  the  Refugee
         Convention or the Procedures Directive promulgated by the  European
         Union to which further consideration will be given  later  in  this
         judgment.  Further this construction is not  inconsistent  with  or
         unduly restrictive of rights of appeal afforded by statute.  In the
         immigration context  it  is  not  unusual  to  find  appeal  rights
         exercisable only from abroad.  People who have no recognised  right
         to enter or remain are not generally entitled to  enter  or  remain
         for the purpose of appealing an  adverse  decision  affecting  such
         rights.  In particular it would  not  be  surprising  that  appeals
         against a refusal to revoke a  deportation  order  would  be  heard
         abroad following removal as consideration of such revocation  would
         normally follow after the decision has  been  implemented  and  the
         person removed in accordance with the deportation order."

44. The judgment of Blake J was appealed to the  Court  of  Appeal  ([2009]
    EWCA Civ 119).  Permission was  granted  on  the  issue  in  which  the
    Claimants succeeded in the  Court  of  Appeal  and  the  Supreme  Court
    relating to the application of paragraph 353 to second  and  subsequent
    claims.  However, in relation to the issue concerning the timing of the
    claim in relation to the immigration decision, permission to appeal was
    refused.  Sedley LJ at [10] of the Court of Appeal's judgment  observed
    as follows in relation to that issue:-

         "[10]    Blake J, in a full and careful judgment, [2008] EWHC  1140
         (Admin) concluded that the first argument advanced by the claimants
         - that on a purely literal construction of s.92(4)(a), any historic
         asylum or human rights claim gave an in-country or suspensive right
         of appeal - failed because it would lead  to  an  inexplicable  and
         arbitrary  distinction  between  individuals  who  were   similarly
         placed.  It followed that, although not spelt out, there had to  be
         a nexus between the immigration decision against which  the  appeal
         was directed and the content of the initial claim  for  protection.
         Keene LJ refused permission to appeal  against  this  much  of  the
         decision, and the application in this regard has not been renewed."



45. The judgment of Blake J  in  Etame  and  Anirah  is  of  assistance  in
    relation to the timing issue.  As I observe, however, its relevance  is
    somewhat limited because the claim relied upon  in  that  case  was  an
    historic one which had been made prior  to  the  immigration  decision.
    The final case to which I make reference is perhaps the most  relevant.
    In R (on the application of) Nirula v First-tier Tribunal  (Asylum  and
    Immigration Chamber) & Anor [2011] EWHC 3336 (Admin)  and  [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 1436 ("Nirula") the issue was whether the Mr Nirula could appeal  a
    decision to remove him on grounds of deception whilst in the UK because
    he also had an Article 8 claim.  In that case,  Mr  Nirula  raised  the
    human rights claim after the  immigration  decision  against  which  he
    appealed.  However, he made the claim only  in  the  grounds  with  his
    notice of appeal and not by way of a claim to the  Secretary  of  State
    (in accordance with section 113).

46. At first instance ([2011] EWHC 3336 (Admin) the timing issue was  dealt
    with by the Deputy High  Court  Judge  (Mr  C  M  G  Ockelton)  in  the
    following terms:-

         "[21]    The issues: 1: "has made"

         [22] The first is whether, in the circumstances of this  case,  the
         claimant is to be regarded at the relevant time  as  a  person  who
         "has made" a human rights  claim  within  the  meaning  of  section
         92(4)(a).  That is important because, as his appeal is not  against
         one of the kinds  of  decision  mentioned  in  s92(4)(a),  he  will
         otherwise have no statutory right of appeal while he remains in the
         United Kingdom.

         [23] The position is, as I have indicated, that the  claimant  made
         his human rights claim for the first time in his Notice of  Appeal,
         and the question is, broadly speaking, whether that was  too  late.
         Mr Malik, on behalf of the claimant, submits that the claimant has,
         by the ordinary use of language, made a human rights claim, and  by
         the time the Tribunal comes to consider the issue, that claim is in
         the past.  It must be, because it was in the Notice of Appeal.

         [24] In response, Mr Dunlop on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State
         points out that "human rights claim" is defined in section  113  as
         "made by a person to the Secretary of State in a designated place",
         and that whatever might be said of the claim made in the grounds of
         appeal, it was not to the Secretary of State.  He  refers,  amongst
         other cases, to the decision of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
         in SS (Turkey) v Secretary of State [2006] UKAIT 74.

         [25] In  response  to  that,  Mr  Malik  argues  that,  first,  the
         provisions of section 113 are applicable,  as  the  section  itself
         makes clear, only if no contrary intention appears ,  and  that  it
         may be that a contrary intention appears by the circumstances of  a
         case such as this.

         [26] Secondly, he argues that the definition does not work  in  any
         event.  There has never been a place  formally  designated  by  the
         Secretary of State for the purposes of receiving asylum  and  human
         rights claims.

         [27] Thirdly, he points out that under the rules of the  First-tier
         Tribunal, Rule 12 provides for  the  Notice  of  Appeal,  with  its
         grounds, to be forwarded to the Secretary of State on  receipt,  by
         the Tribunal.  That means, he  says,  that  a  claim  made  in  the
         grounds of appeal is necessarily made to the Secretary of State.

         [28] In my judgment, none of these arguments has merit.   There  is
         no contrary intention apparent in any section of Part 5 of the Act.
          Specifically, I see no sign of any contrary intention  in  section
         92.  The lack of a specially designated  place  for  an  asylum  or
         human rights claim does not mean that there are no places, nor does
         it mean that an asylum or human rights claim cannot be made  within
         the meaning of the Act, and of section 113 in particular.  The fact
         that a valid appeal is to be passed on by the  First-tier  Tribunal
         to the Secretary of State does not mean that the claim is  made  to
         the Secretary of State.  Nor, incidentally, does it mean  that  the
         appeal is made to the Secretary  of  State.   It  is  made  to  the
         Tribunal.  That was the conclusion also reached by Silber  J  in  R
         (Rainford) v Secretary of State [2008] EWHC 2474 (Admin).

         [29] But, in any event, Mr Malik's submissions ignore the tense  of
         "has made" in section 92(4)(a).  The provision is that a person may
         appeal from within the United Kingdom only  if  he  "has  made"  an
         asylum or human rights claim.   It  is  perfectly  clear  that  the
         making of the claim - a human rights claim  in  this  case  -  must
         precede, at any rate, the Notice of Appeal.  The provision makes no
         sense at all if a right of appeal  is  granted  by  appealing.   No
         authority, in my judgment, is needed for that  conclusion.   It  is
         the simple meaning of the words.

         [30] It is worth adding that this was not  the  issue  before  this
         court in R (Jisha) v Secretary of State [2010] EWHC 2043 (Admin) on
         which Mr Malik relied.  That was a decision on  the  interpretation
         of paragraph 353 of the Statement of Changes in Immigration  Rules,
         HC 395, which, unlike the appeals provisions of the 2002 Act, is an
         important fail-safe provision  to  ensure  that  human  rights  and
         asylum claims are properly considered before a  final  decision  to
         remove a claimant, which may well be after an unsuccessful  appeal.
         The interpretation of the  words  of  paragraph  353  is  therefore
         likely to be rather wider than is necessitated by the  construction
         of the appeal rights themselves in Part 5 of the Act.

         [31] Having said that, in my judgment, the sense of  the  provision
         of the words "has made" stretches, if I may so put it, further back
         than the need to have made a claim before the Notice of Appeal.

         [32] The scheme of Part 5 of the 2002 Act is of decisions  carrying
         rights  of  appeal.   That  scheme  is  also  implemented  by   the
         Regulations made under the Act.

         [33] At the hearing, I mentioned Rule 7 of the First-tier  Tribunal
         Rules, which set out the  time  for  appealing  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal under the Act......

         [34] In Rules 7(2)(a), a specific time limit is fixed for cases  in
         which the person (i) was in the United Kingdom  when  the  decision
         against which he is appealing was made; and  (ii)  may  not  appeal
         while he is in the United Kingdom by reason of a provision  of  the
         2002 Act.  That is  obviously  apposite  to  a  case  such  as  the
         claimant's, and appears to indicate a structure in which the rights
         of appeal derive from the decision itself.

         [35]  I  would  naturally  be  cautious  before   using   delegated
         legislation as a means of interpreting a statute. But I do not need
         to.  Section 105 is as follows:

             '(1) The Secretary of State may make Regulations  requiring  a
             person  to  be  given  written  notice  where  an  immigration
             decision is taken in respect of him.

             (2)  The regulations may, in particular, provide that a notice
             under subsection (1) of a decision against which the person is
             entitled to appeal under section 82(1) must state-

                  (a)  that there is a right of appeal under  that  section,
                  and;

                  (b)  how and when that right may be exercised.

             (3)  The regulations may make  provision  (which  may  include
             presumptions) about service.'

         [36] I do not need to go into the Immigration (Notices) Regulations
         2003 (SI 2003/658), which are made under  that  section.   What  is
         clear on the face of the Act is that section 105, which is in  Part
         5, clearly envisages that both whether there is a right  of  appeal
         and how and when it can be exercised are matters known at the  time
         when notice of the decision  is  given.   Those  provisions  in  my
         judgment rule out the possibility of those matters  changing  after
         the notice of decision is given.

         [37] As I have already remarked, the tense of  "has  made"  in  any
         event prevents the claim being  made  as  late  as  the  Notice  of
         Appeal.  But it cannot have been intended that a claim  made  after
         the notice of the appealable decision should invalidate the notice,
         as it would if the claim itself could  change  the  answer  to  the
         question how and when the right of appeal may be exercised.

         [38] This reading of section 92(4)(a), excluding a right of  appeal
         from within the United Kingdom in circumstances such as the present
         case, does not mean a prospect of a multiplicity of appeals,  as  I
         shall explain later in this judgment.  What is does do is  to  look
         at the statutory appeals process as a whole, remembering  that  one
         (but only one) of its functions is to prevent unjustified stays  in
         the country for the purpose of pursuing unmeritorious appeals.

         [39] I should say  finally  on  this  issue  that  Mr  Malik,  very
         properly, drew attention to the difference in  tense  and  apparent
         effect of the provisions in 92(4)(b), but I do not think that  that
         affects the issue.  For the same reasons as I have already given, a
         person who has an in-country right of appeal under  that  paragraph
         only has it if, at the time of the decision, he  is  of  the  class
         specified, and claims as specified in that paragraph."

47. The Deputy Judge also referred to the process by which the Secretary of
    State notifies any change in the forum of the appeal which  the  Deputy
    Judge notes appears designed to prevent a multiplicity of appeals:-

         "[64]    Without a right of appeal against the Secretary of State's
         decision  so  far  made,  the  claimant  is  nevertheless  entirely
         protected by the Secretary of State's policy,  to  which  reference
         was made by Mr Dunlop in his skeleton argument.  Chapter 51 of  the
         Secretary of State's Enforcement Instructions and Guidance provides
         as follows.

             'If asylum or HR is claimed after serving the IS151A  part  2,
             and removal directions are in place then  refer  to  OSCU  for
             advice before suspending the  removal  directions.   Otherwise
             withdraw the IS151A part 2 and where the applicant will get an
             in country appeal right serve an IS151B with  any  refusal  of
             the claim.'

         [65] The process set out, perhaps  slightly  cryptically,  in  that
         instruction has the clear effect that a claim made to the Secretary
         of State after the service of an immigration decision, such as that
         in this case, will result in the withdrawal of  the  decision  that
         carries no right of appeal, and if necessary, the making of another
         decision.  But by then, of course, there can be no doubt  that  the
         claimant has made a human rights claim, and for that reason the new
         decision  will  carry  an  in-country  right   of   appeal   unless
         certified."

48. The Deputy Judge's decision was upheld by the Court of  Appeal  in  the
    following passage:-

         "Issue (1): "has made" in section 94(2)(a)

         [17] The use of the auxiliary perfect  tense  in  the  phrase  "has
         made...a human rights claim" strongly implies that the  claim  must
         precede any appeal and that must mean before the institution of  an
         appeal rather than the date of hearing of the appeal.   The  reason
         why Parliament has chosen those words is, presumably, in  order  to
         give the Secretary of State the opportunity to give a  decision  on
         any human rights claim before the appeal is determined so that  her
         decision on that question can become  part  of  any  appeal.   This
         orderly  process  will  be  disrupted   if,   without   any   prior
         notification to the Secretary of State, an appellant can simply put
         a human rights claim in his notice of appeal.

         [18] This consideration is reinforced by the definition of a  human
         rights claim in section 113 as "a claim made by  a  person  to  the
         Secretary of State..." A Notice  of  Appeal  seeking  to  appeal  a
         decision for removal is not addressed to the Secretary of State but
         to the First Tier Tribunal.

         [19] Mr Malik for Mr Nirula pointed out first that  the  definition
         continues "...at a place designated by the Secretary of State"  and
         that no place has ever been designated and secondly that Rule 12 of
         the First Tier Tribunal rules provides for the  forwarding  by  the
         Tribunal to the Secretary of State of a Notice of Appeal.

         [20] The absence of a designated place does not,  however,  deprive
         the rest of the definition of legal content.  The claim  still  has
         to be made to the Secretary of State.  The Secretary  of  State  is
         not difficult to find.

         [21] Nor does the fact the FTT has an  obligation  to  forward  any
         Notice of Appeal to the Secretary of State mean that  a  claim  has
         been made to the Secretary of State.  Even if it could,  Mr  Nirula
         would still have to get over the timing point which he cannot do.

         [22] It seems that it may be the first time that this  question  of
         construction has been considered by this court, but it arose before
         SIJ Storey, SIJ Grubb and  IJ  Afako  sitting  in  the  Asylum  and
         Immigration Tribunal in SS (Turkey) [2006] UKAIT 00077.  They  held
         that before 4th April 2005, when an appeal was effected by  service
         of a Notice of Appeal on the Secretary of State, it was  sufficient
         to make a human rights claim in the Notice of Appeal (they  do  not
         appear to have had any argument  in  relation  to  the  words  "has
         made") but, once the AIT had been created and a  Notice  of  Appeal
         had to be given by filing it with the Tribunal, it  was  no  longer
         possible for a human rights claim to be made for the first time  in
         a Notice of Appeal (see paras 87-90).  This decision  was  followed
         by Silber J in R (Rainford) v Secretary of State [2008]  EWHC  2474
         (Admin). I would approve those decisions.

         [23] These two cases were distinguished in Jisha v SSHD [2010] EWHC
         2043 (Admin) in which HH Judge Anthony Thornton QC  held  that  the
         Secretary of State ought to have considered a human rights claim to
         be a second human rights  claim  to  which  paragraph  353  of  the
         Immigration Rules (about fresh claims) applied.  The  argument  was
         that the first  human  rights  claim  had  not  been  made  to  the
         Secretary of State because it had been included in  the  Notice  of
         Appeal to the tribunal.  The judge held that the  definition  of  a
         "human rights claim" in s.113 of the 2002 Act applied to the  words
         as used in Part 5 of the 2002 Act but was not a definition for  the
         purpose of the Immigration Rules.  It  seems,  moreover,  that  the
         first human rights claim had been treated as a human  rights  claim
         whatever  procedural  defects  it   may   have   had.    In   these
         circumstances a second human rights claim did have to be dealt with
         as a fresh claim.  It can be seen that this authority  is  too  far
         removed from the present case to be helpful.

         [24] Mr Malik submitted that any construction of  section  94(2)(a)
         which required an  appeal  against  removal  for  deception  to  be
         pursued out of  country  could  operate  very  harshly  against  an
         appellant who was compelled to return home in order to  pursue  his
         appeal.  But that is not a consideration that can change the proper
         construction of the statute (unless it be suggested,  which  it  is
         not, that the statutory provision is in some way incompatible  with
         the European  Convention  of  Human  Rights).   In  any  event  the
         Secretary of State has the policy referred to  in  para  64  of  Mr
         Ockelton's judgment which caters for such cases.  It was  no  doubt
         in pursuance of that policy that the Secretary of State offered  on
         2nd June 2011 to  consider  Mr  Nirula's  Article  8  claim  if  he
         provided the evidence on which he relied, an offer  which  was  not
         accepted by Mr Nirula.

         [25] I would therefore uphold the decision of the Deputy  Judge  in
         this respect; it is  unnecessary  to  decide  whether  his  further
         decision (that the claim had to be made even  before  a  notice  of
         decision was given) is correct.  That should await  decision  in  a
         case where it matters."

    Discussion

49. Nirula is the closest case in terms of relevance on the  timing  issue.
    However, the Court of Appeal did not need to consider the  issue  which
    arises in this case. The requirement for  a  nexus  between  the  human
    rights claim and immigration decision is also supported however by what
    is said by Blake J in Etame and Anirah which observation was upheld  by
    the Court of Appeal.

50. Ms Loughran's answer to the "nexus" point is that this is satisfied  in
    this case because the Second and Third Human  Rights  Claims  challenge
    the removal brought about by the refusal of leave to enter contained in
    the First and Second Immigration Decisions.  That may be right but  the
    nexus point is only one part of the timing issue.

51. In relation to whether a claim can post-date the immigration  decision,
    I gratefully adopt the views of the Deputy Judge  in  Nirula.   I  draw
    attention in particular to what is said at [37] of the judgment in that
    case. In my view, the case law pointing in the opposite direction fails
    to consider what is said in section 92(4)(a)  in  the  context  of  the
    overall statutory scheme (at least insofar as it existed prior  to  the
    Immigration Act 2014 changes).   Those cases appear to assume that  the
    only requirement in section 92(4)(a) is  that  the  person  making  the
    human rights or asylum claim does so whilst he/she  is  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  That may well be the literal construction  of  that  sentence
    however it fails to consider the section in its statutory context.   In
    my view, the use of the past tense is intended  to  indicate  that  the
    claim has to be made prior to another event.  The  only  obvious  event
    set out in the statutory  scheme  is  the  making  of  the  immigration
    decision under section 82.

52. The point is perhaps even more clearly made by the statute in  relation
    to Third Country cases.  That is because paragraph 5(4) of  Schedule  3
    to the 2004 Act clearly envisages a response to the human rights  claim
    before reliance can be placed on  section  92(4)(a).  That  is  because
    reliance may not be placed on a  claim  unless  it  is  one  which  the
    Secretary of State has not certified.  That must by implication require
    that the Secretary of State be given the opportunity  to  certify.   Ms
    Loughran's response to that is that the Secretary of  State  was  given
    the opportunity to certify.  That is what led to the Second  and  Third
    Certification Decisions.  However,  that  leads  me  on  to  a  further
    problem with Ms Loughran's argument.

53. Ms Loughran argues that both the Second and Third Human  Rights  Claims
    were made to the Secretary of State and that those were the subject  of
    decisions made by the Secretary of State in the form of the Second  and
    Third Certification Decisions. It is the withdrawal of the  Second  and
    Third Certification Decisions by the consent order  which  Ms  Loughran
    says gives rise to the in-country right of appeal.

54. Ms Loughran also says that the First  Certification  Decision  must  be
    invalid as otherwise the Respondent would not have made the Second  and
    Third Certification Decisions.  I reject  that  submission.   The  fact
    that the Respondent responded to the  Second  and  Third  Human  Rights
    Claims by the Second and Third Certification Decisions does not  render
    the  First  Certification  Decision  invalid.    This   case   can   be
    distinguished from AM (Somalia).  As I note  at  [37]  above,  in  that
    case, the earlier certification decision had been quashed by the  Court
    as a nullity.  Here the  First  Certification  Decision  was  not  even
    challenged in the judicial review and is clearly not withdrawn  by  the
    terms of the consent order.

55. As I note above, the statutory  scheme,  particularly  in  relation  to
    Third Country cases, envisages that the Secretary of State will make  a
    decision in response to a claim. The withdrawal of the Second and Third
    Certification Decisions  did  not  relate  only  to  the  certification
    contained within those decisions; the  plain  reading  of  the  consent
    order is that the decisions were withdrawn  as  a  whole.   That  makes
    obvious sense since what the Secretary of State was agreeing to do  was
    to reconsider the human rights claim in  accordance  with  the  Supreme
    Court's judgment in EM (Eritrea).   The effect  of  withdrawal  of  the
    Second and Third Certification Decisions therefore was to leave  before
    the Respondent undecided the Second and Third Human Rights Claims.   It
    is not until a decision was made in response to those claims that an in-
    country right of appeal could  be  generated  in  the  event  that  the
    Secretary of State decided not to exercise her power to  certify  under
    paragraph 5(4) of Schedule 3 to the 2004 Act.  For those reasons, there
    could be no in-country right of appeal. As  it  is,  the  Secretary  of
    State has now decided to certify the  Second  and  Third  Human  Rights
    Claims.

56. For the foregoing reasons, there was no in-country right of appeal when
    the appeal was lodged in this case and Judge Levin  was  right  so  too
    find.  There is no material error of law in Judge Levin's decision  and
    I therefore uphold it.

Notice of Decision
I am satisfied that  the  Decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not
contain a material error of law and I uphold it.

Signed  [pic]          Dated   17 June 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
