
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/24562/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th May 2017                      |On 17th May 2017                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                    [N R]
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Khan, Counsel (Direct Access)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Lindsley against First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Malley's decision of  29th
    September 2016 to dismiss her appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  and
    under Article 8.  The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on [ ]
    1982, and she arrived in the UK in February 2008 as  the  dependent  of
    her then husband [JR].  He returned  to  Bangladesh  on  23rd  December
    2010, has not returned to the UK and she has not seen  him  since  that
    date.

 2. She was left behind in the UK and her leave  was  curtailed  after  her
    then husband informed the Home Office that she was no longer his  wife.
    She obtained a non-molestation order against [JR] in February 2011.  On
    13th April 2012 she was awarded discretionary leave  on  the  basis  of
    domestic violence.  The discretionary leave was to 12th April 2015.

Grounds for Permission to Appeal

 3. The grounds for permission to  appeal  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge misdirected herself in not applying the UKBA  policy  on
    discretionary leave.  The policy was in existence at the  time  of  the
    hearing and was a policy that applied  to  the  appellant  as  she  was
    granted her discretionary leave prior  to  9th  July  2012  immigration
    changes.  It was submitted that the judge failed to consider the appeal
    grounds at paragraph 4 and 13.

 4. It  was  accepted  by  all  parties  that  the  appellant  was  granted
    discretionary leave based on her domestic violence  prior  to  the  9th
    July 2012 changes.  Therefore, any assessment should have been  carried
    out in accordance with the policy prior to that date.  The  policy  was
    within the transitional  provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    policy was directly relevant  to  the  issue  on  discretionary  leave,
    especially that the Secretary of State had failed  to  assess  her  own
    policy and that the Tribunal failed to take account of a policy or  law
    that existed at the time.  The Secretary of State  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had clearly failed to follow that policy which stated

         "... apply, a further period of three years' DL should normally  be
         granted.   Caseworkers  must  consider  whether   there   are   any
         circumstances that may warrant departure from the  standard  period
         of leave.  See Section 5.4".

 5. The grounds of appeal at paragraph 4 state:

         "Appellant was granted discretionary leave on 13th  April  2012  on
         the basis that she is a victim of domestic  violence.   Since  then
         appellant has been living in the United Kingdom.  Appellant's  life
         remains volatile in Bangladesh.  Scenario  from  a  letter  of  the
         Chancellor of  Archdiocese  of  Dhaka  also  be  witnessed  as  the
         difficulties of appellant in Bangladesh.  Pain and  sufferings  are
         there.  She is not available by her father who has  been  suffering
         from cancer and now on dying bed".

 6. Paragraph 11 stated:

         "11.     A discretion under the Immigration Rules should have  been
             exercised differently.

         12.      This decision is unlawful because it is incompatible under
             the Convention on EU Human Rights.

         13.      The  appellant's  previous  leave  was  granted  based  on
             domestic violence pre 9th  July  2012  and  her  circumstances
             remain the same.  It is submitted that  her  current  decision
             looks at the new Rules and is caught unfairly.  That  has  not
             been considered".

The Hearing

 7. At the hearing before me Mr Khan submitted that the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge had not considered whether the circumstances were still the  same
    under the discretionary policy.

 8. Mr Kotas rejoined that at page 2 the Secretary of State's decision  had
    specifically considered the change of circumstances in relation to  the
    discretionary policy and the representative must have had that in  mind
    when she attended the hearing.  The First-tier  Tribunal  had  recorded
    the submissions in detail at paragraph 25 of the decision and had noted
    that the case had been put on the basis of a private life  whether  she
    faced obstacles on her return.  It was not put  on  the  basis  of  the
    application of discretion.

 9. The judge had not failed to address the relevant issues  as  they  were
    put.

10. Mr Khan also referred to the Guidance Note  2011  No  1  Permission  to
    appeal to the UTIAC.  Paragraph 9 identifies that

         "Where there may be a duty to consider points  that  are  'Robinson
         obvious' (see R v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department,  ex
         parte Robinson [1997] 3 WLR 1162) there is power  to  consider  any
         other point arising from the decision if the interests  of  justice
         so require".

Conclusions.

11. The Secretary of State's decision clearly addressed the decision  under
    discretionary leave noting that:

         "On 13th April 2012 you were granted discretionary leave to  remain
         in the United Kingdom under Article 8 European Convention on  Human
         Rights, on the basis you were recovering from domestic violence and
         that you were training to be a dental nurse and your  employer  was
         supporting you through  this  period.   Since  the  last  grant  of
         discretionary leave you have had time to recover from the  domestic
         abuse you were subjected to, you have now  qualified  as  a  dental
         nurse and are in a position where  you  are  able  to  support  for
         yourself.  Therefore, after carefully  reviewing  your  application
         for active review of discretionary leave, the Secretary of State is
         not satisfied that the grounds  under  which  you  were  previously
         granted discretionary leave still persist and your application  for
         further discretionary leave is refused".

12. The decision then went on to consider the applicant's family  life  and
    she had not raised anything to  suggest  that  she  had  a  partner  or
    dependant, and her application was considered on the basis  of  private
    life.

13. I am not persuaded that there is any 'Robinson obvious' point. What  is
    clear is that the grounds of appeal were not based on  the  failure  of
    the Secretary of State to have regard to the policy on  discretion  and
    indeed it is clear from the reference above that the Secretary of State
    indeed  realised  and  recorded  that   the   appellant   was   granted
    discretionary leave on the basis of domestic violence and did  consider
    her policy on that discretionary leave.  Mr Khan supplied me  with  the
    Asylum Policy Instruction Discretionary  Leave  document  published  on
    18th August 2015.  There was no indication that this  was  supplied  to
    the judge, and I  note  that  under  Section  10  of  the  Transitional
    Arrangements  the  policy  states   that   "all   decisions   made   on
    discretionary leave on or after 9th July 2012 will be  subject  to  the
    criteria set  out  in  this  guidance".   At  10.1  applicants  granted
    discretionary leave before 9th July 2012 it is stated:

         "Those granted leave under the DL policy in force before  9th  July
         2012 will normally continue to be  dealt  with  under  that  policy
         through to settlement if they continue to qualify for further leave
         on the same basis as their original DL was granted  (normally  they
         will  be  eligible  to  apply  for  settlement  after  six   years'
         continuous DL (or where appropriate a combination of DL  and  LOTR,
         see Section 8 above)) unless at the  date  of  decision  they  fall
         within the restricted leave policy.

         Caseworkers must consider whether the circumstances  prevailing  at
         the time of the original grant of leave continue  at  the  date  of
         decision. [my emphasis] If the circumstances remain the  same,  the
         individual does not fall within the restricted leave policy and the
         criminality thresholds do not apply,  a  further  period  of  three
         years' DL should normally be granted.   Caseworkers  must  consider
         whether there are any circumstances that may warrant departure from
         the standard period of leave.  See Section 5.4.

         If there have been significant changes that mean the  applicant  no
         longer qualifies for leave under the DL  policy  or  the  applicant
         falls for refusal on the basis of criminality (see criminality  and
         exclusion section above), the further leave application  should  be
         refused".

14. It is quite clear from the decision letter that the Secretary of  State
    had taken into  account  the  fact  that  there  had  been  changes  of
    circumstance.

15. There was no challenge before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  on  the
    basis  of  the  application  of  the  Asylum  Policy   Instruction   on
    discretionary leave and I have set out above the terms and framework of
    the  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  who  cannot   be
    criticised for considering the grounds of appeal as  they  were  before
    him.  There was vague reference to the decision not being in accordance
    with the  law  but  this  was  not  particularised  and  certainly  not
    referenced to or framed in the light of  the  policy  on  discretionary
    leave.

16. As Mr Kotas set out the appeal was made on the basis of the appellant's
    private life, maintaining that there were very significant obstacles to
    her integration in Bangladesh on the grounds that she  was  a  divorced
    woman, her ex-husband had family and friends with influence  who  would
    make it impossible to return.   The  judge  carefully  considered  this
    matter and found that it was not.  Acknowledged  at  paragraph  29  was
    that the appellant had a Bachelors degree and could go back easily  and
    get a job and took  into  account  the  assertion  that  the  character
    assassination was an obstacle in her restarting her life in Bangladesh.



17. There was no mention of the discretionary  policy  in  the  submissions
    from Ms Qureshi and indeed, as identified at paragraph 38 by the judge,
    the appellant's claim is brought on  the  basis  that  there  are  very
    significant obstacles to a return to Bangladesh.  The  judge's  finding
    in this regard was that these assertions did not "bear scrutiny".

18. The judge in paragraphs 38 to 68 made a careful and detailed assessment
    of the appellant's evidence and her ability to return to Bangladesh and
    was not satisfied that she would face  very  significant  obstacles  on
    return for a variety of reasons.

19. The grounds specifically identified paragraph 4 and 13 of the pleadings
    but these merely refer to the fact that she was  granted  discretionary
    leave and refer to the difficulties of her returning back,  and  at  13
    that there was a discretion "under the Immigration Rules" which  should
    have been exercised differently.  There was  no  discretion  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  At paragraph 13 it is stated that  the  appellant's
    previous leave was granted on the basis of domestic  violence  and  her
    circumstances remain the same but merely states that the decision under
    challenge "looks at the new Rules and is caught unfairly".   That  does
    not specifically  raise  the  issue  of  the  discretionary  policy  or
    particularise any challenge thereunder.

20. I hasten to add that it was quite clear that  the  Secretary  of  State
    considered the change of circumstances and this I have outlined  above,
    and there can be no material error in the judge's decision.  The  judge
    noted the change of circumstances at [36] noting that the Appellant had
    received assistance from Adult Support Services  but  that  in  January
    2012 the 'case was closed' [36].  She had had training, was  qualified,
    and sent money back to Bangladesh to support  her  family  there  [37].
    The judge clearly found the decision was in  accordance  with  the  law
    because he proceeded directly to a consideration of proportionality  at
    [63] outside the Immigration Rules, noting that she  had  no  right  to
    remain under those Rules.  At [64] the judge found that  the  appellant
    had obtained useful transferable skills and was capable,  at  [63],  of
    replicating her life in Bangladesh.  Further,  the  appellant  did  not
    claim any family or relationships in the UK which  required  particular
    attention.  The judge clearly found that she had skills and  experience
    in dentistry and accountancy to bring to the  workplace  in  Bangladesh
    and found that she had an ability to find employment on return.

21. For the reasons given above, I find there is no material error  of  law
    in the decision of Judge O'Malley and that decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Helen Rimington  Date 15th May 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
