
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24644/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                              |Determination Promulgated |
|On 7 April 2015                                   |On 20 April 2015          |
|                                                  |                          |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Rohit Bhardwaj
                      (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION is MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Pipe, Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Trevaskis,  who  sitting  at  Newport  on  26
    November 2014 and in a determination  subsequently  promulgated  on  10
    December 2014 allowed the appeal of the Respondent (hereinafter  called
    the claimant), a citizen of India born on 22 November 1989, against the
    decision of the Secretary of State  dated  23  May  2014  refusing  his
    application for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  his
    relationship with Jordana Coulstock (the Sponsor).

2.   In his determination at paragraph  4,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    recorded as follows:

         "4.  It was  confirmed  at  the  outset  of  the  hearing  by  both
             representatives that it was accepted by  the  Respondent  that
             there was a genuine and subsisting  relationship  between  the
             Appellant and the Sponsor; it was accepted  by  the  Appellant
             that he cannot meet the requirements for the grant  of  family
             life based upon Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
             sole  issue  on  which   this   appeal   is   based   is   the
             proportionality of the decision to remove  the  Appellant,  by
             reference to Article 8 of the ECHR."

3.   The Judge having noted that it was conceded that the Appellant did  not
    qualify for leave as a partner under Appendix  FM  thus  dismissed  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules but then went on to consider whether
    the appeal required to be considered according  to  the  provisions  of
    Article 8.  In that regard, the Judge made reference to the guidance of
    the Court of Appeal in MM [2014] EWCA Civ 985 as follows:

         "If the applicant cannot satisfy the Rule, then there either is  or
         there is not a further Article 8  claim.   That  will  have  to  be
         determined by the relevant decision-maker."

4.   The Judge at paragraph 30 of his determination continued that:

         "There must be a  good  reason  to  consider  Article  8  directly,
         meaning  either  one  that  is  compelling  or  because  there  are
         exceptional circumstances.  There is  no  test  of  exceptionality;
         there does not have to be anything extreme to  move  to  Article  8
         directly.  A good reason may be present if the Immigration Rules do
         not provide discretion to examine hearing the immigration  decision
         is proportionate in light of all the Appellant's circumstances, but
         only if the consequences of the immigration decision are likely  to
         have  a  significant  impact  on  the  private   or   family   life
         continuing."

5.   The Judge continued that he found that the immigration decision in  the
    present case was:

         "...likely to have a significant impact on the  private  or  family
         life continuing.  The Appellant  has  been  living  in  the  United
         Kingdom for four years; he and the Sponsor have been in  a  genuine
         relationship for approximately  two  years.   The  removal  of  the
         Appellant will enforce separation between them and a disruption  of
         the private life which the Appellant has established whilst in  the
         United Kingdom."

6.   The Judge proceeded to consider relevant case  law  guidance  including
    that of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, that he applied against the backdrop  of
    the facts as found.

7.   Over paragraphs 40 and 41 of his determination he proceeded to set  out
    the factors both in favour of and against the Appellant.  He did so  as
    follows:

         "40. The factors in favour of the interference are:  the  Appellant
             came to the United Kingdom as a student,  with  limited  leave
             granted on that basis; he  has  entered  into  a  relationship
             knowing that his immigration status has been precarious; he is
             no  longer  studying,  hence  the  original   basis   of   his
             application to enter the United Kingdom has ceased  to  apply;
             regarding s.117A and B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
             Asylum Act 2002, it is in  the  public  interest  that  he  be
             financially independent, but he is wholly dependent  upon  the
             Sponsor, who is working; his private life should only be given
             little weight as it has been established while his status  was
             precarious; there is nothing to prevent him from returning  to
             live in India, where he can be accommodated by his parents and
             can live and work in his own culture.


         41.  The factors against the interference are:  the  Appellant  has
             been living in the United  Kingdom  since  2010;  he  has  not
             committed any crimes; he has studied and has been working when
             allowed to do so, and has established  a  network  of  friends
             among work colleagues  and  beyond;  he  is  living  with  his
             partner, by whom he is being supported financially; if  he  is
             required to return to India to apply for entry clearance as  a
             partner, the outcome of that  application  is  uncertain;  the
             Sponsor would otherwise have to move to India, thereby  losing
             her employment, her home and her family and social ties in the
             United Kingdom; she will be isolated in India because  of  her
             race, her religion and her inability to speak Hindi; she  will
             be unable to  find  work  and  therefore  unable  to  maintain
             contact with her family,  either  by  travel  or  by  indirect
             communication methods; her mental  health,  already  adversely
             affected by the Appellant's immigration problems, is likely to
             be further damaged  by  living  in  India,  where  appropriate
             treatment or medication is either harder  to  obtain  or  more
             expensive."

8.   Notably, at paragraph 42 of  his  determination  the  First-tier  Judge
    continued as follows:

         "42. The starting point for the  balancing  exercise  is  that  the
             Appellant and the Sponsor are acknowledged to be in a  genuine
             and   subsisting   relationship   which   has   existed    for
             approximately two years; their relationship was  formed  at  a
             time when the Appellant still had valid leave;  the  Appellant
             continued  to  comply  with  the  conditions  of  his   leave,
             including restrictions on working, despite the fact that leave
             had  been  curtailed,  apparently  unbeknown   to   him.    He
             subsequently applied for further leave, before  the  scheduled
             expiry of his  original  leave;  the  Respondent  took  eleven
             months  to  process  the  application  before   refusing   it.
             Throughout this time, the Appellant and the Sponsor  conducted
             themselves as though his leave was still  valid,  although  he
             was not studying; he occupied his time by undertaking  private
             study, and the Sponsor continued her employment, receiving  an
             income  which   made   them   economically   self-sufficient."
             (Emphasis added).

9.   The  Judge  went  on  to  note  that  the  Appellant  had  demonstrated
    sufficient command of English to be allowed to enrol in a course  which
    was presented in English and that he therefore satisfied that  test  of
    public interest.  He continued at paragraph 43 that:

         "43. Given the genuine status of the  relationship,  the  Appellant
             would appear to be able to satisfy the requirements for  entry
             clearance as a partner, but I  do  not  consider  that  it  is
             necessary or reasonable to expect him to return  to  India  in
             order to undergo that process."

10.  At paragraph 44, the Judge had this to say:

         "44. I find that the impact of the dismissal of the appeal upon the
             Sponsor will be very serious.  She  will  be  faced  with  the
             choice of the dissolution of their relationship, or  a  period
             of uncertainty whilst the Appellant is forced to make an entry
             clearance  application,  the  outcome  of  which   is   always
             uncertain, and which will  involve  an  indefinite  period  of
             separation.  Alternatively, she will have to move to  live  in
             India; this will involve her in giving up well-paid and steady
             employment in which she is clearly  highly  valued;  she  will
             give up  secure  accommodation;  she  will  give  up  personal
             contact with her family, with whom her  relationship  is  very
             close; she will give up contact with her network  of  friends,
             with whom her contact is also very close;  she  will  face  an
             uncertain future in India, as a  British  woman  of  Christian
             faith who is unable to speak Hindi; it will be impossible  for
             her to obtain work, and she will be wholly dependent upon  the
             protection of the Appellant and his  family;  there  are  also
             reasonable concerns that she may be exposed  to  the  risk  of
             attack, whether sexual or some other form of violence; she has
             suffered adverse mental health problems, largely as  a  result
             of  the  strain  placed  upon  their   relationship   by   the
             Appellant's immigration status, and she  has  fears  that  her
             condition will be aggravated by having to go to live in India,
             and she will  be  unable  to  find  or  afford  the  necessary
             treatment there."

11.  The Judge went on to  conclude  that  the  factors  in  favour  of  the
    removal decision were in his judgment "substantially outweighed by  the
    factors against removal".

12.  The Secretary of State successfully sought permission  to  appeal  that
    decision and in granting such permission First-tier Tribunal Judge P  J
    G White having considered the Secretary of State's  grounds,  concluded
    that it was arguable that in reaching his decision the Judge had failed
    to have sufficient regard to the fact that the relationship between the
    Appellant and Sponsor existed  "despite  the  Appellant's  leave  being
    curtailed".  Further that the Judge's finding concerning the extent  of
    the detriment to the Sponsor by  relocating  to  India  in  respect  of
    employment, ability to communicate with her family  and  mental  health
    was "arguably unsupported by reliable evidence".  Finally that  it  was
    arguable that the Judge had given  insufficient  consideration  to  the
    possibility of the Appellant returning to  India  to  make  an  out-of-
    country application.

13.  Thus the appeal came before me on 7 April 2015 when my first  task  was
    to decide whether or not the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Judge
    contained an error or errors on  a  point  of  law  such  as  may  have
    materially affected the outcome of the appeal.

14.  Having heard and  considered  the  parties'  respective  submissions  I
    reserved my decision.

Assessment

15.  I have concluded that the determination of the  First-tier  Judge  does
    not disclose material errors on  a  point  of  law  and  that  in  such
    circumstances it should stand.

16.  It is apparent to  me  that  ground  1  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    application  for  permission  that  the  First-tier  Judge  failed   to
    correctly apply primary legislation  is  wholly  misconceived.   It  is
    contended that the provisions of Section 117B(4)(b) of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as  amended  by  the  Immigration  Act
    2014) applied in that it provided that little weight should be given to
    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner that was established by
    a person  at  a  time  when  the  person  was  in  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully.

17.  It is apparent on the evidence as found by the  First-tier  Judge  that
    the claimant  and  his  partner  entered  into  their  relationship  in
    February 2012, before his leave was curtailed.   It  follows  that  the
    claimant was not in the United Kingdom unlawfully before the  inception
    of the relationship.  Such was the  clear  finding  of  the  First-tier
    Judge that was open to him on that evidence.

18.  It follows that the provision relied upon by the Secretary of State  in
    ground 1 does not apply to  the  claimant's  case.   There  is  thus  a
    mistake of fact in ground 1 such that the requirements of Section  117B
    (4) (b) simply do not apply.

19.  It is also apparent to me that the Judge's reference to the  fact  that
    the claimant's immigration  status  was  precarious,  was  put  in  the
    context of his  only having had student leave at the  time  he  entered
    into the relationship with the Sponsor, but that it was not unlawful at
    that point.

20.  Further, and as rightly pointed out  by  Mr  Pipe,  the  provisions  of
    Section 117B (5) refer only to private life and thus  weight  could  in
    any event, be given to  the  family  life  element  of  the  claimant's
    relationship with the Sponsor even though it was founded at a time when
    the status of the claimant was "precarious", in the sense that  he  had
    only limited leave as a student at the time.

21.  It was Mr Tufan's submission that the provisions of Article  8  of  the
    ECHR should only be entered into "when something that the Rules do  not
    cater for exists in the application", and in that regard he referred me
    to Singh and Khalid [2015] EWCA Civ 74 where their Lordships  concluded
    that the decision of the court in MM (Lebanon)  did  not  question  the
    substantial point made by Sales J (as he then was) in Nagre that  there
    was no need to conduct a full separate examination of Article 8 outside
    the Rules where, in the circumstances of a  particular  case,  all  the
    issues had been addressed in the consideration under the Rules.

22.  Mr Tufan also referred me to an earlier decision of  Mr  Justice  Blake
    in Kussin [2009] EWHC 358 (Admin) where  insofar  as  the  guidance  in
    Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 was concerned, his Lordship held at  paragraph
    29 that:

         "...the mere fact that there are obstacles  to  her  relocating  to
         Turkey - and it would be unreasonable to expect her to go to Turkey
         - does not of itself make out this case on Article 8 and  make  out
         reasonable prospects that an Adjudicator would find  an  Article  8
         case founded.  Notwithstanding the guidance  in  Chikwamba,  in  my
         judgment, the requirements of fair and firm immigration control  do
         make it justifiable and proportionate to require this  claimant  to
         seek re-admission to be with his partner through the route provided
         by the Immigration Rules.  In requiring him to do so he will not be
         more favourably treated than others  in  a  similar  situation  and
         there are no compelling  factors  that  would  arguably  make  that
         requirement disproportionate."

23.  Mr Tufan continued that an application on the  part  of  the  Appellant
    from abroad was likely to be  successful  subject  to  maintenance  and
    accommodation  requirements  with  reference  to  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM and FM-SE.

24.  In that latter regard, and with respect to Mr Tufan,  I  find  that  he
    failed to appreciate that the requirements and provisions  of  Appendix
    FM did not apply in this case, as the couple had not lived together for
    two years.  As indeed the Presenting Officer at the hearing before  the
    First-tier Judge agreed, the  definition  of  "partner"  in  the  Rules
    requires the parties to have lived together or have  been  married  for
    two years.  The provisions of FM-SE only apply if Appendix FM applies.

25.  Mr Tufan referred to ground 2  of  the  Secretary's  application  which
    maintained that the Judge had given weight to immaterial matters.   For
    example, he had attached positive weight to the  claimant's  ostensibly
    clean criminal record.  In that regard in Nasim (Article 8) [2014] UKUT
    00025 (IAC) it was held that a person's human rights were not  enhanced
    by not committing criminal offences or not relying on public funds  and
    that the only significance of such matters in cases concerning proposed
    or hypothetical removal from the United Kingdom, was  to  preclude  the
    Secretary of State from pointing  to  any  public  interest  justifying
    removal, over and above the basic importance of maintaining a firm  and
    coherent system of immigration control.  Mr Tufan  submitted  therefore
    that the Judge had erred by attaching positive weight under  Article  8
    to an absence of criminal convictions.

26.  In that regard it is, however, apparent to  me  on  a  reading  of  the
    determination, that the First-tier Judge did not use the absence  of  a
    criminal record as a weighty factor establishing an Article 8(1)  right
    and therefore did not offend the  principles  set  out  in  Nasim.   At
    paragraph 41 of his determination, the Judge's reference in relation to
    the factors in favour  of  the  claimant  included  the  fact  (amongst
    others) that he had  "not  committed  any  crimes",  but  here  it  was
    accepted that family life was engaged as it was conceded that the  only
    issue was proportionality.  It follows that I find that  there  was  no
    error in the Judge's approach in this regard as he was not  seeking  to
    construct a family life based on no criminal  convictions  and  it  was
    simply not a factor that weighed against the claimant.
27.    As regards Singh (above) their Lordships confirmed what was  said  in
    MM that there was no intermediary threshold test and  effectively  said
    that Mr Justice Sales (as he then was) in  Nagre  was  not  imposing  a
    threshold test in a case where the Rules demonstrated in the particular
    circumstances, that there would be no need to go on. I observe that  in
    the present case it was accepted that the claimant  was  in  a  genuine
    relationship.  It was a proportionality balance and it was therefore  a
    case where there was no threshold.  In the present case the  First-tier
    Judge and the Presenting Officer before him  conceded  that  it  was  a
    proper case in which to go on to a consideration as to the  balance  to
    be struck in terms of the proportionality of the claimant's removal  to
    India.

28.  I find that Mr  Tufan's  reliance  on  the  2009  case  of  Kussin  has
    overlooked the fact that his Lordship also stated that  each  case  was
    fact-sensitive.  In any event the leading case now  is  that  of  Hayat
    (Pakistan) [2012] EWCA Civ 1054 where at paragraph  30  Elias  LJ,  who
    gave the leading judgment, in effect endorsed the conclusion of the  Mr
    Justice Blake in Kussin that:

         "Whether it is sensible to enforce that policy will necessarily  be
         fact-sensitive; Lord Brown identified certain potentially  relevant
         factors in Chikwamba.  They will include the prospective length and
         degree of disruption of family life and whether  other  members  of
         the family are settled in the UK."

29.  His Lordship continued inter alia:

         "Where Article 8 is engaged and there is  no  sensible  reason  for
         enforcing the  policy,  the  decision-maker  should  determine  the
         Article 8 claim on its substantive merits,  having  regard  to  all
         material factors, notwithstanding that the applicant has no  lawful
         entry clearance."

30.  It was further held that nothing in Chikwamba was  intended  "to  alter
    the way the courts should approach substantive Article 8 issues as laid
    down in such well-known cases as Razgar and Huang".  Finally that:

         "Although the cases do not say this in terms, in my judgment if the
         Secretary of  State  has  no  sensible  reason  for  requiring  the
         application to be made from the home state, the fact  that  he  has
         failed to do so should not  thereafter  carry  any  weight  in  the
         substantive Article 8 balancing exercise."

31.  I find that here the First-tier Judge in terms, found on the facts  and
    with the guidance of relevant case law,  that  there  was  no  sensible
    reason why the claimant in  his  particular  circumstances,  should  be
    required to make an application  for  entry  clearance  from  his  home
    state.  This was a case where it was accepted that there was a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship.  It was thus not a case where there was  a
    sensible reason in enforcing entry clearance.

32.  I thus find that ground 2 is no more than a factual  disagreement  with
    the First-tier Judge's findings.

33.  I am mindful of the guidance of the Court of Appeal in R (Iran)  [2005]
    EWCA Civ 982 and I find that it cannot  be  said  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal   Judge's   findings   were   irrational   and/or   Wednesbury
    unreasonable such as to amount to perversity.  It cannot be  said  that
    they were inadequate.  It is not a case where the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's reasoning was such that the Tribunal were unable to  understand
    the thought processes that he employed in reaching his decision.

34.  I find that the First-tier Judge properly identified and  recorded  the
    matters that he considered to  be  critical  to  his  decision  on  the
    material issues raised before him in this appeal.

Decision

35.  I find that the making of the previous decision involved the making  of
    no error on a point of law and I order that it shall stand.

36.  It follows that the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 15 April 2015



Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein



