
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24960/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 December 2016                   |On 12 January 2017                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                               Ms akosua kumah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs H Gore of Counsel instructed by R Spio & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana whose date of birth is recorded  as
    28 June 1981.  Setting out the immigration history from  the  point  of
    view of the Tribunal is both confusing and confused  and  in  fact  has
    given rise to this appeal.

 2. Application was made for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on  the
    basis of a marriage to an EEA national.  On 14th May 2015 there was  an
    interview. (It is right to say that there were proceedings even  before
    then, before Judge Fox, but they are not material to the matter  before
    me).  That same day i.e. 14 May 2015, a decision was made to refuse the
    application.  On 18th May 2015 the Appellant appealed and submitted her
    grounds.  Included  in  those  grounds  was  the  assertion  that  when
    interviewed, the interviewing officer had confused the Appellant's file
    with that of another person. That assertion was supported by  the  fact
    that reference was being made in the refusal to a German  national  and
    to a Ghanaian passport issued in London when in fact it  has  now  been
    clearly established that the passport relating  to  the  Appellant  was
    issued in Accra.

 3. On 24th June 2015 the  Secretary  of  State  by  letter  wrote  to  the
    Appellant's solicitors in these terms:

         "On 7th January 2015 your client... applied for a  residence  card.
         Your client was issued with refusal papers  dated  14th  May  2015.
         Please note that these papers have now been withdrawn.  Please find
         enclosed revised notices regarding  the  decision  to  refuse  your
         client's application."

 4. It is of note that the Secretary of State did not  expressly  say  that
    the  decision  had  been  withdrawn  but  she  did  say  that  she  was
    withdrawing everything in relation to that particular appeal  in  using
    the term "these papers".

 5. The fresh decision accompanied that letter  but  if  the  Secretary  of
    State was at some point to meet  an  appeal  then  she  would  need  to
    reserve any papers on which she was going to rely so that the Appellant
    knew the case that she was to meet.

 6. Not content still with the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse
    the application, that being the one of 24th June  2015,  the  Appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  For  some  reason  reference  was
    made to appeal number IA/18767/2015 which was borne out of the decision
    which was withdrawn by letter of 24th June 2015.  What is more is  that
    some of the evidence which had properly been served by the Secretary of
    State upon the Appellant whilst that appeal was live had found its  way
    into the documents before the judge without properly having been served
    by the Secretary of State; here I refer in particular to the record  of
    interview of the Appellant which interestingly was not duly  signed  by
    the Appellant nor is it dated.  Be that as it may  no  point  is  taken
    with that letter.

 7. At the hearing before Judge Housego, when  sitting  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal at Hatton Cross on 4th January 2016, Ms Gore  took  the  point
    that the record of interview had not been duly  served  in  the  appeal
    IA/24960/2015 and that the appeal IA/18767/2015 no longer  existed.  It
    was submitted therefore that the  judge  should  not  be  dealing  with
    evidence in relation to that particular appeal.

 8. There seems to be no dispute that the point  was  taken  nor  that  the
    judge invited Ms  Gore  to  say  whether  or  not  she  was  making  an
    application to adjourn but in fact as Ms Gore  points  out  to  me,  it
    wasn't for her to make the application, it was  for  the  Secretary  of
    State because it was the Secretary of State who wanted to rely on  this
    evidence which had not properly been served.  If she, the Secretary  of
    State, wanted to rely on it  the  proper  course  was  to  explain  the
    circumstances, seek leave, and then for the judge to establish  whether
    or not, and to what extent, if at all, the Appellant was  disadvantaged
    or prejudiced by the record of interview coming into evidence.   As  it
    was Ms Gore tells me,  and  I  accept,  she  was  wholly  disadvantaged
    because it was her expectation that the interview was not being  relied
    upon for reasons that had been set out  in  earlier  grounds  and  that
    proper instructions from her client had not been taken.  The judge  has
    clearly given weight to matters which  arise  in  that  interview.  The
    substance of the matter which comes before me with  the  permission  of
    Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins, given  on  1st  September  2016,  is  the
    procedural irregularity which has given rise to unfairness.

 9. Once all matters were aired and a  number  of  procedural  errors  were
    identified in the course of  conversations  had  between  the  parties,
    which I have to say were conducted in a very amicable  way,  and  I  am
    grateful to both of them for the assistance that they have given to  me
    in this matter, a resolution emerged which appears to be  fair  to  all
    sides.

10. The decision of Judge Housego contains a material error of law in  that
    the record of interview was given due weight in circumstances in  which
    the Appellant was  disadvantaged.   I  need  say  no  more  because  Ms
    Isherwood accepts that.

11. The issue for me then is whether to re-make or remit  the  case.   This
    matter has already had a resumed hearing before me.  The  Secretary  of
    State wishes to consider her position but in fact this is one of  those
    cases in which the Appellant in my judgment  has  been  deprived  of  a
    proper and fair hearing in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   (When  I  make
    reference to the Secretary of State wanting to  consider  her  position
    that is in relation to whether or not to serve the record of interview.
     What she wishes to do in respect to the merits of the case  of  course
    is entirely a matter for her).

12. For the avoidance of doubt, by consent, this matter will be remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal with no preserved findings. I make  plain  that
    appeal number IA/18767/2015 stands withdrawn and that any papers served
    under it are not before the Tribunal. If the Secretary of State  wishes
    to rely on any document or documents that  were  relied  upon  in  that
    appeal she will need to re-serve them  in  this  appeal  IA/24960/2015.
    That applies to the interview.  It is a matter  for  the  Secretary  of
    State to consider the extent to which, if at all, there are any  errors
    which have crept into that record of interview consequent upon the real
    risk, which I find there is, that there was another file  open  at  the
    time when the Appellant was first interviewed.

13. Provided the Secretary of State is content to proceed on the basis that
    there are no errors in that record of interview, that  being  a  matter
    for her, then she could rely on it and if there are it will be for  the
    Appellant's representatives to take  any  points  which  arise  at  the
    remitted hearing.  If, on the other hand the Secretary of State  wishes
    to re-interview the Appellant I  would  expect  the  Appellant  to  co-
    operate and the Tribunal to be informed if that is to cause any  delays
    in the matter being re-heard in the First-tier Tribunal.



Direction

14. The matter will be remitted to Hatton Cross to  be  heard  by  a  judge
    other than Judge Housego.

15. There shall be a Twi interpreter.

16. This matter shall be listed for three hours.



Decision

17. The Tribunal has no jurisdiction in Appeal number IA/18767/2015.   That
    matter is not before the Upper Tribunal and was withdrawn.

18. As to appeal number IA/24960/2015 there was a material  error  of  law.
    The decision is set aside to be re-heard in the First-tier Tribunal  in
    accordance with the directions contained herein.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

