
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24122/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 10 March 2015                              |On 17 March 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        CONSTANCIA UATARAPI KAROKOHE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                    Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss O Momoh, Counsel, instructed by Shan & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  McWilliam)  who,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 26 November 2014, allowed the claimant's appeal  against
    the Secretary of State's decision to refuse her application  for  leave
    to remain in the UK on the basis of her  relationship  with  a  British
    citizen.

2.   For ease of convenience I shall refer to the parties as the  "Secretary
    of State", who is the appellant in this matter, and  to  the  appellant
    from the First-tier Tribunal as "the Claimant".

Background

3.   The Claimant whose date of birth is 14 December 1976 and is  a  citizen
    of Namibia. She entered the  UK  in  March  2003  in  order  to  pursue
    studies.  She has two children who are living in Namibia  and  who  are
    being cared for by her mother, who is a farmer.  The Secretary of State
    considered that there  was  insufficient  evidence  to  show  that  the
    Claimant had been in a relationship with Mr Waterhouse for a period  of
    two years or more. In any event she could not satisfy  the  eligibility
    criteria of Appendix FM and there were no insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life outside of the UK.

4.   In a determination the Tribunal found the Claimant and her  husband  to
    be entirely credible and believable  witnesses.  By  the  time  of  the
    hearing the Claimant had married Mr Waterhouse, a British citizen.  The
    first limb of the refusal was  not  pursued.  The  Tribunal  took  into
    account the sponsor's specific circumstances, placing particular weight
    on his fragile mental health, his need to provide for his  family,  his
    obvious work ethnic, his lack of familiarity with Africa,  specifically
    Namibia and his difficulties in finding work and  establishing  a  life
    there.  She concluded that there were insurmountable obstacles  in  the
    context of EX.1.   The Tribunal also considered issues relevant to  the
    public interest at [30], [31] and [36].  The appeal was  allowed  under
    the Rules and under Article 8 ECHR.

Grounds of Application for permission

5.   In lengthy grounds it was contended by the Secretary of State that  the
    Tribunal made a material misdirection of law.   As  an  overstayer  the
    Claimant could not satisfy the mandatory eligibility requirements.  The
    Tribunal erred  by  failing  to  properly  consider  the  existence  of
    insurmountable obstacles under EX1.  The Tribunal erred  by  concluding
    that the Claimant's return to Namibia would be disproportionate  and  a
    breach of Article 8 ECHR.  There were no exceptional circumstances  for
    the case to be considered outside of the Rules.  The Tribunal failed to
    take into account the  considerations  under  Section  117  as  regards
    public interest.

Permission to Appeal

6.   Permission was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Colyer.   Judge
    Colyer took the view that the majority of the grounds  put  forward  by
    the Secretary of State were nothing more than a disagreement  with  the
    findings of the Tribunal  which  were  properly  open  to  her  on  the
    evidence before her.  The only basis on which an arguable error of  law
    was discerned was the failure to have regard to the public interest and
    apply the Part 5 of Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (  as
    amended).

Error of Law Hearing

7.   At the hearing before me I indicated to Mr Tarlow that  I  agreed  with
    the position taken by the permitting judge.  I was satisfied  that  the
    majority of the grounds  of  application   in  reality  amounted  to  a
    disagreement with the Tribunal's decision.

8.     Mr  Tarlow  submitted  that  the  Tribunal  failed   to   take   into
    consideration  the  public  interest  issues   which   had   now   been
    incorporated  into  statue  under  Section  117  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).

9.   Miss Momoh submitted that whilst  the  Tribunal  had  not  specifically
    referred to Section 117, it had referred to all of the relevant  points
    included  in  the  statutory  provisions  with  regard  to  the  public
    interest.  The Tribunal considered the Claimant's immigration  history,
    the precarious nature of the establishment of the relationship and  the
    finances available.  The Tribunal also considered fully  the  issue  of
    insurmountable  obstacles  and  in  particular  placed  weight  on  the
    sponsor's specific circumstances at [29].

Discussion and Decision

10.  At the end of the hearing I confirmed that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal was dismissed.  I found no material error of law in the Tribunal
    decision.  I am satisfied that  the  Tribunal,  whilst  not  explicitly
    referring to Section 117, did in fact consider the  aspects  of  public
    interest set out in statute and reached a  decision  that  was  clearly
    sustainable on the evidence before her.   The  Tribunal  gave   careful
    consideration to the documents and oral evidence and provided  a  clear
    and well reasoned explanation for finding the Claimants account  to  be
    credible and genuine.  As has been concluded in the recent decision  of
    Dube (SS 117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 90 "It is not an error of law  to  fail
    to refer to subsections  117A-117D  considerations  if  the  judge  has
    applied the test he or she was  supposed  to  apply  according  to  its
    terms; what matters is substance, not form".

Decision

11.  The Decision and Reasons shall stand.  There is no  material  error  of
    law.  The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.
There is no error of law in the decision and reasons, which shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date 16.3.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee  award.
It was necessary for the parties to give evidence which formed the basis  of
the Tribunal's decision.





Signed                                  Date 16.3.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
