

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/24848/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 February 2015                            |On 10 February 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                     MC
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             SECRETARY OF STATE

                                                                  Respondent
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


              NOTICE THAT APPEAL IS BEING TREATED AS ABANDONED

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Canada born on 27  February  1980.  She
       came to the United Kingdom as a visitor.  She  is  the  spouse  of  a
       British Citizen and the couple have a child who  is  also  a  British
       Citizen. On 29 April 2014 she applied for  leave  to  remain  as  the
       spouse and this application was refused on 4 June 2014. The appellant
       appealed and her appeal came before  First-tier  Judge  Balloch.  The
       appeal was determined on the papers and dismissed on 20 October 2014.


    2. Permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that  the  First-tier
       Judge had not fully considered the  impact  of  the  removal  of  the
       appellant on her child.


    3. On 22 December 2014 the respondent filed a response noting  that  the
       appellant had applied for a paper appeal which deprived the judge  of
       hearing oral evidence, and submitting that the  judge  had  carefully
       analysed the evidence and had found it inadequate and had  identified
       inconsistencies. The appellant could apply to return as a spouse from
       Canada.


    4. On 29 January 2015 the appellant and her sponsor advised the Tribunal
       that they had returned to Canada on 12th January 2014 and enclosed  a
       Home Office letter dated 15th  December  2014  addressed  to  Transat
       Airlines.


    5. Mr Bramble submitted that in the circumstances the  appeal  had  been
       abandoned and it was clear that the departure was voluntary.  In  the
       alternative he would  rely  on  the  respondent's  response  and  the
       findings  of  the  First-tier  Judge  who  was  working  on   limited
       information. The appellant and he family had left as a family unit.


    6. The appellant appears to argue that she had been misled in  some  way
       into leaving the country. Her husband says that having been  informed
       that his wife had no leave to remain and that the appeal decision had
       been made and declined "we made  arrangements  to  leave  the  United
       Kingdom  even  though  leaving   has   had   an   immense   personal,
       psychological and financial detrement [sic] to our family."


    7. I am not satisfied that the appellant's departure with her family was
       anything other than voluntary and that the family  made  a  conscious
       and free decision to depart. This is not  the  case  of  someone  not
       leaving of there own volition - see paragraph 24 of MM (Ghana), R (on
       the application of) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
       [2012] EWCA Civ 827 per Toulson LJ:


           "Having had the benefit of considering the arguments of  counsel
           in this case, in my view it is erroneous  to  suppose  that  the
           question of whether a  person  has  "left  the  United  Kingdom"
           within the meaning of s.104(4) is in some way dependant  on  the
           actual or intended duration of his absence from the UK,  whether
           hours, days, weeks or months. With great respect to Mummery  LJ,
           I am not able to agree that a person who travels out on a  short
           holiday and returns on the following day has not  thereby  "left
           the United Kingdom" within the meaning of the  statute.  Such  a
           person has "left the United Kingdom" as a physical act. I  would
           exclude the exceptional case of someone who did not leave of his
           own volition, but for example was kidnapped,  because  the  word
           "leaves" implies a volitional act. But I would not interpret the
           word "leaves" as requiring additionally an  intention  never  to
           return, or a minimum actual or intended period of absence."


    8. I agree with Mr Bramble that the departure of the family  was  purely
       voluntary "a volitional act."


    9. I should add  that  it  is  open  to  the  family  to  make  a  fresh
       application to the Secretary of State on the basis of  their  current
       circumstances - as Judge Balloch points out in her determination  the
       material before her was not before the  respondent  and  insufficient
       evidence  had  been  provided  to  her  and  some  matters   required
       clarification. I should perhaps also mention that Judge  Balloch  did
       consider the best interests of the child between paragraphs 27 and 29
       of the determination, referring to EV (Philippines) & Ors v Secretary
       of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874. Had the  appeal
       not been treated as abandoned I would  have  found  for  the  reasons
       given by the respondent in the respondent's notice and as advanced by
       Mr Bramble at the hearing that the determination was  not  materially
       flawed in law.


         This appeal is abandoned by virtue  of  the  appellant's  departure
         from the United Kingdom.

    ANONYMITY ORDER
    The anonymity order made by the First-tier Judge continues.



Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Warr


                               9 February 2015



