
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/24905/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 November 2017 and 25 January    |On 13 February 2018                  |
|2018                                 |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                     GLS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp, instructed by Sterling & Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer (2 Nov
2017)
      Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer (25 Jan 2018)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    made on 23 June 2015 refusing his application for leave  to  remain  on
    private and family life grounds.

Background

2.    The background to this appeal can briefly be  summarised  as  follows.
    The appellant is a citizen of St Lucia born on [ ] 1981.  He first came
    to the UK in 2004 with entry clearance as a student with leave until 15
    February 2006.  He returned to St Lucia and applied for entry clearance
    as a working holidaymaker.  Leave was granted until 1 March  2008.   On
    26 February 2008, he applied for leave as a dependant joining a  person
    with leave to remain and leave was granted until 31 October 2010 and on
    30 December 2009 he was  granted  leave  to  enter  accordingly.   This
    application related to the appellant's previous marriage on 23 February
    2008, which subsequently broke down and was  ended  by  divorce  on  13
    November 2011.

3.    On 10 March 2011,  he  applied  for  a  Certificate  of  Approval  for
    Marriage but this application was discontinued.  On 15 January 2013, he
    applied as the spouse of a  settled  person  but  his  application  was
    rejected for reasons relating to the payment of  the  fee.   A  further
    application was made on 6 February 2013 as  the  spouse  of  a  settled
    person but this was refused with no right of appeal.  On 3 March  2015,
    he applied for leave to remain on private and family life grounds. This
    application was refused on 23 June 2015 and  is  the  subject  of  this
    appeal.

4.    The respondent was satisfied that  the  appellant  was  in  a  genuine
    relationship with his wife whom  he  married  on  19  July  2012.   She
    accepted  that  the  appellant  met  the  suitability  and  eligibility
    requirements of appendix FM but not the immigration status requirements
    which meant that to succeed under the Rules, he had to show under  para
    EX.1.(b) that there were insurmountable obstacles to family  life  with
    his  partner  continuing  outside  the  UK.   The  respondent  was  not
    satisfied that this was the case.  She went on to consider the question
    of private life under para 276ADE(1) but found that the appellant could
    not meet any of its provisions.   She  considered  whether  there  were
    exceptional circumstances which might warrant consideration of a  grant
    of leave outside the requirements of the Rules but it was her view that
    the appellant had obtained qualifications and work experience whilst in
    the UK which would enable him to take employment in St  Lucia  and  his
    partner, a British citizen, would have employment opportunities there.

5.    The respondent also noted (at para 37 of the decision letter) that  in
    March 2012 the appellant had contacted the Home Office to  request  the
    return of his passport to arrange for his marriage.   He  was  informed
    that that could not be done and was advised of the reasons why.  He was
    told that the Home Office could help with his removal from the  UK  and
    that if his intended spouse wanted to apply  for  entry  clearance  for
    him, that would be her choice.  The appellant said that he would return
    to St Lucia and apply for  entry  clearance  after  his  marriage.   In
    summary, the respondent was not satisfied that this was an  appropriate
    case for a grant of leave outside the Rules.

The Hearing before the First-Tier Tribunal

6.    At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  the  judge  heard  oral
    evidence  from  the  appellant  and  his  wife.   She  noted  that  the
    respondent accepted that the marriage was genuine  and  subsisting  but
    his wife's family were not aware of her marriage and believed that  she
    was living with friends.  The reason for this deception was because her
    family would not accept the relationship and she believed that if  they
    became aware of it, she would be cut off from them and prohibited  from
    having any contact with  them.   She  would  face  ostracism  from  her
    friends and community.  She believed that she would be able to continue
    to conceal her marriage while her husband was in the UK but, if she had
    to move to St Lucia, they would become aware of the relationship.

7.    In support of the  claim  that  his  wife  would  be  ostracised,  the
    appellant relied on an expert report from Jasvinder Sanghera,  the  CEO
    of Karma Nirvana, a charity supporting victims of forced  marriage  and
    honour crimes.  The judge accepted that the appellant's  wife's  family
    would not approve of and would very likely ostracise her because of her
    marriage to the appellant, although she did not accept that  she  would
    be at risk of physical harm:  at  no  point  in  her  detailed  witness
    statement or in her oral evidence had she made any such claim  and  the
    focus of her evidence had been the impact of the  ostracism  she  would
    face not only from  her  family  but  also  from  her  friends  in  her
    community.

8.    However, the judge said  that  she  did  not  seek  to  underplay  the
    genuine fear that the appellant's wife had of her family becoming aware
    of the marriage and the ostracism she would face.  She  commented  that
    she was currently living a lie facing  pressure  from  her  parents  to
    marry and that, realistically, one had to  ask  how  much  longer  this
    deception could continue and, in any event, her relocation to St  Lucia
    would be of  benefit  rather  than  detriment  as  St  Lucia  would  be
    thousands of miles away from her family, enabling her to make  a  fresh
    start living openly with her husband.  She noted that the expert report
    referred to the importance of the appellant's wife continuing  to  have
    support from her husband which she would  have  and  also  referred  to
    "survivor support" and the judge was satisfied that  she  could  access
    this via the telephone and internet from St Lucia.

9.    The judge then said that she  found  that  "insurmountable  obstacles"
    referred to  the  practical  problems  that  a  couple  would  face  on
    relocation and she  was  not  persuaded  that  the  appellant's  wife's
    concerns regarding her family could be considered as such.   The  judge
    then said at[11]:


         "With regards to the practical issues of day-to-day  living  in  St
         Lucia the appellant is a former police officer and his wife  is  an
         educated woman with a good employment history  in  retail  although
         the appellant claims in his witness statement that they  would  not
         be able to find work there is no objective evidence  before  me  to
         corroborate this very broad assertion.   Further,  the  appellant's
         parents continue to live in St Lucia and I am  not  satisfied  that
         the couple could not turn to them for practical  support  on  their
         initial return. On these facts I am not persuaded that  the  couple
         would face very significant hardship."


10.   The judge commented that she understood that the appellant's wife  did
    not want to leave the UK. She was a British citizen and had her family,
    friends and employment here.  However, in the light  of  the  fact  was
    that she was aware when she married that the  appellant  did  not  have
    permanent leave to remain in the UK and was always aware  that  he  may
    not be able to remain, the judge was not persuaded that an  intelligent
    and independent woman such as the appellant's wife, with the support of
    her husband and parents-in-law,  would  by  moving  to  St  Lucia  face
    significant hardships that could not be overcome.  Accordingly, she was
    not satisfied on the balance of probabilities that  the  appellant  met
    the provisions of para EX.1.(b).  The  judge  was  not  satisfied  that
    there was any evidence that had not  been  fully  considered  or  which
    considered under article 8 would lead to a different conclusion.

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

11.   In the grounds of appeal, it is argued  that  the  judge  applied  the
    wrong approach to the assessment of insurmountable obstacles  and  that
    serious emotional distress  or  psychological  harm  must  fall  within
    either insurmountable obstacles within the Rules or within  article  8.
    The judge therefore erred, so it is argued, by rejecting the contention
    that community  ostracism  fell  within  the  remit  of  insurmountable
    obstacles on the basis that these were solely concerned with  practical
    issues or in the alternative by failing to consider community ostracism
    within the parameters of article 8 outside the Rules.   The  judge  had
    also  failed  to  have  regard  to   the   documents   concerning   the
    psychological effect of ostracism.  She may have held that they did not
    take the case further but she should have given reasons if that was her
    view.  Finally, it is argued that the appellant's  wife  is  a  British
    citizen who faces at a minimum huge distress if  she  does  not  retain
    autonomy over when and how to disclose her marriage to her  family  and
    this raised issues of the extent  to  which  British  citizens  can  be
    expected to endure distress and to what extent  this  is  proportionate
    bearing in mind Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 and that the  judge  erred  in
    her approach to these issues.

12.   Mr Fripp adopted these grounds.  He submitted  that  social  ostracism
    was  a  factor  which  could  properly  be  considered  when  assessing
    insurmountable obstacles  which  should  not  be  limited  to  strictly
    practical issues.  The fact that an  insurmountable  obstacle  did  not
    arise because of the general prospects a couple would  face  on  return
    but rather would arise because a return would lead to the fact  of  the
    marriage becoming known to the appellant's wife's family should not  be
    regarded as dispositive.  He  further  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    failed to deal adequately with article 8  outside  the  Rules  and  had
    failed to consider the Chikwamba issue of whether there  was  any  real
    purpose in requiring an application to be made from St Lucia  when  the
    appellant could meet in substance the requirements of the Rules.

13.    Mr  Walker  submitted  that  the  judge  had  reached  findings   and
    conclusions properly open to her for the reasons  she  gave.   She  was
    entitled to find that the appellant had failed to show that there would
    be insurmountable obstacles to living in St Lucia  and  there  were  no
    additional factors  which  were  capable  of  leading  to  a  different
    decision outside the Rules.

Assessment of Whether the First-Tier Tribunal erred in law.

14.   I must consider whether the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  such
    that the decision should be set aside.  The expression  "insurmountable
    obstacles" used in para  EX.1.  is  defined  in  para  EX.2.  as  "very
    significant difficulties which would be faced by the applicant or their
    partner in continuing their family life together  outside  the  UK  and
    which could not be overcome or would entail very serious  hardship  for
    the applicant or their partner."

15.   The issue of insurmountable  obstacles  has  been  considered  by  the
    Supreme Court in R (Agyarko) v Secretary of State [2017] UKSC 11.  Lord
    Reed considered the  jurisprudence  in  the  ECtHR  and  said  that  it
    appeared that that Court intended the  words  to  be  understood  in  a
    practical and realistic  sense  rather  than  as  referring  solely  to
    obstacles making  it  literally  impossible  for  the  family  to  live
    together in the country of origin of the  non-national  concerned,  the
    Court's application of this issue indicating that it  was  a  stringent
    test.

16.   Lord Reed then referred to the provisions relating  to  insurmountable
    obstacles in appendix FM and paras  EX.1  and  EX.2  saying  that  that
    definition appeared to be consistent with the meaning  which  could  be
    derived from the Strasbourg case law. Lord Reed then said at [45]:


         'By virtue of para EX.1.(b), insurmountable obstacles  are  treated
         as a requirement for the grant of leave under the Rules in cases to
         which  that  paragraph  applies.   Accordingly,  interpreting   the
         expression in the same sense as in the Strasbourg case  law,  leave
         to remain would not normally be granted in cases where an applicant
         for leave to remain under the partner route was in the UK in breach
         of immigration laws, unless the applicant or  their  partner  would
         face very serious difficulties  in  continuing  their  family  life
         together outside the UK, which  could  not  be  overcome  or  would
         entail  very  serious  hardship.   Even  in  a  case   where   such
         difficulties  do  not  exist,  however,   leave   to   remain   can
         nevertheless  be  granted  outside  the   Rules   in   "exceptional
         circumstances", in accordance with the  Instructions:  that  is  to
         say,  in  "circumstances  in  which   refusal   would   result   in
         unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for  the  individual  such  that
         refusal of the application would not be  proportionate."   Is  that
         situation compatible with article 8?'


17.   Lord Reed considered that issue in [46]- [48] and held that the  Rules
    and Instructions were compatible with article 8 but added that that was
    not to say that  decisions  applying  the  Rules  and  Instructions  in
    individual cases would necessarily be compatible with article  8:  that
    was  a  question  which,  if  the  decision  was  challenged,  must  be
    determined independently by the court or tribunal in the light  of  the
    particular circumstances of each case.

18.   Applying this guidance to the approach  taken  by  the  judge  in  the
    present case, I  am  not  satisfied  that  she  erred  in  law  in  her
    assessment of insurmountable obstacles within the Rules. It  is  argued
    that  at  the  end  of  [10]  the  judge  erred  in  law  by   limiting
    "insurmountable obstacles" to practical problems and therefore left out
    of account the risk of ostracism from her family  and  friends  if  the
    fact of the appellant's wife's marriage came to light.   However,  when
    [10], [11] and [12] are read as a whole, I am not  satisfied  that  the
    judge excluded  from  consideration  the  appellant's  wife's  fear  of
    ostracism from her family not least in the light of her comment in [10]
    that relocation to St Lucia was more likely to  be  of  benefit  rather
    than detriment in that in St Lucia she would be thousands of miles away
    from her family, able to make a fresh start and live  openly  with  her
    husband away from a hostile community.  She  also  commented  that  the
    appellant would be able to provide her with support and she would  have
    access to further support by telephone and internet.

19.   The judge did not exclude the risk of ostracism  from  the  assessment
    of insurmountable obstacles but was not satisfied in the  circumstances
    of the appellant and his wife that, when taken with other  difficulties
    which would  arise,   it  could  be  said  that  there  would  be  very
    significant difficulties which could not be overcome  or  would  entail
    very serious hardship.  Accordingly, I am satisfied that the judge  did
    not err in law in her approach to  the  issue  of  whether  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles within the Rules.  She approached  this  issue
    in a practical and realistic way consistent with the  jurisprudence  of
    both the ECtHR and the Supreme Court and reached  a  decision  properly
    open to her for the reasons she gave.

20.   I now turn to the issue  of  whether  the  judge  erred  in  law  when
    assessing whether the appeal needed further consideration under article
    8 outside the Rules.   She  directed  herself  in  accordance  with  SS
    (Congo) v Secretary of State (2015) EWCA 387 and said that she was  not
    persuaded  that  there  was  any  evidence  that  had  not  been  fully
    considered or which,  considered  under  article  8  would  lead  to  a
    different conclusion.  That restrictive approach has been superseded by
    the judgments of the Supreme Court in Agyarko and in R  (MM  (Lebanon))
    and Others v Secretary of State [2017] UKHL 10 that the fact  that  the
    Rules could not be met did not absolve decision  makers  from  carrying
    out a full merits-based assessment outside the Rules  under  article  8
    where the ultimate issue is whether a  fair  balance  has  been  struck
    between the individual and public interest, giving due  weight  to  the
    provisions of the Rules.

21.   The judge did not have the benefit of  the  guidance  of  the  Supreme
    Court as set out above and appears not to have considered whether, even
    though  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the  test  of  insurmountable
    obstacles within the Rules, there were exceptional circumstances  which
    would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences such  that  a  refusal
    would not be proportionate.  To this extent and through no fault of her
    own as she applied the binding jurisprudence as  at  the  date  of  her
    decision, I am satisfied that she erred  in  law  by  failing  to  give
    further consideration to the appeal under article 8.  In the  light  of
    the evidence and the potential arguments based on Chikwamba, I  am  not
    satisfied that it can be said that there are no  prospects  of  success
    under article 8 outside the Rules.

22.   I am therefore satisfied that the article 8  decision  should  be  set
    aside and that the appropriate course is for it to be retained  in  the
    Upper Tribunal for that part of the decision to be remade.  As  already
    indicated, there is no  error  of  law  in  the  decision  relating  to
    insurmountable obstacles under the Rules and that part  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision stands.

23.   As the appellant  wished  to  file  further  evidence  to  update  the
    position in respect of article  8,  the  hearing  was  adjourned.   The
    appellant has  filed  a  supplementary  expert  report  from  Jaswinder
    Sanghera, dated 24 January 2018, setting out further evidence about the
    impact of social ostracism when a family member is  perceived  to  have
    broken codes of honour and thereby brought shame on the family.

Further submissions

24.   Mr Fripp submitted that the appellant and his wife were in  a  genuine
    relationship where his wife's family were not aware  of  the  marriage.
    If they became aware of it, his wife would  face  ostracism.   She  had
    been able to conceal the marriage in the UK but this would not  be  the
    case if they had to move to St Lucia.  In the light of the finding that
    there would not be insurmountable obstacles to the  appellant  and  his
    wife  relocating  in  St  Lucia,  the  issue  was  whether  there  were
    exceptional circumstances such that article 8 required the appellant to
    be given leave to remain.  Mr  Fripp  relied  on  the  evidence  of  Ms
    Sanghera.  He pointed out that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  had  not
    found that the fear of ostracism was unfounded and it  was  clear  from
    the expert evidence that the effect on the appellant's  wife  would  be
    very serious if her family learned about the marriage.

25.   Mr Fripp argued that this was a case where the  appellant  could  meet
    the requirements of the Rules for leave to remain as a partner save for
    the immigration status requirements.  It had not been shown that  there
    was any basis for finding  that  he  could  not  meet  the  suitability
    requirements or that he would be denied entry  under  para  320(11)  as
    someone who had made frivolous applications.  The appellant would  have
    a good case, perhaps even a certain case, so he  argued,  of  obtaining
    entry clearance.  If he was required to return to St Lucia  to  do  so,
    the effect of even a period of temporary separation taken with the fact
    that his wife would not be able to look to her family for  support  was
    such  that  the  refusal  of  leave  would  be  disproportionate  to  a
    legitimate aim within article 8 (2).

26.   He relied on Chikwamba and referred to  [51]  of  Agyarko,  where  the
    Supreme Court accepted that there might be no public  interest  in  the
    removal of an applicant, even if residing  in  the  UK  unlawfully  but
    otherwise certain to be granted leave to enter in an  application  made
    from outside the UK.  He submitted that the fact  that  an  application
    was very likely to be successful should weigh heavily in the assessment
    of proportionality.  When this factor was considered with the fact that
    the appellant's wife was unable to  look  to  her  family  for  support
    during a period of absence, this was a case  which  could  properly  be
    regarded as one of the small minority of cases where removal  would  be
    disproportionate.

27.   Mr Tufan submitted that the issue of ostracism had a limited, if  any,
    bearing on the issues under article 8.  The First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    had accepted that the appellant's wife had a genuine fear that  if  her
    family became aware of her marriage, this  would  result  in  ostracism
    although the judge did not accept that she would be at risk of physical
    harm from her family.  He submitted that the fact of her marriage would
    surface sooner or later and any reaction from her family would have  to
    be faced at some point.  If the appellant returned to St Lucia to  make
    an application for entry clearance, there would  only  be  a  temporary
    separation if the requirements of the Rules could be met.  He submitted
    that there were no exceptional circumstances to support a finding  that
    the removal of the appellant would lead to a breach of article 8.

Assessment of the Issues

28.   The First-tier Tribunal judge did  not  accept  that  the  appellant's
    wife would be at risk of physical harm from her family for the  reasons
    she set out in [9] of her decision but she did not  seek  to  underplay
    her genuine fear of  ostracism  if  her  family  became  aware  of  her
    marriage.  There is nothing in the evidence which leads me to take  any
    different view on this  issue.   I  accept  that  the  fears  that  the
    appellant's wife has expressed are genuinely held and that  the  report
    from Ms Sanghera sets out what the consequences may be  if  someone  is
    ostracised from  their  family  and  the  emotional  and  psychological
    consequences which may follow.

29.   The First-tier Tribunal  judge  asked  herself  how  much  longer  the
    deception of whether the appellant's wife had  married  could  continue
    and also questioned whether a relocation to St Lucia  would  not  be  a
    benefit rather than a detriment as she  would  be  thousands  of  miles
    further away from her family and could make a fresh start living openly
    with her husband away from a potentially hostile community.  In [39] of
    her witness statement of 7 November 2016, the appellant's wife sets out
    the basis of her concerns. Her family would not approve of her  leaving
    the UK to live in St Lucia.  They would feel that  she  was  ungrateful
    for all they have done to have her brought up and educated  in  the  UK
    and would not understand why she was leaving. She does not see a way of
    preventing her family from finding about her marriage and feels that by
    going to St Lucia she would be forced into telling  her  parents  about
    her relationship with the appellant.  She wants to be the one  to  tell
    them rather than them finding out accidentally from  someone  else  and
    this is not something she is ready to do.

30.   Whilst I can understand her fears,  the  fact  remains  that  she  has
    successfully kept her marriage hidden from her  family  since  November
    2012 and if she were to move to  St  Lucia,  it  does  not  necessarily
    follow that she would have to disclose the fact of her marriage if  she
    chose not to do so.  If she did or her family otherwise found out about
    the marriage, there is some force in the judge's comments  that  living
    in St Lucia would enable her to make a fresh start. In this  context  I
    note from Ms Sanghera's  report  that  one  reaction  to  ostracism  is
    relocation to protect the new family from the feared repercussions  and
    to rebuild their lives successfully, albeit without their families: 4.4
    of the report dated 24 January 2018.

31.   It is implicit in the evidence of the appellant's  wife  that  if  she
    remains in the UK, her family are unlikely, or perhaps less likely,  to
    find out about the marriage.  Assuming this to be the case, it leads to
    a consideration of whether it would be disproportionate to  expect  the
    appellant to return to St Lucia by himself to enable  him  to  make  an
    application for entry clearance in accordance with the Rules.  It is Mr
    Fripp's submission that the appellant has a good  case,  maybe  even  a
    certain case of success.  He pointed to evidence to  support  the  fact
    that the appellant's wife is earning sufficient to meet  the  financial
    requirements of the Rules and argues that there is  no  basis  for  the
    appellant being refused on suitability grounds. When these factors  are
    taken with the issues arising from the fear of  ostracism,  he  submits
    that the refusal of leave under article 8 would be disproportionate.


32.   However, the fact remains that family life has been  formed  when  the
    parties were aware that the immigration status of one of them was  such
    that the creation and continuance of family life would  be  precarious.
    In Agyarko, the Supreme Court considered the issue of precariousness in
    [49] - [53], noting the  judgment  of  the  ECtHR  in  Jeunesse  v  The
    Netherlands (2015) 60 EHRR 17 which said that where  the  parties  were
    aware that the relationship was precarious, "it is likely only to be in
    exceptional circumstances that the removal of the  non-national  family
    member will constitute a violation of article 8". Lord Reed went on  to
    say,   having   referred   to   the   immigration   instructions   that
    "precariousness" was not a preliminary hurdle to be  overcome,  rather,
    the fact that family life had been established by an applicant  in  the
    full knowledge that his stay in  the  UK  was  unlawful  or  precarious
    affected the weight to be attached to it in the balancing exercise.

33.   Lord Reed went on to say at [51]:


         "Whether the applicant is in the UK unlawfully, or is  entitled  to
         remain in the UK only temporarily,  however,  the  significance  of
         this consideration depends  on  what  the  outcome  of  immigration
         control might otherwise be.  For example,  if  an  applicant  would
         otherwise be automatically deported as a foreign criminal, then the
         weight of the public interest in his or her removal would generally
         be very considerable.  If, on the other hand, an applicant  -  even
         if residing in the UK albeit unlawfully - was otherwise certain  to
         be granted leave to enter, at least if  an  application  were  made
         from outside the UK, then there might be no public interest in  his
         or her removal. This  point  is  illustrated  by  the  decision  in
         Chikwamba v Secretary of State for Home Department."


34    Chikwamba  was  considered  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  R  (Chen)  v
    Secretary of State IJR [2015] UKUT 189 where the Tribunal accepted that
    there may be cases in which there were no insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life being enjoyed outside the UK but where temporary separation
    to enable an individual to make an application for entry clearance  may
    be disproportionate  and  that  in  all  cases  it  would  be  for  the
    individual to place before the Secretary of State  evidence  that  such
    temporary separation would interfere disproportionately with  protected
    rights and it would not be enough solely to  rely  upon  the  case  law
    concerning Chikwamba.

35.   There is no dispute that the removal  of  the  appellant  would  be  a
    breach of  sufficient  significance  to  engage  article  8  (1).   The
    decision is in accordance with the law and is for a legitimate aim, the
    maintenance of immigration control.  The issue is whether requiring the
    appellant to return to St Lucia is necessary  and  proportionate  to  a
    legitimate aim.  In [57]  of  Agyarko,  Lord  Reed  confirmed  that  in
    general in cases concerned with precarious family life, a  very  strong
    or compelling claim is required to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
    immigration control. In the present case the marriage was entered  into
    when the appellant's immigration  status  was  precarious  and  it  has
    continued to be so.

36.   The appeal was not successful under the Rules.  The judge  found  that
    there were no insurmountable obstacles to the parties  living  together
    in St Lucia.  However, it is clear that the appellant's wife fears that
    if she does go to live in St Lucia, her family will not approve of that
    course and it may lead to the fact of her marriage being discovered  or
    she feels that she may be forced to disclose it and so bring about  the
    risk of  ostracism.   She  has  successfully  managed  to  conceal  her
    marriage to date and I think the likelihood is that she would  be  able
    to continue to do so even if she moved  to  St  Lucia.   There  are  of
    course other reasons why she may not wish to move to St Lucia:  she  is
    settled in the UK, her life is here and she has submitted  evidence  of
    employment, which if accurate, shows that maintenance  requirements  of
    the Rules can in all likelihood be met.

37.   The option remains of the appellant returning to St Lucia to  make  an
    application for entry clearance whilst his wife remains in the UK.   It
    appears to be the case  that  an  application  has  good  prospects  of
    success, but it cannot be said to be certain of success.  It  would  be
    wrong to prejudge the position or to pre-empt the decision of the entry
    clearance officer as an application must be assessed  at  the  date  of
    decision on the evidence presented. Mr Fripp submitted that  there  was
    no reason to believe that the suitability  requirements  of  the  Rules
    could not be met it but, again, that must be a  matter  for  the  entry
    clearance officer to consider on the basis of the evidence before  him.



38.   I must take into account the provisions  of  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 and in particular that the maintenance of effective
    immigration  control  is  in  the  public  interest  (s.117B(1)),   the
    appellant is able to speak English (s.117B(2)) and little weight should
    be given to a relationship formed when a person is in the UK unlawfully
    (s.117B(4)).  I also take into account that in March 2012 the appellant
    contacted the Home Office and there was a discussion about  the  return
    of his passport. It is recorded that he said that he would return to St
    Lucia after the marriage and apply for entry  clearance.   That  option
    was open to the appellant at that stage and has remained  open  to  him
    since then.

39.   If that course is taken, it would  not  increase  the  risk  of  their
    marriage coming to the knowledge of his wife's family.  There would  be
    a temporary separation, assuming that the  requirements  of  the  Rules
    could be met. There is no evidence before me  of  the  length  of  time
    applications normally take when made from St  Lucia  but  there  is  no
    reason  to  believe  that  it  would  be   for   an   unreasonable   or
    disproportionate length of time.  I am not satisfied that requiring the
    appellant to take that course of action would be disproportionate.   It
    must also be kept in mind that Chikwamba was decided at a  time  before
    the amendment to the Rules in 2012 and 2014  and,  more  significantly,
    before  the  statutory  enactments  relating  to  the  public  interest
    considerations in the 2002 Act and that whilst in the UK, the appellant
    cannot meet the immigration status requirement,  a  substantive  rather
    than a procedural part of the Rules in  Appendix  FM.  The  appellant's
    case is not one where it can be said that there is no  public  interest
    in removal.

40.   Taking all the relevant factors into account including those in  S117B
    of the 2002 Act, I am not satisfied that the  decision  to  remove  the
    appellant is disproportionate to  a  legitimate  aim  in  circumstances
    where there are no insurmountable obstacles to the parties returning to
    St Lucia and where the appellant can return  by  himself  and  make  an
    application for entry clearance.  He  fails  to  show  that  there  are
    strong or  compelling  reasons  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining immigration control.  Accordingly, I am not satisfied  that
    the decision to remove the appellant would be in breach of article 8.

Decision

41.  The First-tier Tribunal did not  err  in  law  its  assessment  of  the
    appeal under the Rules.  It did err in its assessment of the article  8
    appeal.  That decision set aside.  I re-make the decision  and  dismiss
    the article 8 appeal.

42.   The anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal remains  in  force
    until further order.


Signed:     H J E Latter     Dated: 8 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
