
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24225/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14 September 2016                      |On 24 October 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR SHAHRUKH KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Haji of Counsel instructed by Lincolns
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Thanki promulgated on  29  February  2016  in
    which the judge allowed the appeal of Mr Shahrukh Khan to whom I  refer
    to as the appellant.   That  appeal  was  against  a  decision  by  the
    Secretary of State that the applicant was not entitled to  a  residence
    card as confirmation of his right to  reside  as  the  extended  family
    member of his paternal uncle, that being a decision  made  pursuant  to
    Regulations 8 and  17  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.  The judge found materially that the appellant  is  a
    dependant of an EEA national exercising treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom, that he satisfied the requirements  of  Regulation  8  and  he
    therefore allowed the appeal remitting it to the respondent to consider
    the case again under Regulation 17(4).

 2. The Secretary of State appealed against that decision  on  the  grounds
    that I summarise as follows in that the judge firstly failed to address
    himself properly according to the decision in Dauhoo (EEA Regulations -
    reg8(2)) [2012] UKUT 79 (IAC), in that the  judge  failed  to  identify
    whether there was prior dependency or prior membership of  a  household
    and that the judge's findings were  not  sustainable  insofar  as  they
    related to findings of present dependency.

 3. A separate issue arises in this case as a result of a decision which  I
    brought to the attention of the parties, that being Sala  (EFMs:  Right
    of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC), a decision of  the  Vice  President
    and Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb.   In  summary,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    concluded that panel there is no right of appeal against a decision  to
    refuse a residence card as an  extended  family  member  owing  to  the
    proper interpretation of Regulation 2 of the EEA Regulations  in  which
    an EEA decision is defined.

 4. Ms Haji for the appellant submitted  that  the  decision  in  could  be
    distinguished on the basis first that this  is  not  a  case  in  which
    discretion  had  in  fact  been  exercised,  the  Secretary  of   State
    concluding that there was no entitlement  under  Regulation  8  in  the
    first place.  Second, that it could be distinguished on the basis  that
    this was not about a durable relationship and thus  this  was  not  the
    type of appeal to which Regulation 26(2)(a) related.  It was in fact an
    appeal to which Regulation 26(3) applied.  Mr Melvin's submissions were
    that I should follow Sala.

 5. In addition to these submissions I heard  submissions  as  to  whether,
    assuming that the First-tier Tribunal did have jurisdiction, there  was
    an error of law and I will turn to those submissions in due course.

 6. Having paid close attention to the decision in Sala I consider that  it
    cannot be distinguished on the basis submitted by Ms  Haji.   Whilst  I
    note in particular the submissions made by the parties  in  that  case,
    and while it is unusual that the Secretary of State  in  Sala  did  not
    assert the opinion that there was a right of appeal,  I do not consider
    that the distinctions can be made out.  The ratio is  Sala  applies  to
    all those who fall within Regulation 8 (as this  appellant  does).   In
    particular I do not consider that the  reasoning  of  the  Tribunal  at
    paragraphs 46 to 48 in particular can be distinguished  on  this  issue
    and first I come to  the  conclusion  for  the  reasons  given  by  the
    Tribunal in Sala that there is no right of appeal in this case and that
    accordingly the First-tier Tribunal had no  jurisdiction  to  determine
    the appeal

 7. If however I am wrong about that I  do  consider  that  Judge  Thanki's
    decision does involve the making of an error of  law.   It  is  evident
    from the decision in Dauhoo that the first  question  that  had  to  be
    considered is whether there was prior  membership  of  a  household  or
    prior dependency on the part of the appellant before  he  came  to  the
    United Kingdom.  Ms Haji accepted that the trigger  was  the  appellant
    coming to the United Kingdom  and  not  the  EEA  national.   She  also
    accepted that the judge found that there had been no  prior  membership
    of the household.

 8. The question then arises is whether the judge properly found that there
    was prior dependency.  The evidence  is  somewhat  thin  regarding  the
    prior dependency.  The judge  records  at  paragraph  [59]  that  on  1
    October 2007 prior to the appellant entering the United Kingdom  on  13
    October 2007, there had been a money transfer to the appellant  in  the
    sum of Euros 365.  There is, as Ms Haji accepted  no  evidence  of  any
    other transfers prior to 1 October.  It would therefore follow the only
    basis on which the judge could have found prior dependency was  on  the
    basis of that one payment.

 9. There is however, contrary to the decisions in Moneke  (EEA  -  OFMs  -
    assessment of evidence) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00430 (IAC) no analysis  of
    whether that was a dependency of necessity.  There is no assessment  of
    what the essential needs were and in that context it  is  difficult  to
    discern if the judge has indeed found that there was prior  dependency.
    Whilst it is arguable that the judge must of necessity have  made  that
    finding before proceeding to go  any  further,  there  is  insufficient
    reasoning in respect of that it being entirely unclear that  the  judge
    was aware that it was necessary to make a finding on  prior  dependency
    as a preliminary matter before going on to consider the  other  matters
    on which he does make  findings  that  of  his  current  membership  of
    household and current dependency.

10. For these reasons, were I to find that there is  jurisdiction  in  this
    case, I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did
    involve the making of an error of  law  and  on  that  basis  it  would
    require to be set aside and remade on the issue of  whether  there  was
    dependency of the appellant on  his  uncle  prior  to  the  appellant's
    arrival in the United Kingdom, and as to his current status in terms of
    household and/or dependency.

11. For these reasons I find that there was no  jurisdiction  and  I  order
    accordingly.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

   1. The appellant has no right of appeal. The First-tier Tribunal  had  no
      jurisdiction to hear the appeal. It erred in law in doing so.

   2. I set aside its decision to allow the appeal and substitute a decision
      that there was not a valid appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                                  Date:  19 September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

