
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24420/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd September 2017                |On 29th September 2017               |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                             miss dariya krysyuk
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Joshi Counsel instructed by Solacexis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  the  Ukraine  whose  date  of  birth  is
    recorded as 7th  January  1965.   She  appealed  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State of 26th May 2015 refusing her application made under
    Article 8 of the ECHR which hearing was heard by Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Metzer sitting at Taylor House on  21st  September  2016.
    Having regard to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the  Immigration  Rules  he
    dismissed the appeal.

 2. Not content with that decision, by Notice dated 22nd November 2016  the
    Appellant made application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. The basis upon  which  the  application  was  made  was  that
    contrary to what appears in the decision of the judge, namely that  the
    appeal was limited to a consideration of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), which
    would be determinative of the appeal, it was  submitted  that  no  such
    concession was made and that the judge erred in failing  to  go  on  to
    consider either properly, or at all, the wider application of Article 8
    which, it is asserted, had that been done, may well have resulted in  a
    different outcome in the appeal.

 3. The application failed in the first instance  when  Judge  Hollingworth
    refused it observing that the judge was entitled to  proceed  with  the
    hearing on the basis of the issue as indicated to the  judge  and  that
    such an indication or concession would supersede the content of  papers
    such as a skeleton argument submitted for the purposes of the hearing.

 4. It is not clear to me  whether  the  attendance  note  of  Counsel  who
    appeared in the First-tier Tribunal was before Judge Hollingworth but a
    renewed application in any event was made to the Upper Tribunal and  it
    would appear that the attendance note of Counsel was  certainly  placed
    before the judge of the Upper Tribunal,  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Black who on 8th August 2017 granted permission in which it is  stated,
    inter alia:

   "3.   Counsel for the Appellant at the First-tier Tribunal  hearing  has
        produced an attendance note  relating  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        hearing.  It  refers,  and  she  asserts  in  a  brief  accompanying
        statement, that the issues were  '276ADE(vi)  [sic]  and  Article  8
        outside the rules'.  The appellant's skeleton argument in the First-
        tier Tribunal also refers 'exceptional aspects  of  the  Appellant's
        case'.  There is a paragraph in the  skeleton  headed:  'exceptional
        circumstances' - Article 8 of the EXHR.  The phrasing in the  First-
        tier Tribunal Judge's decision is ambiguous in that  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge states: 'the parties agreed at the outset  that  were
        the Appellant not to succeed under the Immigration Rules, she  would
        not be able to  satisfy  the  test  of  'exceptional  circumstances'
        outside the Rules'.  It is not clear who was party to the  purported
        agreement.  There is a potential error at [12] of  the  decision  in
        that the First-tier Tribunal states 'there were no wider submissions
        in relation to Article 8 of  the  ECHR  outside  the  Rules'.   This
        statement is contrary to the skeleton argument in which  this  issue
        is covered."

 5. It is clearly a condition precedent to the appeal succeeding that it is
    established that the concession was not made.  In  granting  permission
    Judge Black noted that at best what was being presented was  ambiguous.
    The burden of course is upon the Appellant.   If  it  is  ambiguous  or
    equivocal then the burden of proof simply is not met. The Secretary  of
    State has produced a typed note with the date of  21st  September  2016
    upon it.  That is the same date as the hearing.  It reads:

         "No bundle for A, only served on the morning of the hearing.   Upon
         reviewing  this,  IJ  wished  to  clarify  the   issues   and   his
         consideration.   Rep  stated  she  would  argue  very   significant
         obstacles  and  outside  of  the  rules  in  the  alternative.   IJ
         indicated he could not see how this could be argued outside  if  it
         could not succeed in the Rules; rep eventually conceded  that  this
         would be advanced purely on 276ADE."

 6. That reads to me clearly to suggest that there was a discussion between
    the judge and the Appellant's representative at the  beginning  of  the
    hearing to narrow the issues.  That there may have been other documents
    going to a different part of the case does  not  help  in  establishing
    whether or not that evidence was going to be relied  upon.   If  as  is
    suggested from this document it was accepted that the case  would  turn
    on a consideration of 276ADE then there was no obligation on the  judge
    to look at the evidence going to the wider application of Article 8.

 7. In support of the contention that concessions were not made there is  a
    file note produced in support of the appeal which states:

         "Judge repeatedly stated that I do not want to rely  on  Article  8
         outside the rules as he already has to decide an  important  issue.
         I confirmed yes and I also rely on the skeleton argument  which  is
         quite extensive and deals with 276ADE and  Article  8  outside  the
         rules."

    The fact that the skeleton argument dealt with Article  8  outside  the
    Rules being part of the same document again does not help  because  the
    skeleton argument appears on its face to have  been  capable  of  being
    relied upon only with respect to 276ADE notwithstanding the  fact  that
    it made reference to Article 8 outside the Rules.

 8. The judge's note which by the way is significantly longer than anything
    from Counsel who appeared for the Appellant,  as  is  the  Respondent's
    file note, (and I was grateful to Ms Joshi who conceded that there  was
    insufficient evidence laid before me in respect of the contention  that
    there was no concession) is here, referring to the judge's note  again,
    consistent with what the Respondent  contends  was  the  position.  The
    judge himself of course has set out in clear terms what the  concession
    was and why he did not go on to consider the wider submissions.

 9. So, in determining whether or not the concession was  made  I  resolved
    that in the Respondent's favour, in other words the Appellant  has  not
    satisfied me on balance of probabilities  that  the  judge  has  erred.
    There is no reason for me to go behind that finding.  It is urged  upon
    me that Ms Krysyuk is entitled to a fair hearing.   She  has  not  been
    denied one.  She had an opportunity  to  be  heard  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and she has had an opportunity to  present  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal such evidence as was thought appropriate in order to make  the
    point.  The fact that Counsel has not been willing to come forward,  as
    I have been told, to assist those wishing to advance the matter  before
    me may, I do not know, be consistent with  the  very  short  file  note
    which was produced at the hearing.  I say no more about that.   In  the
    circumstances the Appellant, having failed  to  establish  the  premise
    upon which the appeal is brought, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

Signed                              Date: 28 September 2017





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

