
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24247/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Belfast                     |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 12 June 2015                      |On 20 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                           SANSAO DUMANGANE JUNIOR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K. Linkin, Solicitor, MSM Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnyez, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal comes before  the  Upper  Tribunal  following  a  grant  of
    permission in respect of a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  whereby
    the appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision  to  refuse  to  issue  a
    permanent residence card was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    P.A. Grant-Hutchinson after a hearing on 23 June 2014.

 2. The respondent's decision was to the effect that the appellant had  not
    established that his wife, an Irish citizen, had been exercising Treaty
    rights for a continuous period of five years.

 3. It is recorded at [5] of the determination that at the  outset  of  the
    hearing before Judge Grant-Hutchinson the appellant confirmed that  his
    wife had not been exercising Treaty rights for a continuous  period  of
    five years. In the same paragraph  the  judge  concluded  that  as  the
    hearing progressed it was apparent that the appellant  was  correct  to
    make that concession. He then stated that the appeal proceeded  on  the
    footing that he was required to consider Article 8 of the ECHR in terms
    of the respondent's refusal to grant a residence card.

 4. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was  that  the  appellant's
    wife has not been able to find employment, despite having tried hard to
    do so. She had been in receipt of Jobseekers' Allowance  for  a  period
    but latterly had been caring  for  her  elderly  mother.  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchinson concluded at [12] that the sponsor had neither been employed
    nor seeking employment such as to allow the appeal to succeed under the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the   EEA
    Regulations").

 5. Although it was concluded that the  appellant  does  have  private  and
    family life in the UK, it was found that there would be no interference
    with that private and family life. No removal notice  had  been  served
    and the appellant had not been advised that there was any intention  to
    remove him.

    The grounds of appeal and submissions

 6. The grounds of appeal before me essentially concern the conclusion that
    the respondent's  decision  would  involve  an  interference  with  the
    appellant's Article 8 rights, relying on JM (Liberia)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ  1402  and  Ahmed  (Amos;
    Zambrano; reg 15A(3)(c) 2006 EEA Regs) [2013]  UKUT  00089  (IAC).  The
    grounds also make reference to the terms of the respondent's  decision,
    which amongst other things states that he has no alternative  basis  of
    stay in the UK, should make arrangements to leave and that  if  he  did
    not do so a decision may be  made  at  a  later  date  to  enforce  his
    removal.

 7. At the start of the hearing Mr  Diwnyez indicated that  the  concession
    at [3] of the 'rule 24' response, to the effect that  it  was  conceded
    that the First-tier judge had erred  in  law  in  failing  to  consider
    Article 8, was erroneous. Ms Linkin indicated at that  stage  that  she
    had no  submissions  to  make  in  terms  of  the  withdrawal  of  that
    concession. I allowed that concession to be withdrawn, there  being  no
    submissions to the contrary, and taking into  account  that  it  was  a
    concession as to law rather than fact.

 8. Before me the parties were aware that a reported decision of the  Upper
    Tribunal, dealing with  the  interrelationship  between  refusal  of  a
    residence card and Article 8, was awaited, although I was told that  Ms
    Linkin's instructions were that the  appellant  wanted  the  appeal  to
    proceed nevertheless.

 9. In submissions on  behalf  of  the  appellant  the  grounds  of  appeal
    summarised above were relied on. It was accepted that a residence  card
    confers no substantive rights but it was clear that the refusal of  the
    residence card in this case indicated that the appellant had  no  basis
    of stay and was liable to be removed. In that case the appellant  would
    not have his Article 8 case heard.

10. It was submitted that there was clearly an arguable case under  Article
    8 in terms, for example, of employment, the appellant's voluntary work,
    and the six children of the sponsor. The evidence of  the  sponsor  was
    that she was not able to support herself in Mozambique, and  could  not
    save to visit her children and grandchildren there.

11. As regards the respondent's rule 24 response, it was submitted that  it
    was in error in suggesting that the appellant needed to establish "very
    compelling circumstances" in order to succeed under Article 8.  Without
    having his Article 8 case considered the appellant would be  forced  to
    stay in the  UK  unlawfully,  which  was  a  matter  considered  in  JM
    (Liberia). I was also referred to the decision in Ahmed,  which  itself
    relied on the decision in JM (Liberia). The further appeal  from  Ahmed
    to the Court of Appeal, cited as NA (Pakistan) V Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 995, did not involve any  challenge
    to the Article 8 point.

12. Mr Diwnyez submitted that the decision notice in  this  case  indicated
    only that the Secretary of State  has  the  power  to  make  a  removal
    decision, not that there is any intention to remove.

13. In the light of the fact that a reported decision of the Upper Tribunal
    was awaited in relation to the Article 8  point,  I  indicated  to  the
    parties that if that case was reported before my determination of  this
    appeal, I would allow the parties to make further  submissions  in  the
    light of it. Although I also indicated that I may decide  to  determine
    this appeal without waiting for the  reported  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal. In the event I delayed determining the  appeal  pending  that
    decision.

14. Subsequent to the hearing, the decision in Amirteymour and others  (EEA
    appeals; human rights) [2015] UKUT  00466  (IAC)  was  promulgated.  In
    directions I invited the parties to make any further  submissions  they
    wished to make in the light of that decision. I received submissions on
    behalf of the appellant only, on 7 October 2015.

15. The appellant's  further  submissions  contend  that  the  decision  in
    Amirteymour does not prevent the appellant succeeding in his appeal (on
    Article 8 grounds). It is argued that the decision is wrongly  decided,
    not being in accordance with EU principles in terms  of  free  movement
    rights. The decisions in Ahmed and NA (Pakistan) are again  relied  on,
    as well as a case referred to as "Levin" (not cited but believed to  be
    the case of D.M. Levin v Staatssecretaris van Justitie [1982] EUECJ  R-
    53/81), and Carpenter [2002] EUECJ C-60/00.

16. However, the Tribunal in Amirteymour was  plainly  aware  of  the  free
    movement issues inherent in its decision, and the basis of the decision
    in  NA  (Pakistan).  Although  I  am  not  bound  by  the  decision  in
    Amirteymour, I find the reasoning in it compelling. It is not suggested
    that in the case of the appeal before me any s.120 notice was served on
    the appellant. In principle therefore, the issue in this appeal is  the
    same  as  that  considered  in  Amirteymour.  I  adopt  the  Tribunal's
    reasoning in that case.

17. In consequence, I am not satisfied that the decision of the  respondent
    involves any question of an interference  with  the  appellant's  human
    rights in terms of Article 8  of  the  ECHR.  In  this  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was correct. Accordingly, there is no  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a  point  of  law.  Its  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    therefore stands.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  15/10/15

