

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)                          Appeal  Number:
IA/24759/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
Heard  at  Manchester  Piccadilly                                Decision  &
Reasons Promulgated
On the  18th  March  2016                                                 On
the 6th April 2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

Between:
                              MR ZESHAN MAHMOOD
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

      For the Appellant: Ms Barton (counsel)
      For the Respondent: Mr Harris (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Martins promulgated on the 8th June 2015  in  which  he
      dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary
      of State to refuse to issue with him with  a  residence  card  as  the
      spouse of an EEA national exercising Treaty Rights,  pursuant  to  the
      Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

   2. Permission to appeal against that decision has been granted by  Deputy
      Upper Tribunal Judge Archer on 12 October 2015, on  the  grounds  that
      the Judge arguably applied the wrong burden  of  proof.   However,  he
      granted permission to appeal on all of the grounds set out within  the
      grounds of appeal.

   3. Within the grounds of appeal it is argued that the First-tier Tribunal
      Judge erred in respect of the burden and standard of proof and that at
      paragraph [69] the Judge stated that "In accordance with the  case  of
      IS (marriages of convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT 00031, the burden of
      proving that a marriage is not a "marriage  of  convenience"  for  the
      purposes of EEA Regulations rests on the  Appellant;  but  he  is  not
      required to discharge  it  in  the  absence  of  evidence  of  matters
      supporting the submission that the marriage is one of convenience,  in
      other words there is evidential  burden  on  the  Respondent."  It  is
      argued the Judge failed to take account of the Upper Tribunal case  of
      Papajorgji (EEA Spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece  [2012]  UKUT
      00038 (IAC).

   4. Next argued within the grounds of appeal it is argued that  the  Judge
      made procedural errors amounting to errors of law, in that  the  Judge
      had erred in taking account of  all  evidence  given  by  the  sponsor
      including the evidence given by her at the  first  hearing  when  that
      hearing had been adjourned by  the  Judge  because  of  problems  with
      interpretation and it is argued that the Judge should have disregarded
      evidence purportedly given by sponsor on that occasion.  It is further
      argued that the transcript of the interview was not  produced  by  the
      Respondent until the resumed appeal hearing and it is argued that  the
      Judge erred in admitting this document halfway through the appeal  and
      after the Appellant given evidence. Within the third ground of  appeal
      it is argued that it was not open to the First-tier Judge to find that
      the sponsor was  not  exercising  Treaty  Rights  in  absence  of  any
      evidence to show that the payslips and P60 tax form  produced  by  her
      were  forgeries.  Finally  it  is  argued  that  the  interview  which
      consisted of 1364 questions, when no interpreter been provided and  in
      circumstances where it was not signed neither by the Appellant or  the
      sponsor, nor by the officers who carried out the interview, should not
      have been given any weight.

   5. Within the Rule 24 reply on behalf the Respondent it  is  argued  that
      the Judge found discrepancies with the Appellant's evidence  regarding
      the tenancy agreement, the transport  arrangements  for  the  registry
      office and in respect monies in  the  joint  bank  account  and  found
      discrepancies the documents regarding the sponsor's employment.  It is
      argued that the Judge made findings which were open  to  him  and  had
      considered  all  of  the  evidence  and  that  although  he   is   not
      specifically referred to the case of Papajorgji he had considered  the
      principles in that case.  It is argued that the Judge directed himself
      appropriately.

   6. At the Upper Tribunal appeal hearing, Mr Harris,  quite  properly,  on
      behalf the Respondent made several concessions. He agreed that in  the
      light of the latest Court of Appeal case of Agho v Secretary Of  State
      for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1198, it was  clear  that  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  got  the  burden  of  proof  wrong  at
      paragraph [69] of his decision. He  further  agreed  that  was  wholly
      unsafe for the Judge to have relied upon the evidence of  the  sponsor
      given on the first appeal hearing in circumstances where that  hearing
      had to be abandoned as  a  result  of  a  lack  of  understanding  and
      problems with interpretation between the sponsor and the  interpreter.
      He agreed that these amounted to material errors of law.

   7. Ms Barton further argued that the Judge's findings in respect  of  the
      payslips and tax forms were also unsafe, as these were tainted by  the
      same errors. Both advocates agreed that the case would need  rehearing
      before the First-tier Tribunal, given the errors contained within  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Martins.

      My findings on error of law and materiality

   8. As had been properly conceded on behalf the Respondent by  Mr  Harris,
      the Court of Appeal in the recent case of Agho v  Secretary  of  State
      for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1198 in  which  the  Court  of
      Appeal gave clear guidance as to the  burden  and  standard  proof  in
      marriage of convenience cases, having considered the original decision
      of IS (marriage  of  convenience)  Serbia  [2008)  UKAIT  31  and  the
      subsequent case of Papajorgji (EEA Spouse - marriage  of  convenience)
      Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC). The Court of Appeal  at  paragraph  13
      stated that :


      "13. What it comes down to is that as a matter of principle the spouse
      establishes a prima face the case that he or she is a family member of
      an EEA national by providing the marriage  certificate  and  sponsor's
      passport; but the legal burden is on the Secretary of  State  to  show
      that any marriage thus proved is a marriage of convenience; and burden
      is not discharged simply by showing 'reasonable suspicion'. Of  course
      in the usual way the evidential burden may shift to the  applicant  by
      proof of facts which justify the inference that the  marriage  is  not
      genuine, and the facts giving rise to  the  inference  may  include  a
      failure to answer a request for documentary proof of  the  genuineness
      of  the  marriage  where  grounds  for  suspicion  have  been  raised.
      Although, as I say, the point was not argued before us, that  approach
      seems to me to be correct -  as  does  the  UT's  statement  that  the
      standard of proof must be the civil  standard,  as  explained  by  the
      House of Lords in Re B (Children) [2008] UKHL 35, [2009] 1 AC 11." The
      Court of Appeal referred  specifically  within  paragraph  14  to  the
      conclusion within Papajorgji that "In summary,  our  understanding  is
      that, where the issue is raised in an appeal,  the  question  for  the
      judge will  therefore  be  'in  the  light  of  the  totality  of  the
      information before me, including  the  assessment  of  the  claimant's
      answers and any information provided, am I satisfied that it  is  more
      probable than not this is a marriage of convenience ?'" The  Court  of
      Appeal stated that consistent that such formulation clearly places the
      burden of proof on the Secretary of State or ECO.

   9. In light of the consideration of this issue both by the Upper Tribunal
      in Papajorgji and the  subsequent  consideration  of  the  burden  and
      standard proof by the Court of Appeal in Agho, I entirely  agree  with
      the concession made  by  Mr  Harris  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Martins erred in law at [59] when finding that "In accordance with the
      case of IS (marriages of convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT  00031,  the
      burden of proving that a marriage is not a "marriage  of  convenience"
      for the purposes of EEA Regulations rests on the Appellant; but he  is
      not required to discharge it in the absence  of  evidence  of  matters
      supporting the submission that the marriage is one of convenience,  in
      other words there is evidential burden on the Respondent."


  10. The Court of Appeal has made it clear that in fact  the  legal  burden
      rests not on the Appellant but on the Respondent,  and  that  although
      the evidential burden may shift to the  Appellant,  the  legal  burden
      remains on  the  Respondent  throughout.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Martins having got the burden of proof wrong, this does  amount  to  a
      material error of law.

  11. I further completely agree with the concession made by  Mr  Harris  on
      behalf the  Respondent  that  it  was  wholly  unsafe  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge to rely upon any of the evidence given by  the  sponsor
      on the first hearing date on the 10th February 2015, in  circumstances
      where the interpreter provided was a Lithuanian as opposed to  Latvian
      speaker, and hence difficulties in understanding as described  by  the
      Judge at [13] and [46] materialised, even though they  tried  to  give
      evidence in Russian, the Judge noting that  this  was  this  "was  not
      satisfactory, the sponsor could not express  that  herself  properly".
      In such circumstances when the hearing resumed on the 17th March 2015,
      the sponsor's evidence should have been given again from the start, in
      order to ensure that her evidence was an accurate reflection  of  what
      she intended to say, rather than the Judge  resuming  from  where  the
      evidence had left off the previous occasion. This clearly amounts to a
      procedural error which does amount to a material error of  law.   This
      clearly  would  have  affected  the  Judge's  assessment  as  to   the
      Appellant's and her sponsor's credibility  and  further  affected  his
      assessment as to the sponsors credibility in respect of her employment
      and his consideration of the documents produced in respect thereof.

  12. It was argued by Ms Mason that the  Judge  was  wrong  to  admit  into
      evidence the interview record which was only produced at  the  resumed
      hearing. I do not consider that it was inadmissible as  evidence,  but
      clearly the alleged difficulties with interpretation at the interview,
      and the fact that it had not  been  signed  were  matters  which  were
      relevant to the weight to be attached to the interview.

  13. I find that the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Martins  does
      contain material errors of  law  and  is  set  aside.  The  matter  is
      remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo  before
      any First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Martins.



Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Martins  does  contain  material
errors of law and is set aside;

The matter is remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing  de
novo, in front of  any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Martins.

Signed

R McGinty

Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  McGinty                                  Dated
18th March 2016
