
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24875/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8 May 2014                                   |On 6 June 2014             |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                   THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ANDREWS DBE.

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON


                                   Between

                                    MS MN
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Wilding
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are hereafter referred to as they were  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal so that MN is the appellant and the Secretary of State for the
    Home Department is the respondent.

 2. The appellant's future is still uncertain, and  although  we  were  not
    addressed on the matter, we direct that the current direction  granting
    anonymity continue until further order.

History

 3. The appellant applied for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom.  That
    application was refused by a decision that is dated 11 June 2013  under
    Articles 3 and 8 ECHR.   A  decision  was  also  taken  to  remove  the
    appellant from the United Kingdom to her home country of Japan.

 4. The appellant appealed the decision to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    appeal was heard on 3 December 2013.  In a determination promulgated on
    28 February 2014 the First-tier Judge allowed the appeal under Articles
    3 and 8 ECHR.

 5. The respondent applied for permission to appeal that  determination  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  In granting the application  the  judge  doing  so
    found that it is arguable that having provided a detailed record of the
    evidence and the submissions of the representatives over the course  of
    some 55 paragraphs, the Tribunal thereafter provided inadequate reasons
    for its factual findings in the following 9  brief  paragraphs  of  the
    determination.  It was found arguable also that the Tribunal failed  to
    address the issue of internal relocation within the context of  Article
    3 ill-treatment in Japan  and  that  it  failed  to  provide  a  proper
    analysis of the Article 8 issues in line with the decision  in  Gulshan
    (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC).

 6. Before us Ms Wilding of counsel appeared for the appellant as  she  had
    done before the First-tier Judge.  We record  our  thanks  to  her  for
    appearing pro bono as we found  her  submissions  most  helpful.   This
    being an error of law hearing, at least initially,  Ms  Wilding  fought
    valiantly to seek to  persuade  us  that  although  she  felt  in  some
    difficulty in submitting that the judge had dealt with  the  Article  8
    position, nevertheless in as far as the judge's Article 3 reasoning and
    findings were concerned the determination bore scrutiny and  the  judge
    was entitled to conclude as she did for the reasons given.

 7. After careful consideration we find that the determination  has  to  be
    set aside.

 8. A party to adversarial proceedings is entitled to know the reasons  why
    a decision has or has not gone in their favour. In this appeal  it  was
    not sufficient for the judge to set out the  evidence  that  she  heard
    from the appellant  together  with  details  of  her  cross-examination
    (which was extensive) and then state in one  sentence  that  she  finds
    that the starting point is an assessment of credibility "and I find the
    appellant to be a credible witness"  without  providing  any  specified
    reason or reasons why she came to that finding.

 9. Another example is that the appellant  gave  evidence  that  she  fears
    return to Japan because of her  family  that  lives  there.  The  judge
    stated  in  paragraph  79  that  she  considered  carefully   Professor
    Goodman's detailed country report on Japan. The judge found that  "(the
    report) provides useful insights and information" from which the  judge
    concludes that if the appellant were returned "it would be likely to be
    possible for her family to locate her there". However, the  judge  does
    not spell out what consequences that would have for the appellant  such
    as would lead to an Article 3 finding in her favour.

10. Although the judge goes on to say in  paragraph  82  that  the  current
    evidence does not indicate that a sufficiency of  protection  would  be
    available to the appellant in Japan because of police attitudes to what
    is regarded as a family matter,  nowhere  has  the  judge  provided  an
    analysis of the evidence or articulated reasons as to why she concluded
    as she did.

11. Ms Wilding submitted  that  if  we  found  that  the  judge  had  erred
    materially we should then proceed to substitute our own decision on all
    the evidence that we  had  before  us.   Mr  Nath,  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent, did not seek to persuade us to do otherwise.

12. We heard submissions from both representatives,  have  noted  them  and
    have taken them into account in arriving at our decision.

13. The Appellant was  present  in  court.  She  was  not  called  to  give
    evidence. The risk that the appellant takes in not giving evidence  and
    tendering herself for cross-examination is that the Tribunal  may  have
    difficulty in making positive credibility findings or  feel  unable  to
    give such weight as it might otherwise have done had oral evidence been
    presented.

14. There is a further point that the Tribunal is deprived  of  information
    that may be of assistance in coming to its findings on the  matters  of
    credibility and in assessing the experts' reports  in  the  context  of
    those findings. The lack of oral evidence from the appellant makes  the
    analysis of those matters more difficult and the findings less secure.

15. Having said that, and although we set aside the  determination,  it  is
    helpful to have the record of the  proceedings  before  the  First-tier
    Judge as set out in the  determination.  This  includes  the  questions
    asked and replies given in cross-examination. There is no challenge  to
    the judge's record  as  set  down.  We  anticipate  also  that  if  the
    respondent's representative was  seriously  seeking  to  challenge  the
    appellant's evidence he would have made submissions on the  point  when
    considering the future conduct of this appeal. Whatever the position is
    it is incumbent upon us to make findings in relation to the appellant's
    credibility and to give reasons for so doing lest we fall into error as
    did the First-tier Judge.

Our Credibility Findings

16. The appellant has been consistent in the history given by  her  leading
    to her application for leave to remain.  She made an initial  statement
    dated 13 May 2013 that accompanied the application. That statement went
    into considerable detail. A supplementary statement  was  prepared  for
    the First-tier Tribunal hearing and the appellant was cross-examined at
    that hearing.  On reading the judge's record of  the  cross-examination
    the appellant did not seek to provide answers where she was  unable  to
    provide the  information  being  sought.  There  was  no  embellishment
    apparent and her evidence remained consistent throughout.

17. The few points that might be said could be taken against her did not in
    our finding even  mildly  shake  the  foundation  of  her  story.   For
    instance, at paragraph 22 of the determination the appellant was  asked
    why the medical certificate relied on makes no mention of the cause  of
    the injuries or  that  she  had  been  attacked  by  her  father.   The
    appellant did not know why that was not mentioned but believed it might
    be because her father is a doctor and was known at the  hospital.   She
    did not know whether the security guard  had  filed  a  report  of  the
    incident. What is not in doubt is that in support  of  the  appellant's
    story that she was hit by  her  father  there  are  photographs  and  a
    medical report, and these give credence to her history of events on her
    birthday in 2012.

18. The reports of Dr Rachel Thomas are also supportive of the  appellant's
    history of abuse.  The first report is  dated  21  June  2013  and  the
    second, a psychotherapy treatment report, is dated  17  November  2013.
    The first report provides a history  that  the  appellant  gave  to  Dr
    Thomas and the second records the treatment that the appellant received
    after she joined Dr Thomas's psychotherapy group in September 2013.  It
    is quite clear from  that  report  that  the  appellant  has  not  only
    maintained the history of suffering that she experienced at  the  hands
    of her family members but revealed during the course of  treatment  far
    more about herself and what had happened to her.

19. All of this leads us to conclude that the appellant's evidence is to be
    believed and we proceed on the basis that events took place as she  has
    maintained throughout. We find that subjectively she fears  her  family
    and what would happen to her on her return to Japan at the hands of her
    family.

The Appellant's History

20. We do not set out here the entirety of the appellant's story.   Suffice
    to say that we have read her statements, the psychologist's reports and
    the country report from Professor Roger  Goodman  carefully.   We  have
    also considered the submissions that have been made to us.

21. The appellant is now 32 years old.  She  was  born  in  Tokyo  and  her
    parents are still living.  She  has  two  sisters  who  live  with  her
    parents in Tokyo.  The appellant has said that historically her  family
    was part of the Royal Family many years ago  and  her  family  name  is
    prestigious.  Research undertaken by Professor Goodman  finds  that  no
    significant information is available on the internet and he  is  unable
    to detect any strong ties to the  imperial  family.   Nevertheless,  it
    sounded to him that the family came from prominent Samurai stock.

22. The appellant was schooled in  Tokyo.   She  suffered  abuse  from  her
    father, in particular, from  the  age  of  3.   He  began  abusing  her
    sexually at the age of 9 and she was raped anally from that  age  until
    she was about 14.  An uncle also abused her from the age  of  11  until
    she left to  come  to  the  United  Kingdom.   The  appellant's  mother
    witnessed the physical abuse and indeed physically abused the appellant
    herself.  Her mother was aware of the sexual abuse also.  The appellant
    told her what her father had done from the beginning and at the time it
    happened and was told that she should not make  her  father  angry  and
    that it was her fault.  Neither of the appellant's sisters were  abused
    physically or sexually.  The appellant's parents seemed  to  blame  her
    for interfering with their career plans. Her performance in school  and
    appearance was not good enough for them.

23. Dr  Thomas  relates  in  the  second  report  that  the  appellant  was
    increasingly able to reveal to the group more detail about  the  nature
    of  her  past  abuse.  She  disclosed  to  the  group,  for   instance,
    information such as not currently having her own hair due to  excessive
    stress induced hair pulling  and  difficulties  using  the  toilet  and
    washing (bathrooms being where much of her early abuse took place)  and
    asking for help with these difficult and humiliating problems (p. 46 in
    the appellant's bundle).

24. The appellant came to the United Kingdom to study at a boarding  school
    at age 16.  The cost of her studies was paid for  by  her  great  aunt.
    Her progress, or at least the perceived lack of progress,  annoyed  her
    parents and she continued to suffer physical abuse when in Japan during
    the boarding school breaks as well as further  sexual  abuse  from  her
    father.  The appellant continued to come back and forth to  the  United
    Kingdom studying molecular cell biology at  University  College  London
    where she obtained a degree.

25. In 2004 she returned to Japan and went to Nara  instead  of  Tokyo  and
    began work in a corner shop.  She rented a flat and lived on her own to
    avoid the abuse from her parents.  However,  her  parents  tracked  her
    down.  She took out cash with her card and was obliged to register  her
    residence in Nara.  She  believed  that  her  parents  used  a  private
    investigator to find her. She had been there only  two  weeks  when  on
    leaving the apartment she discovered  her  parents  were  outside.  Her
    father told her to open the door. He then threw  her  inside  onto  the
    floor and attacked her. Her parents demanded that she  went  back  with
    them to Tokyo and she did so.

26. The  appellant  applied  for  a  Masters  Degree  at  UCL  in  chemical
    engineering and obtained a visa to enable her to do so.   She  returned
    to Japan around eight times during  the  time  that  she  was  on  that
    course.  Her mother phoned and demanded that she  return  to  Japan  to
    meet potential marriage partners.  In 2009 she met  a  man,  a  British
    national of Chinese extraction, and was due to marry  him.   Ultimately
    the marriage did not take place.  The relationship broke down ten  days
    before the wedding.  Her parents arrived in the  UK  letting  her  know
    that they were coming only the day before, and the appellant  met  them
    in a restaurant with a friend of hers.  At the time her father  grabbed
    her arm and squeezed it so hard that it left a bruise.   The  appellant
    walked out of the restaurant with her friend.

27. Following the cancellation of the wedding the  appellant  travelled  to
    Japan on 4 October 2012 because she  wanted  to  apologise  to  various
    people  for  the  wedding  not  taking  place.   She  stayed   at   her
    grandmother's house. On the appellant's birthday she visited  her  sick
    grandmother in hospital.  Her parents arrived.  The appellant wanted to
    leave but her mother insisted that the appellant went for a coffee with
    her parents.  The appellant's  father  was  silent  and  she  felt  the
    tension and aggression from him.  In the cafeteria her father picked up
    a chair and hit  her  over  the  head  with  it.   The  security  guard
    separated them and  her  father  was  led  out  of  the  building.  The
    appellant was left with swelling  on  her  lip  and  a  bruise  to  her
    forehead.  She was examined  by  a  doctor  at  the  hospital  and  she
    requested a medical record of the injury.

28. The appellant then left the next day to go to Korea, returning to Japan
    a few days later. It was then that she attempted to make a complaint to
    the police reporting that her father hit her  a  few  days  previously.
    She gave the police the medical record from  the  hospital.   She  also
    said that she was hit when she was a child and gave her  parents'  name
    and address.  The officer, on realising which address the appellant had
    given, left the room to check the  records.  He  returned  ten  minutes
    later to say that the assault was not serious enough  for  a  potential
    charge, it was a family issue and she was overreacting.  He  said  that
    he would not officially lodge the report.  The appellant did not report
    the abuse to the police earlier because she was ashamed  of  discussing
    family matters with  anyone  from  the  outside.   The  appellant  gave
    details of returning to the UK later that month.

29. In her first statement at  paragraph  53  the  appellant  says  she  is
    terrified at the prospect of having to go back to Japan.  She is afraid
    that the abuse from her father will start again and that he will  track
    her down no matter where she goes in Japan.  When she met them in  July
    2012 her parents said that they will do everything in  their  power  to
    prevent her coming back to Japan.  She was considered a failure for not
    getting married as was planned and they feared this  would  affect  her
    sisters' chances of getting married. They said also that  it  would  be
    "great" if she took her own life as it would make it easier for them.

30. The appellant stated that she  has  spent  the  majority  of  the  last
    fifteen years in the UK and has no close friends in Japan.  All of them
    are in the UK and she considers the UK to be her home.  She has been  a
    member of the church for five years; she goes to church  every  weekend
    when she is in London and to church events such as football matches and
    going to tea.  At the  time  the  statement  was  made  she  was  in  a
    "committed" relationship with a  British  national.   It  is  apparent,
    however, that since that statement was made the relationship  with  him
    broke down, and although she is lodging in a property that he owns,  he
    is no longer supplying her with any funding and she is unable  to  work
    because of Border Agency restrictions.

31. The supplementary statement dated 25 November 2013 refers to the Family
    Registry in Japan recording the details of every member of every family
    there and is based upon the assumption that "no-one gets thrown out  of
    their family".  An Address Registry requires  that  every  person  must
    register where they are living. This is  for  employment  and  national
    insurance purposes.  Anyone who is listed on the  Family  Registry  can
    look up where other family members are living via that Registry.  It is
    possible to separate yourself from a specific family on the Registry by
    means of an application to separate yourself, giving a valid reason for
    doing so.  This involves going to court, but the appellant believes  it
    is a fairly simple process.  Even if you do separate yourself, however,
    any family member would still be able to track you  down  because  your
    new details as an individual or as a member of another family would  be
    stored with your former family's details,  albeit  with  an  indication
    that you have separated from your family.  Thus her family will  easily
    be able to find out her new address by doing  a  simple  check  at  the
    Registry.

32. The statement also refers to her beginning group psychotherapy sessions
    with Dr Thomas in July 2013 which she attends once a week for  an  hour
    and a  half.   Since  beginning  those  sessions  she  has  started  to
    comprehend the extent of the trauma that she has been  through  in  her
    life and realises how much her  behaviour  and  personality  have  been
    shaped by the abuse and how much work she needs to do in order  to  get
    better.  She feels that she is just at the beginning  of  a  very  long
    pathway to recovery.  Having suffered abuse for 30  years  she  has  to
    take each stage of her recovery step-by-step which she thinks is  going
    to take at least five years.  Having opened up and started to face  the
    abuse to which she was subjected she feels that she has opened up a box
    that cannot be closed again.  It is essential for her to carry on  with
    this psychotherapy programme in a place where she feels safe.   She  is
    settling in well with the group and would not want to have  to  restart
    psychotherapy with a different group of people whom she does not  trust
    in Japan.

33. As to her relationship that recently broke down, this caused her  great
    shock and a lot of pain and she was glad that she had the psychotherapy
    group to talk to about the relationship breakdown as they  have  helped
    her  to  cope.   She  has  been  helped  to  realise   that   she   can
    constructively rebuild her life without this man,  whereas  before  she
    started therapy her reaction to such a trauma would have been to revert
    back to "destructive mode", as she did in the past  when  in  traumatic
    situations.

Professor Goodman's Report

34. This report provides information on Japanese culture and the issues  of
    physical, psychological and sexual abuse in domestic  situations.   One
    of his  conclusions  is  that  even  if  there  had  been  concerns  by
    neighbours,  teachers,  police  or  any  other  authorities  that   the
    appellant was the victim of any kind of  abuse  in  the  1980s,  it  is
    extremely unlikely that this would have been reported  or,  if  it  had
    been reported, that any action would have been taken in relation to it.



35. The number of reported cases of sexual abuse remains very small indeed.
     In many ways this (sexual abuse) seems to be one of the last taboos in
    Japanese society.  If there were concerns  about  sexual  abuse  having
    taken place in the appellant's family, this is particularly unlikely to
    have been investigated and there  is  probably  no  more  appetite  for
    investigating sexual abuse in families  today  than  there  was  twenty
    years ago.

36. A comment at page 61 of the bundle is that the  concerns  expressed  by
    the appellant about future abuse which she might suffer if she  was  to
    return to Japan  would  probably  fall  under  the  title  of  domestic
    violence rather than child abuse.  In  Japan  this  is  also  generally
    considered to be a private family matter and  not  of  concern  to  the
    public or the state.  In  the  light  of  all  that  is  said  in  that
    paragraph and others Professor Goodman  thinks  it  extremely  unlikely
    that the authorities would become involved if the appellant asked  them
    to  investigate  or  take  into  account  historical  cases  of  abuse,
    regardless of her family background.

37. When asked how safe it would be for the  appellant  to  live  in  Japan
    undetected by her family he commented that Japan is a large country but
    it is difficult to hide in it due to the compulsory  family  and  local
    registration systems.  While documents are in theory private it is well-
    known that they are easy  to  obtain  by  detective  agencies  who  can
    thereby uncover where people are staying  and  working.   At  the  very
    least he thinks that wherever the appellant went to live in  Japan  she
    would, with good reason, be living in the anticipation  (his  emphasis)
    that she could be tracked down at any point.

38. There are a very small number of refuges run by local  Governments  and
    private organisations for what used to be called "battered women".   He
    would be surprised if the appellant was eligible  to  live  in  one  of
    these on the basis of being abused several years ago by her family  and
    on the basis of needing protection in the present time.  He fears  that
    she might only become eligible in the case that she was actually abused
    again, and even then, given the demand for places in such hostels he is
    not sure that she could be guaranteed a place.

Dr Thomas's Reports

39. When Dr Thomas made her initial report she had seen the  appellant  for
    some two hours. After giving her credentials and the history as told to
    her by the appellant she sets out her  findings  and  conclusions  from
    page 16 onwards (p.31 in  the  bundle).   The  appellant's  psychiatric
    classification is said to  be  "major  depressive  disorder,  moderate,
    without psychotic features".  The appellant feels  recurrently  low  in
    mood with frequent bouts of tearfulness whenever  alone.   She  reports
    that the appellant's parents have reportedly told  her  they  wish  she
    were dead and would cover up if she wished to commit suicide.

40. That part of the appellant that blames herself for her abuse feels that
    she does want to kill herself and indeed made "recent" plans to  do  so
    in a London hotel room (the report is dated 23  May  2013,  amended  21
    June 2013).  Whilst not actively suicidal  currently,  she  experiences
    regular suicidal thoughts and that risk  could  easily  escalate  to  a
    severe and acute one again in  the  event  of  further  traumatic  life
    events, especially a negative determination.

41. There is a history of sleep  and  appetite  disturbance.   Due  to  the
    severe and sustained abuse she experienced in childhood  the  appellant
    began losing her hair which began falling  out  in  clumps.   She  then
    began pulling it out  because  it  was  loose.   She  now  has  several
    significant bald patches and wears a wig.   Hair  loss  on  that  scale
    requires extreme and  prolonged  stress  for  its  causation  and  this
    symptom indicates the heightened and serious  levels  of  that  symptom
    over a significant time period.

42. The appellant feels scared "all the time" at the moment as she is doing
    something  for  the  second  time  that  she  knows  her  parents  will
    absolutely disagree with, namely seeking leave to  remain  in  the  UK.
    She is continually troubled with the possible outcome  of  her  current
    application for leave to remain and very  frightened  in  case  she  is
    refused and has to return to Japan to face the retaliation she believes
    strongly will then come from her family.  She has ongoing  severe  pain
    and tension in her neck and  shoulders  which  appears  to  be  due  to
    chronic stress.  She also has ongoing gynaecological problems.

43. Dr Thomas at page 20 of the report for reasons given there opines  that
    the appellant is a highly credible self-historian and her  self  report
    was matched both by other recorded documentation  and  by  Dr  Thomas's
    objective assessment of her clinical presentation to her in interview.

44. Dr Thomas finds that the appellant is  currently  moderately  depressed
    and this would increase to a severe level if the appellant is  returned
    to Japan where she would believe strongly that her life  and  emotional
    and physical wellbeing and  integrity  is  at  risk  from  her  family,
    particularly from her parents, who have already apparently  wished  her
    dead and been severely  abusive  to  her  over  many  years,  including
    extreme acts of physical and sexual violence.  Even if the threat  from
    her parents is not borne out in reality, which given the history  seems
    very likely (sic), the very fact that she  fears  it  to  be  so  would
    anyway be sufficient to cause a marked psychiatric  deterioration  were
    she to be returned to  Japan  with,  in  Dr  Thomas's  view,  a  marked
    depressive breakdown.  The appellant already has  significant  suicidal
    thoughts and these would, Dr Thomas  believes,  increase  her  thoughts
    with an intended plan to commit suicide in  the  event  of  a  negative
    determination being given.

45. It is her opinion that in the event of such a determination and  return
    to Japan the appellant would be flooded with traumatic  affect  and  by
    feelings of despair and hopelessness.  She would think it a very strong
    probability that the appellant would give up hope  at  that  point  and
    commit suicide in the UK in preference to a life  of  probable  further
    abuse in Japan.  Even if suitable and  high  quality  psychotherapeutic
    and psychiatric care is available in Japan, she does not  believe  that
    the appellant would be in any state mentally to access it as she  would
    feel too unsafe and be too frightened and traumatised by  a  return  to
    her country, and by reconnection with the traumatic memories  of  being
    abused there to render such treatments in any way effective.

46. Dr Thomas then goes on to say that the appellant is in urgent  need  of
    psychotherapeutic help for her  current  psychiatric  disorder  and  it
    would be Dr Thomas's assessment that  the  appellant  would  require  a
    minimum of a one year treatment once weekly with a trusting therapeutic
    relationship before any noticeable  change  to  her  current  depressed
    state.  She may need considerably longer than this given  the  severity
    and chronicity of her abusive early experiences.  The appellant is only
    just beginning to face, in her opinion, the full extent of her family's
    abusive behaviour towards her and to see it as such.

47. That the appellant has received such psychotherapeutic help is revealed
    by the second report from Dr Thomas dated 17 November 2013 which is the
    most recent report available but is  now  some  six  months  old.   The
    report reveals that Dr Thomas met with the  appellant  for  an  initial
    individual six sessions at her consulting  rooms  which  the  appellant
    attended and made good use of.  Although Dr Thomas  would  not  usually
    take on an individual for psychotherapy treatment when that person  had
    been assessed for  court  proceedings,  the  urgency  of  the  clinical
    situation, the fact that a suitable treatment  vacancy  was  available,
    and the fact that the appellant already knew her with some  element  of
    trust, all caused Dr Thomas to feel that  this  might  be  a  good  and
    feasible treatment option for her.

48. Following the six initial sessions the  appellant  joined  Dr  Thomas's
    women's psychotherapy group in September 2013  and  the  appellant  has
    attended reliably every week and has never missed a group.  During  the
    three months to the date of report the appellant has been  increasingly
    able to give more detail about the nature of  her  past  abuse  and  to
    trust other group members with personal and painful  information.   The
    break-up with her  partner  has  been  extremely  distressing,  and  in
    addition to being emotionally devastating and humiliating, has left her
    with considerable financial and other worries about her future  as  her
    partner was supporting the cost of her therapy  treatment,  and  paying
    her solicitor's fees and living expenses.

49. During the three month period the appellant has already  been  able  to
    move from her position of rather blindly adopting her parents' doctrine
    that the abuse was "necessary for my own good" to a position of feeling
    her underlying anger and distress  about  the  way  in  which  she  was
    manipulated  and  maltreated.   That  is  said  to  be  an   impressive
    development for someone in the early stages of psychotherapy  treatment
    and it is Dr Thomas's view that the appellant's  own  capacity  to  use
    psychotherapeutic help, together with the "goodness  of  fit  for  her"
    (sic) with the psychotherapy group of which she is  now  a  part,  have
    both contributed significantly to this  initial  positive  development.
    With the security of a base in the UK that will enable her to know  she
    can continue without fear of return to Japan and that she can  work  to
    support herself and her treatment without dependence on others who  may
    let her down, her therapeutic progress  will  certainly  continue  with
    this rate.  Indeed, her progress will almost inevitably improve further
    given that she will then be in a situation of much greater  safety  and
    stability to enable her to reap  full  benefit  from  this  therapeutic
    work.  Her current disabling psychological symptoms such as her chronic
    hair pulling (with resultant severe consequences for her  self-esteem),
    food restriction and phobia of bathrooms are also likely to continue to
    improve and, in time, may even fully resolve.

50. Dr Thomas then comments that although the appellant has made  promising
    initial progress it  remains  very  early  days  in  her  psychological
    treatment.  The extent of the childhood abuse she suffered at the hands
    of her parents is extremely severe and cumulative and at the  hands  of
    immediate care givers which adds to the degree  of  trauma  experienced
    with no safe adult to whom to have  recourse.   If  she  is  forced  to
    return to Japan she anticipates that the appellant would rapidly become
    re-traumatised by being forced to return to  a  country  in  which  her
    original abuses took place and in which, due to the status  and  wealth
    of her family in her home country, she feels that she would not be safe
    from their finding her and re-abusing her as has  happened  previously.
    She would rapidly become more profoundly  psychiatrically  ill.   Given
    that she is already symptomatic for both major depressive disorder  and
    post-traumatic  stress  disorder  following   her   traumatic   earlier
    experiences, this will present a major psychiatric risk and, under such
    circumstances, she will be even less able to  protect  herself  in  the
    event of parental tracing or other abusive contact.  She is  likely  to
    become  rapidly  too  psychiatrically   unwell   to   access   relevant
    psychiatric and mental health services in Japan, and indeed  is  likely
    to be too frightened to do so in any case due to a difficulty  trusting
    Japanese doctors due to both her parents influence in the  country  and
    the fact that her father is in the medical profession.  She would  lose
    the beneficial current support network and therapeutic benefit that she
    is clearly deriving from her psychotherapy group here in London.

51. The report continues that the appellant  is  currently  quite  socially
    isolated, especially since the ending of her partner relationship.  The
    group members represent to her a clear form of social support  and  she
    is already much attached to all of them, takes their advice and  allows
    them to help her both practically and emotionally.  The group has  been
    essential to her mental stability over the past weeks and without  that
    support she is likely to  have  harmed  herself  to  a  serious  extent
    following the breakdown of the relationship with her  partner  and  may
    have made a suicide attempt.   Even  with  the  group's  help  she  has
    greatly struggled and has needed some additional holding  contact  with
    Dr Thomas between group sessions and direct help with negotiating  with
    her ex-partner some form of financial support package  from  him  going
    forward.

Article 3 ECHR

52. As Lord Bingham put it in Ullah v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2004] UKHL 26 at paragraph 24:

         "In relation to Article 3, it is necessary to show  strong  grounds
         for believing that the person, if returned, faces a  real  risk  of
         being subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment  or
         punishment".

53. The Court of Appeal in J v Home Secretary [2005] EWCA Civ 629  draws  a
    clear distinction between "foreign cases" and "domestic cases".   Those
    are the labels which Lord Bingham used in Ullah.  By "foreign cases" he
    meant those cases where it is not claimed that the state complained  of
    has violated the applicant's ECHR rights within its own territory,  but
    where it is said that the conduct of the state  in  removing  a  person
    from its territory to another territory will lead to a violation of the
    person's ECHR rights in that other territory.  By "domestic  cases"  he
    meant cases concerning claims based on the ECHR where a state  is  said
    to have acted within its own territory in a  way  which  infringes  the
    enjoyment of an ECHR right within that territory.  At paragraph 17 of J
    this  has  been  recognised  as  an  important  distinction,  both   in
    Strasbourg and in our own  jurisprudence.   J  was  concerned  with  an
    appellant who was a citizen of  Sri  Lanka  and  an  ethnic  Tamil  who
    alleged that he would commit suicide if he were returned to Sri  Lanka.
    In J the risk of a violation of Article 3 or 8 must  be  considered  in
    relation to three stages.  By reference to the claim made in that  case
    these were:

      i) when the appellant is informed that a final decision had been  made
         to remove him to Sri Lanka;

     ii) when he is physically removed by aeroplane to Sri Lanka; and

    iii) after he has arrived in Sri Lanka.

    In relation to stage (i) the case  is  plainly  a  domestic  case.   In
    relation to stage (iii) it is equally clearly a foreign case,  but  the
    classification of the case in relation to stage (ii) is less easy.   It
    is then said that since  in  practice  arrangements  are  made  by  the
    Secretary of State in suicide cases for an escort it was found safer to
    treat that as a domestic case.

54. Dyson LJ, giving the judgment of the court in J, said  in  relation  to
    the possibility that enforced return might bring about the  appellant's
    suicide:

         "25. ... It should be stated at the outset that  the  phrase  'real
             risk' imposes a more stringent test than merely that the  risk
             must be more than 'not fanciful'.  The cases show that  it  is
             possible to amplify the test at least to the following extent.

         26.  First, the test requires an  assessment  to  be  made  of  the
             severity of the treatment which it is said that the  applicant
             would suffer if removed.  This must attain a minimum level  of
             severity.  The court has said on a number  of  occasions  that
             the  assessment  of  its   severity   depends   on   all   the
             circumstances  of  the  case.   But  the  ill-treatment   must
             'necessarily be serious'  such  that  it  is  'an  affront  to
             fundamental humanitarian principles to remove an individual to
             a country where he is at risk of serious  ill-treatment':  see
             Ullah paragraphs [38-39].

         27.  Secondly, a causal link must be shown to exist between the act
             or threatened act of removal  or  expulsion  and  the  inhuman
             treatment relied on as violating  the  applicant's  Article  3
             rights.  Thus in Soering at paragraph [91], the court said:

                  'In so far as any liability under the Convention is or may
                  be incurred, it is liability incurred by  the  extraditing
                  Contracting State by reason of  its  having  taken  action
                  which has as a  direct  consequence  the  exposure  of  an
                  individual to proscribed ill-treatment.'"(emphasis added).
             See also para [108] of Vilvarajah where the court said that
             the examination of the Article 3 issue 'must focus on the
             foreseeable consequences of the removal of the applicants to
             Sri Lanka...'
         28.  Thirdly, in the context of  a  foreign  case,  the  Article  3
             threshold is particularly high simply because it is a  foreign
             case.  And  it  is  even  higher  where  the  alleged  inhuman
             treatment is not the direct or indirect responsibility of  the
             public authorities of the receiving state,  but  results  from
             some naturally occurring illness, whether physical or  mental.
             This is made clear in para [49] of D and para [40] of Bensaid.
         29.  Fourthly, an Article 3 claim can in  principle  succeed  in  a
             suicide case (para [37] of Bensaid).
         30.  Fifthly, in deciding whether there is a real risk of a  breach
             of Article 3 in a suicide case, a question  of  importance  is
             whether the applicant's fear of ill-treatment in the receiving
             state upon which the risk of suicide is said to  be  based  is
             objectively well-founded.  If the fear  is  not  well-founded,
             that will tend to weigh against there being a real  risk  that
             the removal will be in breach of Article 3.
         31.  Sixthly, a  further  question  of  considerable  relevance  is
             whether the removing and/or the receiving state has  effective
             mechanisms to reduce  the  risk  of  suicide.   If  there  are
             effective mechanisms, that too will weigh heavily  against  an
             applicant's claim that removal will violate his or her Article
             3 rights."

55. As appears at paragraph [14] of Y and Z (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2009]  EWCA
    Civ 362 and following, as to the fifth principle,

                    14.  ".....If a fear of ill-treatment on return is well-
             founded, this will ordinarily mean that refoulement (if it is a
             Refugee Convention case) or return (if it  is  a  human  rights
             case) cannot take place  in  any  event.   In  such  cases  the
             question whether return will precipitate suicide  is  academic.
             But the principle leaves an unfilled space for cases  like  the
             present one where fear of ill-treatment on return, albeit  held
             to be objectively without foundation, is subjectively not  only
             real, but overwhelming.

                    15.  There is  no  necessary  tension  between  the  two
             things.  The corollary of the final sentence of para [30] of  J
             is that in the absence of an objective foundation for the  fear
             some independent basis for it must be established if weight  is
             to be given to it.  Such an independent basis may lie in trauma
             inflicted in the past on the appellant in (or, as here, by) the
             receiving state: someone who has been tortured and raped by his
             or her captors may be terrified of returning to the place where
             it happened, especially if the same authorities are in  charge,
             notwithstanding that the objective risk of recurrence has gone.



                   16. One can accordingly add to the fifth principle  in  J
             that what may nevertheless be of equal  importance  is  whether
             any genuine fear which  the  appellant  may  establish,  albeit
             without an objective foundation, is such as to create a risk of
             suicide if there is an enforced return."

Our Conclusions on the Issue

56. We turn first to whether the appellant's fear of ill-treatment in Japan
    is objectively well-founded.  The circumstances of this  appellant  are
    wholly different to those of the appellants in J and Y and Z.  In those
    appeals the appellants had been tortured by  the  Sri  Lankan  security
    forces as suspected LTTE members and their fear was that upon return to
    Sri Lanka they would be likely to suffer  similar  treatment  again  or
    worse.

57. In the current appeal the appellant has not suffered  directly  at  the
    hands of the State, but at the hands of family members, her parents  in
    particular.  There is some evidence that the State, for  reasons  given
    by Professor Goodman, has a reluctance to investigate sexual  abuse  in
    families.  The authorities would not get involved in the  case  of  the
    appellant asking them to investigate or take  into  account  historical
    cases of abuse.  That much we comprehend. However,  we  find  that  the
    lack of investigation that may entail falls far short in  our  view  of
    complicity by the state in the execution of such abuse or overt or even
    tacit approval of such behaviour.  There  is  simply  not  enough  good
    evidence to allow us to find otherwise.

58. We bear in mind and give weight to the fact also that the  worst  abuse
    was that which the appellant had to suffer when she was a child,  which
    as recounted by the appellant was truly appalling. It is of no surprise
    to us that she has been adversely affected and is a highly  traumatised
    young woman as described by Dr Thomas.

59. More latterly the abuse that she has experienced has been  verbal  and,
    on two occasions in 2012, physical.  The appellant was grabbed  by  her
    father in London in 2012 and she received a bruise but she was able  to
    walk away with her friend who accompanied her.  Later  that  year  when
    her father attacked her in public in Japan  the  appellant  appears  to
    have shown some measure of asserting herself. She requested  a  medical
    report of the injury and later reported the matter to the  police.   We
    take into account her concern that the  officer  at  the  local  police
    station in essence refused to investigate the  complaint.  However,  we
    are far from persuaded that this amounts to a systemic failure  on  the
    part of the authorities to protect her. We  are left wondering what the
    result may have been  if  she  had  lodged  the  complaint  immediately
    (rather  than  leaving  it  for  several  days  before  doing  so)  and
    thereafter pursued the matter to a higher level in the event  that  the
    local police station officer refused  to  help.  The  police  were  not
    involved when the attack took place. It is difficult to imagine that if
    they had arrived on the scene the assault would have  been  allowed  to
    continue or that some action  would  not  have  ensued.  This  was  not
    domestic violence in the sense that the assault took  place  in  public
    with others present, rather than in private behind closed doors.

60. It is clear to us that the appellant has felt for many years completely
    under the influence of her parents. Culturally, and for reasons set out
    in the reports, she felt that she had to do their bidding. However,  as
    she has grown older we assess from her actions that she has  taken  the
    first steps to achieve, or attempt to achieve,  independence  from  her
    parents. It seems to have been her decision that she returned  to  live
    in Nara in 2004, away  from  her  family.  Although  this  attempt  was
    unsuccessful because her parents found her  and  her  father  assaulted
    her, her failure to involve the authorities at that stage is explicable
    by her then deference to her parents. More  recently  when  her  father
    assaulted her she did not let matters lie but obtained  a  report  from
    the hospital and, albeit belatedly, reported the matter to the  police.
    It is noteworthy that the appellant felt able to make a complaint  even
    though at that stage she had not yet embarked upon her therapy with  Dr
    Thomas.

61. It is fortunate indeed that the appellant was not more badly injured in
    the 2012 assault. She has supposed that it is because of  her  father's
    influence and position that the police did nothing about  investigating
    the assault. There is some support for the view  that  the  authorities
    would be unlikely to investigate the matter as they would  consider  it
    to be a form of domestic violence but we are far  from  persuaded  that
    there is not a system in place in Japan that offers protection  to  its
    citizens who suffer crimes of violence perpetrated outside the home  by
    one family member on another. There is no objective evidence  about  it
    to which we have been referred and Professor Goodman does not go so far
    as to say this, only that  it  is  not  mandatory  for  the  police  to
    intervene in cases of domestic violence where  they  suspect  abuse  is
    taking place.

62. The appellant is 32 years old, and would be living  independently  from
    her parents if she returns to Japan. Therefore she would not be subject
    to  domestic  violence  within  the  natural  meaning  of  the   words,
    suggesting as they appear to us to do that the violence is  within  the
    home. Although Prof Goodman's opinion is that it is extremely  unlikely
    that the authorities would get involved in the case  if  the  appellant
    asked them to investigate or take  into  account  historical  cases  of
    abuse, regardless of her family background, that is  not  to  say  that
    current (as opposed to historical) abuse in the form of assaults by one
    member of the family against another who  live  independently  of  each
    other would not be investigated.

63. The situation now is that the appellant has an insight  into  her  past
    such that she is able to face the full  reality  of  her  abusive  past
    experiences, and this is no doubt largely due to the work of Dr  Thomas
    and the appellant's participation in group therapy. We find that in the
    event that the appellant returns to Japan she would once again seek  to
    live independently from her parents. If they found her  she  would  not
    open the door to them and would not go with them  anywhere  because  if
    she did so she realises that she would risk further assault. If in some
    way her parents, for instance, broke down the  door  that  would  be  a
    matter that would not be ignored by the police.

Suicide Risk

64. As to the real risk of suicide, we do not  find  that  the  appellant's
    subjective fear of return is so severe that there is  a  real  risk  of
    serious self-harm or suicide  which  engages  Article  3  if  she  were
    returned.  The summary and conclusions  of  Dr  Thomas  in  her  second
    report are predicated upon the basis that the appellant would be unable
    to access relevant psychiatric and mental health services in Japan  and
    because  of   this   she   would   rapidly   become   more   profoundly
    psychiatrically ill.

65. We well understand that the appellant is making good progress in  group
    therapy currently and  there  may  well  be  difficulties  for  her  in
    removing her from that situation. However, as far as we are aware it is
    not seriously suggested that there are no psychiatric and mental health
    services in Japan of which she could avail herself. She has  made  what
    must have been a gigantic step to reveal more about herself  to  arrive
    at a fuller understanding of what has happened  to  her  and  this  has
    facilitated the first steps to her recovery. Having done so once is not
    unreasonable to suppose that she would be able to do so again.  Through
    no fault of the appellant or those  representing  her,  a  further  six
    months has passed, during which we assume that the appellant will  have
    received continuing treatment with Dr Thomas.  It is difficult to  know
    whether the prospect of the hearing in  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  made
    worse the mental trauma for  the  appellant,  or  that  the  continuing
    sessions with Dr Thomas will have benefitted her further.  We are aware
    that the appellant has "opened up" and has started to  face  the  abuse
    and it is probably an understatement to say that it is less than  ideal
    that the treatment should be interrupted.  However, we remind ourselves
    that we are dealing with Article 3 risk.

66. We find it difficult to comprehend and thus reject the notion that  the
    appellant would, in effect, be left to fend for herself if returned  to
    Japan.  We find that efforts would be made by the appellant, who is  an
    intelligent and educated woman, or those acting with her best interests
    at heart, such as Dr Thomas, to make enquiries to enable her on  return
    to enable her to have further treatment.  We find that Dr Thomas,  with
    the greatest respect, may have put it too highly to state that  without
    any of the social, medical and therapeutic supports that the  appellant
    has developed here in the UK, this could be psychiatrically devastating
    to  her  and  that  the  chances  of  her  experiencing  a  significant
    psychiatric breakdown and probably attempting suicide are very high. As
    the appellant says in paragraph 18  of  her  second  statement  she  is
    settling in well with her group and she  would  not  want  to  have  to
    restart the psychotherapy with a different group  of  people  whom  she
    does not trust in Japan. That is well-understood, but is far from being
    a statement that she would not do so, or that she would  take  her  own
    life because of fear of the return to Japan and her family  there.  For
    the reasons set out above whereas we  understand  that  it  could  (our
    emphasis) indeed be psychiatrically devastating  to  the  appellant  if
    left without help on return to Japan we reject the notion that  further
    treatment, albeit  in  an  entirely  different  situation  and  with  a
    different group of people involved, would be unavailable to her.

67. As we reject the notion that there would not  be  social,  medical  and
    therapeutic supports for the appellant in Japan, which  is  the  reason
    given as to why Dr Thomas  feels  that  the  appellant  would  probably
    attempt suicide, we do not find that there is  a  real  risk  that  the
    appellant would be likely to take her own life in the UK  or  in  Japan
    such as would entail a breach of Article 3 ECHR. We note that  she  has
    not talked about suicide in her statement of May 2013, and yet  in  the
    same month appears to have talked about it to  Dr  Thomas  because  her
    report is dated that month and refers to the suicide risk. We are  left
    wondering why the appellant did not set this out in her  own  statement
    if indeed she intended to take her own life at that time and we do  not
    know the answer. On the evidence before us we are unable to  reach  the
    conclusion that the appellant's fear of ill-treatment in the  receiving
    state upon which the risk of suicide is based is subjectively not  only
    real, but overwhelming.

68. For these reasons we do not find that the appellant is at real risk  of
    ill-treatment in Japan contrary to Article 3.

Article 8

69. The appellant has established a private life in the United Kingdom. She
    has spent the majority of the last sixteen  years  or  so  here.   That
    private life is worthy of respect.  It is said that she  has  developed
    close friendships here although Dr Thomas refers  to  her  being  quite
    socially  isolated,  especially  since  the  ending  of   her   partner
    relationship in October 2013. She has links to her  church  and  church
    community.

70. No-one has suggested that the appellant can bring herself within any of
    the categories set out in paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    that concern private life. However, although the Immigration Rules  are
    now framed in a way that takes into account matters of relevance to  an
    Article 8 evaluation, they are not  comprehensive.  Thus  consideration
    should be given to whether the refusal of leave or the removal  of  the
    appellant  from  the   jurisdiction   would   be   a   disproportionate
    interference with her right to a private life notwithstanding that  she
    failed to qualify under paragraph 276ADE:  Gulshan  (Article  8  -  New
    Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC).

71. Mental health must also be regarded as a crucial part of  private  life
    associated with the aspect of moral integrity.  A  large  part  of  the
    appellant's current life is  engaged  with  Dr  Thomas  and  the  group
    therapy in which the appellant partakes.

72. When considering what we refer to  as  the  "Razgar  approach"  (Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27) we have no doubt that the appellant has an  established
    private life and her return to Japan would cause an  interference  with
    it.  The interference is, however, potentially lawful and in pursuit of
    a legitimate aim.  Immigration control  is  not  a  legitimate  end  in
    itself, although it is  a  well-established  means  of  protecting  the
    economic wellbeing of the country.

73. We note that the appellant may well have qualified for indefinite leave
    under the Immigration Rules, either on the basis of long  residence  or
    by completing five years' continuous residence on  the  Highly  Skilled
    Migrant Programme but for the fact that she has returned frequently  to
    Japan, albeit she would say that this was only because of her  parents'
    abusive demands for her to return.  Nevertheless, having  done  so  she
    does not qualify for such indefinite leave and although  she  may  have
    wished it to be otherwise, there should not have been  the  expectation
    that temporary leave, albeit over many years, would eventually lead  to
    the right to remain here  absent  meeting  the  Rules  or  there  being
    exceptional or compelling circumstances which require that  she  should
    be allowed to do so. Since  she  does  not  meet  the  Rules,  the  key
    question  is  whether  there  are  such   exceptional   or   compelling
    circumstances in the present case as to render the decision  to  remove
    her disproportionate interference with her established private life.

Conclusions

74. It is for the Secretary of State to show  that  interference  with  the
    exercise of the appellant's right to respect for her  private  life  is
    proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be achieved, which
    in this case would appear to be the economic well-being of the country,
    or perhaps the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.

75. We have considered all the evidence in the round. We  have  taken  into
    account all the matters to which we have referred or to which  we  have
    been referred. We have made findings and set against  them  the  public
    interest considerations justifying removal. We conclude  that  this  is
    one  of  those  exceptional  cases  in  which  there   are   compelling
    circumstances  that  are  not   sufficiently   recognised   under   the
    Immigration Rules such that having considered the proportionality issue
    the appellant succeeds under Article 8.

76. Our decision turns on this appeal's own particular facts. We have found
    that the appellant has been the victim of circumstances that have  been
    largely outside her control.  The appellant has spent almost  half  her
    life, some 16 years, in this country, and has at all  times  been  here
    legally.  During  that  time  she  has  built  private  life  ties  and
    friendships, albeit that her partner brought their relationship  to  an
    end towards the end of last year whilst  her  appeal  was  outstanding.
    She has returned to Japan to make applications on  occasions  that  she
    has been unable to renew her visa in country. We find it likely that if
    she had not returned to Japan to make such applications or  because  of
    what she saw as her parents' abusive demands to return there,  she  may
    well have met the requirements of the Rules otherwise. We wish to  make
    it clear that we are not seeking to suggest that a person who  narrowly
    misses meeting the requirements of the Rules can  rely  on  that  as  a
    ground  for  claiming  that  there  are  compelling  circumstances  for
    granting them leave outside the Rules. We mention this merely  as  part
    of the overall picture of the strength of the ties that this particular
    appellant has developed with the UK, which to all intents and  purposes
    is now her home, and the environment  in  which  she  feels  safe.  Her
    return to Japan, at least in recent years, cannot truly be described as
    voluntary.

77. The appellant has not been a drain on public funds until recently.  She
    is highly qualified and able to make a  positive  contribution  to  the
    economy. Although much of her time here was spent  as  a  student,  she
    also worked after obtaining her higher degree. She had  the  use  of  a
    credit card, and intermittent income from employment, and even when she
    was no longer permitted to work she was supported by her partner  until
    the relationship failed in October 2013.  We imagine that  any  current
    barrier to her obtaining gainful employment would be  lifted  following
    the success of her appeal.

78. Although the appellant would be able to build up her  private  life  in
    Japan by interacting with others in a different environment, that  will
    be difficult for her given her current  state  of  mental  health.  She
    should be able to receive treatment for her mental health  problems  in
    Japan. However, there is a distinction between the availability of such
    treatment, which takes the matter outside Article 3, and the ability of
    a vulnerable person to adopt a sufficiently positive mental attitude to
    be able to take advantage of such treatment as  is  available.  We  are
    concerned that there will be adverse consequences for  this  appellant,
    bearing in mind the traumas that  she  has  suffered  and  the  medical
    evidence of  her  condition,  if  she  is  taken  out  of  her  current
    environment and forced to return to Japan.

79. The appellant has commenced treatment for her mental health issues here
    and has learned to place her trust in Dr  Thomas.  She  has  integrated
    with a supportive network of other traumatised patients.  However  this
    has taken much time and patience. Her mental health  is  improving  but
    she clearly remains vulnerable and still needs a great deal of support,
    including on a one  to  one  basis.  To  commence  treatment  again  in
    completely different circumstances is likely to be detrimental  to  her
    health, particularly in the short term, albeit that we have  found  she
    cannot meet the high bar required to found a successful Article 3 claim
    on grounds of the risk of self-harm.  There has to be  a  serious  risk
    that all the good work achieved thus far by Dr  Thomas  and  her  group
    will be undermined if her treatment is interrupted at this stage.  Even
    if she does summon up the courage to start similar treatment in  Japan,
    she will be building up new relationships from scratch.

80. Furthermore, we have little doubt that the appellant's subjective  fear
    of her parents and her belief that she will be assaulted again  by  her
    father will increase her anxiety  substantially.  It  is  necessary  to
    enter one's address in the Address Registry in Japan. This would  allow
    her  father  to  discover  her  whereabouts  as  he   did   previously.
    Objectively  we  find  that  there  is  a  real  risk  that  in   those
    circumstances the appellant would once more be the victim  of  assault.
    The fact that he attacked her in a public place  without  any  apparent
    fear of reprisals is likely to fuel her anxiety about encountering  him
    even in public, and the presence of her mother has proved no deterrent.
    Thus the appellant is unlikely to be able to settle  easily  in  a  new
    location in Japan. She will constantly be on her guard in case  she  is
    found and attacked again. All those matters are bound to reflect  badly
    on her mental health as described by Dr Thomas.

81. If one poses the question: does the legitimate aim we  have  identified
    really justify requiring this vulnerable young  woman,  who  has  spent
    almost half her life in this  country,  to  discontinue  her  currently
    beneficial treatment for genuine mental health issues, and return to  a
    country where she will be constantly living in legitimate fear that the
    abuse from her own family that caused her mental health issues  in  the
    first place will resume? The answer is plainly  no.  The  Secretary  of
    State, upon whom the burden of proof rests, was unable to come up  with
    any sufficient  or  satisfactory  explanation  of  why  that  level  of
    interference with her established private life was proportionate.



Decision

82. It is for these reasons that we find that the proposed interference  by
    the respondent with the exercise of the appellant's  right  to  respect
    for private life is not proportionate to the legitimate  public  end(s)
    sought to be achieved. This appeal succeeds.

83. The decision of the First-tier tribunal  judge  is  set  aside  and  we
    substitute the decisions that:

      (a) The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules;

      (b) The appeal is dismissed under Article 3 ECHR;

      (c) The appeal is allowed under Article 8 ECHR.

84. We have made an anonymity direction for the reason set out in paragraph
    2 above.



Signed                              Date:


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton

