
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/24388/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |          Decision & Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 6th October 2017                   |          On 21st November 2017       |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                               mr Adeel Ahmad
                       (anonYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     The appellant appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)



                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant's appeal against a decision to refuse  his  human  rights
    claim was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach ("the judge") in
    a decision promulgated on 19th December 2016.  The judge found that the
    appellant would not face very significant  obstacles  in  reintegrating
    into Pakistan on return.  He could not meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules ("the rules") in paragraph 276ADE.  She  went  on  to
    find, having taken  into  account  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"), that the decision  to
    refuse  the  human  rights  claim  and  the  appellant's   removal   in
    consequence of that decision amounted to a proportionate response.  She
    also found that the  appellant  had  not  put  forward  any  compelling
    reasons why he should be permitted to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    outside the rules.

2.   At the appellant's request, contained  in  a  letter  to  the  Tribunal
    dated 15th September 2016, the judge decided the appeal on the basis of
    the documentary evidence before her.

3.   The appellant applied for permission to appeal, contending that he  had
    established private and family life ties in the United Kingdom and that
    the judge's decision went against the  weight  of  the  evidence.   The
    Secretary of State's refusal of the human  rights  claim  breached  his
    Article 8 rights.  Permission to appeal was  granted  by  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, who  found  that  the  judge  may  have  erred  in  not
    proceeding to make an Article 8 assessment outside the rules.

4.   In a rule 24 response from the Secretary of  State  dated  25th  August
    2017, the appeal was opposed.  The application for permission to appeal
    was misconceived as the Secretary of  State's  decision,  refusing  the
    human rights claim, included a certificate made under section 94(1)  of
    the 2002 Act.  The appellant had only an out of country right of appeal
    and so the First-tier Tribunal Judge had no jurisdiction  to  hear  the
    matter.  In any event, the appellant's grounds identified  no  material
    error of law.  The judge had before her no substantial evidence of  any
    private  life  ties  and  the  appellant's   immigration   status   was
    precarious.  In the light of Nasim and Others [2014]  UKUT  00025,  the
    judge's overall decision to dismiss the appeal was clearly correct.

The Hearing

5.   Mr Ahmad appeared in person, without  a  representative.   I  explained
    the procedure to be followed and he confirmed that he  understood  that
    he would have an opportunity to explain his case  that  the  judge  had
    made an error of law, such that her decision should be  set  aside  and
    remade.  He would also have an opportunity to respond to the  Secretary
    of State's case that the judge had no jurisdiction to hear the  appeal,
    in the light of the certificate.

6.   Mr Ahmad said that he had spent the most important part of his life  in
    the United Kingdom.  He arrived when he was 21 years  old,  with  entry
    clearance as a student, in December 2009.  He received further leave as
    a student and then leave in a post-study category, finally applying  in
    November 2014 for leave to remain on the basis of his private life.  He
    had experience here and it would be hard for him to return to  Pakistan
    as he would have to start "from zero".  He had few resources.

7.   Mr Ahmad said that he had trained people in the United Kingdom and  had
    members of his family and friends here.  He was not a burden to  anyone
    and had paid taxes.  He was more comfortable in this country and  would
    be insecure in Pakistan.

8.   The judge presumed that Mr Ahmad's parents  and  siblings  in  Pakistan
    would help  him  out  but  that  would  not  be  possible.   There  was
    insecurity in his home country  and  he  was  helping  his  family  out
    financially.  He knew what he was doing in the United Kingdom.  He  had
    spent a lot of time here and it would not be easy for him to  integrate
    into Pakistani society, on return.

9.   Mr Ahmad referred to a short bundle sent  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  two
    days before the hearing.  This included a witness statement.  In it, he
    referred to investing time, money and energy in gaining  his  education
    and in working in the United Kingdom.  His mother's sister  lives  here
    with her children and grandchildren and he is attached to his  cousins.
    Mr Ahmad said that he lives with one of them and with  an  aunt.   They
    are a close family.  If he had to leave, this would interfere with  his
    life in this country.

10.  In submissions, Mr Walker said that the Secretary of  State  relied  on
    the rule 24 response.  Refusal of the human rights claim  allowed  only
    an out of country appeal in the light of section 94(1) of the 2002 Act.
     In any event, paragraph 13 of the decision showed that the  judge  had
    made a finding which was open to her.  The appellant  had  provided  no
    details of ties to the United Kingdom.  The judge accepted that he  may
    have established some form of private life given  the  length  of  time
    spent here but this  could  not  outweigh  the  public  interest.   The
    judge's conclusion that there was  no  reason  to  make  an  Article  8
    assessment outside the rules, in the light of the  appellant's  limited
    private life ties, was open to her.   The  appellant's  recent  witness
    statement referred to family life with an aunt and cousins.  The  judge
    made her decision based on the limited evidence before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

11.  Mr Ahmad said that he had nothing to add.

Findings and Conclusions on Error of Law

12.  In written submissions contained in Mr  Ahmad's  short  bundle,  it  is
    contended that the application he made in November 2014 has the  effect
    of preserving rights of appeal available before amendment of  the  2002
    Act by the Immigration Act 2014.  I rather doubt that this is  correct.
    The Secretary of State's decision is to refuse  a  human  rights  claim
    made by him, after he varied his original  application.   The  date  of
    decision is June 2015 and so it would appear that only limited  grounds
    of  appeal  are  available  to  Mr  Ahmad.   That  makes  no   material
    difference, however, as he has sought to rely on his  human  rights,  a
    ground of appeal available to him whether or  not  the  decision  falls
    within the regime introduced by the Immigration Act 2014.

13.  In any event,  there  is  a  fundamental  problem.   The  Secretary  of
    State's decision includes, towards the very end of the decision letter,
    a certificate under section 94(1) of the 2002 Act.   A  certificate  is
    available in a case where the Secretary of State  finds  that  a  human
    rights claim is clearly unfounded.  The effect of  the  certificate  is
    that the appellant must  bring  his  appeal  from  outside  the  United
    Kingdom.  There has been no challenge to the certificate.

14.  In the light of the certificate, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  no
    jurisdiction to decide the appeal.  Her decision to proceed amounts  to
    a material error of law, such that the decision must be set  aside  and
    remade.  Were it necessary to do so, I would find in the light  of  the
    evidence before the judge that the ties established by Mr  Ahmad  since
    he arrived as a student in December 2009 are  relatively  insubstantial
    and have developed while he has had precarious immigration status.   If
    she were properly able to proceed, she  would  have  been  entitled  to
    conclude that those ties did not outweigh the public interest.

15.  Remaking the decision is straightforward.  In  the  light  of  guidance
    given by the Court of Appeal in Virk [2013] EWCA  Civ  652,  which  was
    also a case in which the First-tier Tribunal had no  jurisdiction,  the
    correct course is to remake the decision and then dismiss it.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made a material error of  law.   The  decision
must be remade.  It is remade as follows: appeal dismissed.



Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


Anonymity

There has been no application for anonymity.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge
made no order or direction.  I too  make  no  order  or  direction  on  this
occasion.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge RC Campbell

