
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/24903/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 July 2015                       |On 9 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                               MR HAJIDIN CAKA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms A Watterson of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. The respondent is a citizen of Kosovo born  on  14  January
    1984. However for the  sake  of  convenience,  I  shall  refer  to  the
    Secretary of State as the appellant and  Mr  Caka  as  the  respondent,
    which were the designations they had before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  decision
    of the respondent dated 3 June 2014 to  refuse  to  issue  him  with  a
    residence card as an extended family member of an  EEA  national  under
    regulation 8 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 (hereinafter, 'the2006 Regulations').

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge SJ Pacey allowed the appellant's appeal in  a
    decision of 25 November 2014. Permission to appeal was refused at first
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchinson but Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Warr granted permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  20  April
    2015 stating that it is arguable that regulation  17  (4)  which  deals
    with applications for residence card is  by  extended  family  members,
    imports the exercise of discretion.

 4. The matter came before me for hearing on 9 July 2015.

 5. The main issue that was taken into account in  the  proceedings  before
    the First-tier  Tribunal  was  whether  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and his Polish EEA national sponsor was durable  and  whether
    the appellant meets the criteria  of  regulation  8  (5)  of  the  2006
    regulations.

 6. The evidence before the Immigration Judge was the oral evidence of  the
    appellant and the sponsor which the Judge found to  be  persuasive  and
    given in straightforward persuasive terms. He stated that the appellant
    provided utility bills in their joint names which cover a  period  from
    September to November  2012.  He  took  into  account  the  documentary
    evidence which included copies  of  electronic  exchanges  between  the
    parties which he found go to show contact between the parties.

 7. The Judge stated that the evidence which were a number of letters  from
    friends of the parties were provided at the  hearing,  which  were  not
    before the respondent when she made her decision which  is  the  reason
    why the Judge did not make a fee order. The Judge acknowledged that the
    witnesses did not attend court to give evidence  so  it  could  not  be
    tested but nevertheless their statements had probative value. The Judge
    found that on the totality of the evidence before him he was  satisfied
    that the appellant meets the criteria of regulation 8 (5) of  the  2006
    Regulations and allowed the appeal outright.

 8. The appellant's grounds of appeal argue as follows,  in  summary.   The
    Judge of the first-tier Tribunal has made a material error  of  law  by
    allowing the appeal outright under the 2006 Regulations. The  appellant
    claimed to be in a durable relationship with a qualified person but the
    issuance or otherwise of a residence card to an extended family  member
    is at the Secretary of State's discretion as set out in  regulation  17
    (4) and (5) of the 2006 Regulations. Paragraph 17 (4) states  that  the
    Secretary of State may issue a residence card  to  an  extended  family
    member not falling within regulation 7 (3) who is not an  EEA  national
    on application, if (a) the relevant EEA national is in relation to  the
    extended family member not a  qualified  or  an  EEA  national  with  a
    permanent right of residence under regulation 15 and  (b)  in  all  the
    circumstances it appears to the Secretary of State appropriate to issue
    the residence card. It further states at paragraph (5) that  where  the
    Secretary of State receives an  application  under  paragraph  (4),  it
    shall undertake an extensive examination of the personal  circumstances
    of the applicant and if he refuses the application shall  give  reasons
    justifying the refusal unless this is  contrary  to  the  interests  of
    national security.

    Decision as to whether there is an error of law in the determination

 9. I find that there is a material error of law in  the  determination  in
    relation to the application of the 2006 Regulations.

10. The Judge having found that the appellant was extended family member of
    an EEA national, allowed the appeal outright rather  than  allowing  it
    only to the extent that the respondent was  required  to  exercise  her
    discretion under regulation 17 (4) of the 2006 regulations.  The  Judge
    failed to have regard to the cases of Ithemedu (OFM's-meaning)  Nigeria
    [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC) and YB (EEA reg 17 (4)-proper  approach)  Ivory
    Coast [2008] UKAT 00062.

11. There was no suggestion that the appellant was a 'family member' of his
    EEA sponsor  for  the  purposes  of  the  Regulations,  as  defined  in
    Regulation 7.  Therefore, a residence card could only be issued to  him
    under Regulation 17 if he can establish that he satisfies the  criteria
    of paragraph (4) of Regulation 17, which provides that the Secretary of
    State may issue a residence card to an 'extended family member'  of  an
    EEA national, if the other requirements  of  that  paragraph  are  met.
    This paragraph can only be applicable to the appellant if it can  first
    be established that he is an  'extended  family  members'  of  for  the
    purposes of the 2006 Regulations.

12. For the purposes of the Regulations, the appellant will be an 'extended
    family member' of his EEA  national  sponsor  if  he  can  satisfy  the
    criteria of any one of paragraphs (2), (3), (4) or (5) of Regulation  8
    of the 2006 Regulations.

13. I find there is a material error of law in  the  determination  as  the
    Judge having found that the appellant and her sponsor were in a durable
    relationship, allowed the appeal outright under the  2006  regulations.
    The proper course was to have sent it back to the  Secretary  of  State
    for her to exercise her discretion.

14. I direct that the appeal be sent back to the Secretary of State for her
    to exercise her discretion.

DECISION

I allow the respondents appeal under the 2006 Regulations.


      Dated this 8th day of September 2015

Signed by

.............................................
Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

