
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/24213/2014
                                                               IA/24217/2014
                                                               IA/24219/2014
                                                               IA/24340/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9 November 2015                   |On 4 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                                Bibi Peerbux
                              Mamade Tarabally
                                     BT
                                     ZT
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SecretARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Emma Harris, Counsel, instructed by Barnes
Harrild and Dyer
For the Respondent:    Mr Chris Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellants appeal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Camp) dismissing the  appellants'  appeals  against  a  decision
    taken on 19 May 2014 to refuse to grant leave to remain and  to  remove
    the appellants from the UK.

Introduction

 3. The appellants are citizens of Mauritius and  comprise  a  family  unit
    made up of BP (who was born in 1980 and entered the UK in 2001  with  a
    student visa), MT (who was born in 1969, is  the  husband  of  BP,  and
    entered the UK in 2002 with a dependent spouse visa), BT (a daughter of
    the marriage born in 2001 who  entered  the  UK  in  2004)  and  ZT  (a
    daughter of the marriage born in the UK in 2005 who has always lived in
    the UK). The appellants had leave to remain in the UK until 16 November
    2009 on the basis of BP being  a  student  until  2008  and  thereafter
    joining the Royal Navy until her discharge in 2009. The appellants made
    a previous application for leave to remain on 13 May 2009 but that  was
    refused on 20 April 2010 and  a  subsequent  human  rights  appeal  was
    eventually dismissed by the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 16 November 2011. There does not appear to have been any
    subsequent attempt to remove the appellants from the UK and the current
    application was made on 19 June 2012. That was refused on  20  February
    2013 but was then reconsidered and  refused  again  following  judicial
    review proceedings.

 4. The Secretary of State decided that the  appellants  had  not  complied
    with conditions attached to their previous  grant  of  leave  and  that
    there were no exceptional circumstances which meant that removal was no
    longer appropriate. The appellants did not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE or Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules").

The Appeal

 5. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing at Birmingham on 2 October 2014. They were  represented  by  Ms
    Dhaliwal, Counsel. The First-tier Tribunal found that Edgehill  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 402 applied and the appeals had  to  be  considered  in
    accordance with the law before 19 June 2012  i.e.  in  accordance  with
    Article 8 as judicially interpreted. The judge found  that  removal  to
    Mauritius as a family would not constitute  an  interference  with  the
    appellants' right to family life. Article 8 was not a  by-pass  to  the
    requirements of the Rules.  Essentially,  the  appeals  turned  on  the
    reasonableness of returning the minor appellants  to  Mauritius.  There
    was sparse evidence of the private lives of the  adult  appellants.  BT
    and ZT only spoke English  but  there  was  a  functioning  educational
    system  in  Mauritius  although  it  would  undoubtedly   represent   a
    disruption to their education to be required to move into  it  at  this
    stage of their lives.

 6. The judge further found that the adult appellants were  well  aware  in
    2009 that they were required to return to Mauritius but chose to remain
    in the UK. Events in the lives of all of the appellants had occurred in
    that context and the fact that the children were now older  had  to  be
    seen in that light. It was in the best interests  of  the  children  to
    remain with their parents  and  that  would  happen  whether  they  all
    remained in the UK or were removed together to Mauritius.  Removal  was
    proportionate and the public interest outweighed the interests  of  the
    children in remaining in their present educational and social setting.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the
    basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law. The  judge  should
    have applied Appendix FM and section 117B of the 2002  Act.  The  judge
    failed to seize the thrust of the factual matrix  in  this  case  which
    involved two children in the UK who had both achieved 7 years residence
    in the UK, the youngest having been born  here.  The  judge  failed  to
    properly consider the best interests of the children by  systematically
    identifying the relevant factors. There was no broad assessment of  the
    impact of removal on the children's subsequent educational development,
    progress and opportunities in  light  of  the  acknowledged  linguistic
    difficulties. The judge failed to consider the absence of close  family
    in Mauritius, the fact  that  French  is  used  in  education  and  the
    presence of other family members in the UK such as grandparents, uncle,
    aunt and cousins. The judge failed to  recognize  that  the  appellants
    were lawfully resident in  the  UK  until  their  previous  appeal  was
    dismissed on 16 November 2011. There was  no  assessment  of  the  core
    factual issues from paragraph 25 of EV Philippines [2014] EWCA Civ 874.
    There was no consideration of the principles of Zoumbas v  SSHD  [2013]
    UKSC 74; in particular the principle that a child must  not  be  blamed
    for matters for which he or she is not responsible such as the  conduct
    of a parent.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor  on  21
    April 2015. It was arguable that the judge's reasoning with respect  to
    the best interests of the children was not  sufficiently  detailed;  in
    particular BT was at secondary school and had been in  the  UK  for  11
    years. She would be returning  to  a  country  where,  on  the  judge's
    findings,  she  did  not  speak  the  language.  There  was  no  proper
    consideration of section 117B of the 2002 Act and it  was  also  argued
    that there were factual errors in the decision.

 9. In a rule 24 response dated 29 April  2015  the  respondent  sought  to
    uphold the decision on the basis that this was a thorough and  detailed
    decision. The judge considered the disruption to the children but  also
    their illegal status and the fact that their parents chose to reside in
    the UK under those circumstances. The judge rightly considered that  it
    was in the best interests of the children to remain with their  parents
    and to return as a  family.  The  grounds  merely  disagreed  with  the
    adverse outcome of the appeal.

10. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

11. Ms Harris submitted that Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ  74  applied  and
    Edgehill was limited to decisions made from 9 July 2012 to 6  September
    2012. The revised Rules applied and that was a material  error  of  law
    because the children had been in the UK for 7 years as at the  date  of
    application. There should have been a distinct enquiry as to  the  best
    interests of the children and the judge failed to take into account the
    other factors raised. The judge accepted that the children  only  spoke
    English but failed to consider that BT was  about  to  start  her  GCSE
    years. There are no close family in Mauritius because they are  all  in
    the UK. The previous immigration appeal  was  not  dismissed  until  16
    November 2011. Illegality was not relevant to the best interests of the
    children in any event. The decision includes only a  passing  reference
    to section 117B. There is no reference to the financial independence of
    the family or their ability to speak English. There is  an  outstanding
    application for the registration of BT as a British  citizen,  made  in
    July 2015.

12. Mr Avery submitted that there  was  no  material  error  of  law  -  at
    paragraph 24 of the decision the judge correctly  identified  that  the
    key issue was reasonableness and that would be the case under paragraph
    276ADE or section 117B of the 2002 Act. The impact  on  the  appellants
    was considered at paragraph 26 of the decision. The appellants  had  no
    immigration  status  after   2009,   merely   unsuccessfully   pursuing
    immigration appeals since then. The judge correctly  started  from  the
    position that the best interests of the children were  to  remain  with
    the parents. The judge was entitled to take the  public  interest  into
    account at paragraph 29 and factored best interests into consideration.
    The appellants could not obtain a positive right to a  grant  of  leave
    from section 117B whatever their degree of fluency in  English  or  the
    strength of their financial  resources  (AM  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  0260
    (IAC)).

13. Ms Harris submitted in response that the judge mentioned disruption  in
    paragraph 26 but there was nothing  to  say  how  that  influenced  the
    proportionality assessment. The positive section 117B factors could not
    in themselves justify a grant of leave but can assist the appellants.

14. I have considered paragraph 56 of Singh. The law as it was held  to  be
    in Edgehill only obtains to decisions taken in  the  two  month  window
    between 9 July 2012 and 6 September 2012. As from 6 September 2012  the
    respondent was entitled to take into account the provisions of Appendix
    FM and paragraphs 276ADE - 276DH in deciding  private  or  family  life
    applications even if they were made prior to 9 July 2012.

15. In this case, the decision under appeal was made on 19 May 2014 and the
    respondent considered and applied Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE.
    However, the judge then found at paragraph 18 of the decision that "The
    original application was made on 19 June  2012.  It  therefore  appears
    that the appeal has to be considered in accordance with the law  before
    that date, i.e. in accordance with article 8 of the ECHR as  judicially
    interpreted". I find that is an error of law - the appeal actually fell
    to be considered under paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM  of  the  Rules
    together with Article 8, section 117B - D of the 2002 Act,  section  55
    of the 2007 Act and the relevant case law. Mr Avery submitted that  any
    error of law is not material because the judge did consider the correct
    principles i.e. reasonableness  and  proportionality.  However,  it  is
    common ground that the appellants could succeed under paragraph  276ADE
    of the Rules because BT had resided in the UK for 7  years  as  at  the
    date of the 19 June 2012 application. I find that there is  a  material
    error of law because on the face of  the  decision  the  judge  limited
    consideration of the appeals to Article 8  when  the  appellants  could
    potentially succeed under the Rules.

16. The judge referred to an assessment of proportionality at paragraph 19,
    stated that Article 8 is not a by-pass to the Rules at paragraph 22 and
    then stated at paragraph 24 that the appeals turned on  reasonableness.
    However, there are no findings on reasonableness and  at  paragraph  31
    the judge decided the appeals on proportionality without  reference  to
    reasonableness. I find that the decision is not  internally  consistent
    in terms of the test to be applied and that is a further error of law.

17. The judge stated at paragraph 23 of the decision that he bore  in  mind
    section 117B of the 2002 Act. A significant issue in this appeal is the
    fact that BT and ZT are qualifying children, as defined in section 117D
    and therefore fall within section 117B(6) of the 2002  Act.  The  judge
    had to consider whether it was reasonable to expect them to  leave  the
    United Kingdom. The recent case law  remains  relevant,  whilst  taking
    into account that the case law effectively pre-dates  the  commencement
    of sections 117A - D (28 July 2014). There are no findings in  relation
    to  the  relevant  provisions  of  section  117B-D.  I  find  that  the
    consideration of section 117B-D is inadequate and  that  is  a  further
    material error of law.

18. The issue of proportionality involves striking a fair  balance  between
    the rights of the appellants and  the  public  interest.  In  assessing
    proportionality, the "best interests" of any children must be a primary
    consideration (see ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD (2011) UKSC 4 and section 55 of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009).  Whilst  the  best
    interests of the child are not  necessarily  determinative,  a  child's
    best interests are a weighty consideration,  albeit  one  that  can  be
    outweighed by sufficient weight of public  interest  concerns  (see  ZH
    (Tanzania) per Lady Hale at [33]).

19. In  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
    appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197(IAC),  Mr  Justice  Blake  held  that  as  a
    starting point, it is in the best interests of children to be with both
    their parents and if both parents are being removed from  the  UK  then
    the starting point suggests that so should dependent children who  form
    part of their household unless there are reasons to the contrary. It is
    generally in the interests of  children  to  have  both  stability  and
    continuity of social and  educational  provision  and  the  benefit  of
    growing up in the cultural norms of the society to which  they  belong.
    Lengthy residence in a country other than the state of origin can  lead
    to development of social, cultural and educational ties that  it  would
    be inappropriate to disrupt in the absence of compelling reasons to the
    contrary. What amounts to lengthy residence is not clear cut  but  past
    and present policies have identified seven years as a relevant  period.
    Seven years from age four is likely to be more significant to  a  child
    than the first seven years of life. Very young children are focussed on
    their parents rather than their peers and are adaptable.

20. In EV (Philippines) and others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874, Lord Justice
    Clarke held that  in  determining  whether  the  need  for  immigration
    control outweighs the best interests of the children, it  is  necessary
    to determine the relative strength of the  factors  which  make  it  in
    their best interests to remain here and also to  take  account  of  any
    factors that point the other way. A decision will depend on a number of
    factors such as the children's age, the length of time  in  the  United
    Kingdom, how long  they  have  been  in  education,  what  stage  their
    education has reached, the extent to which they have  become  distanced
    from the country  to  which  it  is  proposed  that  they  return,  how
    renewable their connection may  be,  to  what  extent  they  will  have
    linguistic, medical or other difficulties in adapting to life  in  that
    country and the extent to which the course proposed will interfere with
    their family life or  their  rights  (if  they  have  any)  as  British
    citizens.

21. The judge sought to address the  best  interests  of  the  children  at
    paragraphs 25-27 of  the  decision  and  found  that  they  spoke  only
    English.  However, there is only very limited reference to the case law
    and no structured analysis of the issues set out above. The  fact  that
    BT had reached secondary education  in  the  UK  and  the  presence  of
    extended family members in the UK were highly relevant factors. I  find
    that the judge's consideration of the best interests of BT  and  ZT  is
    inadequate and that is a further material error of law.

22. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellants'
    appeals involved the making of errors of law and  its  decision  cannot
    stand.

Decision

23. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the errors of law infect  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

24. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.


Signed   [pic]         Date 29 November 2015

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
