
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/24452/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 5 July 2017                            | On 13 July 2017                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                  Mr C B U
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Singer, Counsel, instructed by Alcott
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Colvin (the judge), promulgated on 18 October  2016,  in
    which she dismissed his appeal.   That  appeal  had  been  against  the
    Respondent's decision of 18 June 2015, refusing his human rights claim.

 2. The Appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom in 2002  and  had  been
    resident here lawfully thereafter.  He had previously been in what  was
    accepted as a durable relationship with an EEA national for a number of
    years.  This relationship ended when the EEA national returned  to  her
    native country.  The application leading to the  Respondent's  decision
    was made in March of 2015.  In the application the  Appellant's  change
    in circumstances were noted, and it was said that  he  was  relying  in
    essence on his private life under Article 8.

The judge's decision

 3. By the time the appeal came  up  for  hearing  in  September  2016  the
    Appellant's circumstances had changed once more.  From around the  time
    he made his application to the Respondent (but presumably shortly after
    this particular event) the Appellant had begun a new relationship  with
    a British national.  Evidence of this relationship was  included  in  a
    supplementary bundle which was filed and served with the  Tribunal  and
    the Respondent prior to the hearing.

 4. At paragraph 3 the judge records that as a preliminary  matter  it  was
    "clarified" that the appeal before her was on Article 8 grounds outside
    of the Immigration Rules.  It is also said in that paragraph  that  the
    Appellant's new relationship fell within the scope of section 85(5)  of
    the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,   as   amended.
    Therefore, concluded the judge, that issue was  regarded  as  being  in
    effect a "new matter", and  that  the  judge  had  no  jurisdiction  to
    consider the issue.  That is a conclusion of central importance in  the
    appeal before me.

 5. Having reached her conclusion on the new relationship point  the  judge
    goes on to record the evidence and submissions made in respect  of  the
    Appellant's private life.  At paragraph 21 she appears  to  agree  with
    the Respondent's assertion that the Appellant had failed to  mention  a
    spent conviction in his application form and  that  he  therefore  fell
    foul of the suitability requirements under Appendix FM, as they  relate
    to paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.

 6. At paragraphs 22 to 25 the judge goes on to consider the  private  life
    issue in detail.  Having taken a number of  matters  into  account  the
    judge concludes that even if the Appellant had not fallen foul  of  the
    suitability requirements he was unable to show that  there  were  "very
    significant obstacles" to his reintegration into Nigerian  society  and
    he could not show that there were any compelling circumstances  in  his
    case.  In light of this the appeal (on the restricted basis  considered
    by the judge) was dismissed.

The grounds and grant of permission

 7. The grounds assert that the issue of a new relationship was not a  "new
    matter", as it was in fact simply an aspect of his human rights  claim.
    The grounds also submit that the judge's approach  to  the  suitability
    issue was erroneous.

 8. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge P J M  Hollingworth
    on 17 March 2017.  That judge did not  engage  with  the  "new  matter"
    issue, but instead concentrates on the substance of  the  private  life
    considerations undertaken by the judge.

The hearing before me

 9. At the outset  of  the  hearing  Mr  Singer  made  an  application  for
    anonymity in this case.  The application was based  in  part  upon  the
    nature of the Appellant's own job but, more importantly, on  the  basis
    that his current partner's work with vulnerable children  justified  an
    anonymity direction.  Mr Tarlow had no objections to this.   I  acceded
    to the application.

10. Mr Singer confirmed that evidence of  the  new  relationship  had  been
    provided to the Tribunal and the Respondent in advance of  the  hearing
    before the judge by way  of  a  supplementary  bundle  (on  file).   He
    submitted  that  the  judge's  conclusion  that  the  new  relationship
    constituted a "new matter" was wrong.  The family life issue was simply
    an aspect of the overall Article 8 claim.  He noted that  Article  8(1)
    refers to "private and family life".

11. He submitted that even if (and this is unclear from the  papers  before
    me) the representatives before  the  judge  had  agreed  that  the  new
    relationship did amount to a "new matter", any erroneous concessions as
    to the law were of no effect: the judge had to apply the law correctly,
    particularly when this went to the issue of jurisdiction.

12. I referred Mr Singer to the Respondent's guidance on the issue  of  new
    matters contained in a document dated 8 May 2017.  I  pointed  out  the
    third bullet point on page 25 in which  the  Respondent  suggests  that
    where an appellant initially relies on private life but then wishes  to
    include a family life aspect, this  is  likely  to  constitute  a  "new
    matter" for the purposes of section 85(5) of the 2002 Act.   Mr  Singer
    responded to this by submitting that the guidance was not law and could
    not be used as a tool to interpret a statute.  It  was  also  submitted
    that the judge got it  wrong  in  respect  of  the  suitability  issue.
    Paragraph 21 indicated that she had treated the matter  as  though  she
    only had a judicial review jurisdiction on this point.

13. Mr Tarlow relied on the rule 24 response.  He simply submitted that the
    new relationship was a "new matter" and that the judge was  correct  to
    proceed on that basis.

14. In reply Mr Singer noted that relationships could in fact form part  of
    private life in any event, as indicated in a number of judgments in the
    Court of Appeal.  I raised the issue of materiality to which Mr  Singer
    responded that  the  judge  had  precluded  herself  from  hearing  any
    evidence about the partner's particular circumstances including her job
    and earnings etc.  Taking matters overall,  Mr  Singer  submitted  that
    there was at least an arguable case that there would be  insurmountable
    obstacles to her going and living in Nigeria.

15. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision on error of law.




Decision on error of law

The "new matter" issue

16. I have concluded that the judge did err  by  concluding  that  the  new
    relationship constituted a "new matter" within the meaning of  sections
    85(5) and 85(6) of the 2002 Act.

17. The relevant provisions of section 85 read as follows:

         "(5) But the Tribunal must not consider a  new  matter  unless  the
             Secretary of State has given the Tribunal consent to do so.

         (6)  A matter is a 'new matter' if -

             (a)  it constitutes a ground of appeal of  a  kind  listed  in
                  Section 84, and

             (b)  the Secretary of State has not previously considered  the
                  matter in the context of -

                  (i)  the decision mentioned in section 82(1), or

                  (ii) a statement made by the Appellant under section 120."

18. I note the lack of clarity from the papers before me  as  to  what  was
    actually said at the hearing before the judge in  relation  to  section
    85(5).  There is nothing to suggest that the point was canvassed in any
    detail by the representatives or the judge.  There is  simply  what  is
    stated in paragraph 3 of the judge's decision.  It may be, for the sake
    of argument, that both representatives agreed that the new relationship
    was a "new matter".  However, as Mr Singer correctly  pointed  out,  it
    was  incumbent  upon  the  judge  to  apply  the  law  correctly.   Any
    concessions purportedly made as to the law would be of  no  consequence
    if that law was applied erroneously.  This would be so particularly  in
    relation to matters relating to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

19.  My  reasons  for  concluding  that  the  judge  was   wrong   in   her
    interpretation of the law are as follows.

20. First, the effect of section 85(5) is to limit the jurisdiction of  the
    Tribunal.  Therefore, in my view, it  is  necessary  to  interpret  the
    meaning of the phrase, "a new matter" with caution and narrowly.

21. Second, the "matter" which constitutes the second element of the  term,
    "new matter" clearly means that it is one  of  the  grounds  of  appeal
    under section 84. In the  present  appeal,  the  ground  of  appeal  in
    question is that contained in section 84(2): that the  refusal  of  the
    human rights claim is unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights  Act
    1998. The ground of appeal does not specify "an Article 8  claim",  and
    certainly not "a private life claim" or "a family life claim".

22. In this case the Appellant's original application was made on the basis
    of Article 8.  The specific  facet  of  the  Article  8  claim  related
    initially to private life.  As time moved on  there  was  a  change  of
    circumstances and the Appellant sought to  bring  into  his  Article  8
    claim a family life dimension. The change in emphasis has not taken the
    claim outwith the boundaries of "a human  rights  claim",  nor  has  it
    changed in a substantive way the basis upon which the Appellant resists
    removal: a removal in consequence  of  the  refusal  of  the  claim  is
    unlawful under section 6 of the 1998 Act.

23. Third, in this regard I note the wording of Article 8(1) itself:

         "Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life,
         his home and his correspondence."

24. In my view, Article  8(1)  encompasses  what  may  be  described  as  a
    'composite right',  comprising  two  elements  of  the  same  protected
    fundamental right. They are, in effect, part and  parcel  of  the  same
    protected right.  I note that the Court of Appeal has stated that there
    is no substantive difference between the assessment of the  two  facets
    of this right where removal is proposed (see, for example, Singh [2015]
    EWCA  Civ  630,  at  paragraph  25).   Relationships  are  part  of  an
    individual's private life, just as they are part  of  family  life  (as
    confirmed in Strasbourg on numerous occasions: see, for example,  Petty
    v UK [2002] 35 EHRR 1 and Niemietz v Germany  App  No.  13710/88).   In
    other words, any distinction to be drawn  is  one  without  a  material
    difference.

25. Fourth, if any distinction is to be made within the ambit  of  a  human
    rights claim (and the right of appeal attached to the refusal thereof),
    it would lie as between an Article 8 case  on  the  one  hand,  and  an
    Article 3 protection case on the other. There is an easy line  to  draw
    here.

26. Fifth, I have borne in mind the Respondent's guidance, but it  is  just
    that: guidance. It is of no  assistance  in  interpreting  the  correct
    meaning of the section 85(5) and (6).  I have not  been  provided  with
    any other materials to aid with the issue of construction.  I have been
    able to look  at  the  explanatory  memorandum  which  accompanied  the
    introduction of the amendments through the Immigration  Act  2014,  but
    could find nothing of any value therein.

27. Sixth, aside from the error in the interpretation of what constituted a
    "new matter" (on the basis that she regarded the relationship as  being
    a family life issue), the judge should have  considered  all  of  these
    issues as particular of the Appellant's private life case in any event.
    As alluded to above, the relationship was clearly part  and  parcel  of
    the private life.

28. Seventh, I had queried whether any error by the judge would  have  been
    material.  I am persuaded that the error was material.  Although  there
    clearly would be a number of factors  counting  against  the  Appellant
    (including  his  precarious  status  during  the  time   of   the   new
    relationship), the fact is that the judge did not engage  with  any  of
    the evidence relating to this matter. There is no consideration of  the
    partner's particular circumstances, including the  nature  of  her  job
    (one which is clearly  of  value  to  British  society),  her  personal
    circumstances, and the earnings of the couple (as that factor may go to
    any consideration of a Chikwamba argument). There is  sufficient  merit
    in the relationship issue to make the judge's error material.

    The suitability issue

29. Insofar as the second ground of appeal is concerned, I  find  that  the
    judge erred in her approach to the suitability issue.  On the  face  of
    paragraph 21 that the judge appears to have regarded her role as  being
    one of review only.  That is incorrect.  It was incumbent upon  her  to
    make her own decision, an exercise of her discretion on the suitability
    issue.

30. In addition, it is unclear from the final sentence of that paragraph as
    to what  the  judge  was  actually  finding  by  way  of  facts  and/or
    concluding in relation to the exercise of any discretion.

31. On either basis the judge has erred.

Disposal

32. Both representatives were agreed that if I concluded the judge  was  in
    error, this matter should be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I
    have had regard to paragraph 7.2 of the Practice  Statement.   In  this
    case there is an absence of findings and conclusions on what is now the
    central plank of the Appellant's case, namely his relationship.

33. In my view, remittal is appropriate.   I  would  note  that  it  is  my
    understanding that the Upper Tribunal will be issuing an  authoritative
    decision on the meaning of what constitutes a "new matter" in the  near
    future.  I do not have any concrete timeframe for  this  and  for  this
    reason have not adjourned the current appeal.   However,  both  parties
    will no doubt keep a careful out on relevant developments.

34. In respect of the remitted appeal, there are no preserved  findings  or
    conclusions. The judge's decision is set aside in  full.  There  is  no
    power to set aside part of  a  decision  only  (at  least  not  if  the
    decision relates to a single ground of appeal).

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision contained a material error of law.

I set aside that decision.

I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed   [pic]         Date: 11 July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
