














                                       [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA245402015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 May 2017                         |On 26 May 2017                       |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR SAFDAR SHAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Safdar Shah in Person


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in this case is the Secretary of State and the respondent
    is Mr Safdar Shah.  However for the purposes of this decision  I  refer
    to the parties as they were before the First-tier  Tribunal,  where  Mr
    Shah was the appellant.

 2. The history of Mr Shah's case is set out in the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal promulgated on 24 October 2016.  In summary Mr Shah first
    entered the United Kingdom on 10 September 2006 with entry clearance as
    a student until 31 December 2007.  He  was  granted  further  leave  to
    remain on the same conditions on a number of occasions  until  30  June
    2010.  On 8 July 2010 he was granted leave to remain until  30  January
    2012 as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  On 23 April 2012  he  was  granted
    leave to remain until 23 April 2014 as a Tier 1 (Post-Study) Migrant.

 3. On 28 February 2014 an application for leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrant was  refused.   The  appellant  made  a  further
    application on the same basis on 23 April 2014.   On  12  June  2015  a
    decision was made by the respondent to refuse that application and  the
    decision  included  a  One-Stop  Warning  under  Section  120  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 requiring the appellant to
    inform the respondent of any  reasons  why  he  thought  he  should  be
    allowed to remain.

 4. At the outset of his hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Mr  Shah
    indicated that he no longer intended to pursue his appeal  in  relation
    to his Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  application  and  that  he  only
    intended to proceed his application for leave to remain on the  grounds
    of long residence.   As  noted  at  paragraph  [6]  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision and at paragraph [15]  prior  to  that  hearing,  the
    respondent received the appellant's additional grounds of appeal  dated
    15 August 2016.  Mr Kotas confirmed that these have  been  received  by
    the respondent on 16 August 2016.  These  grounds  confirmed  that  the
    appellant arrived in the UK on 10 September  2006  and  that  he  would
    therefore have completed ten years' lawful  residence  on  9  September
    2016.  The grounds set out that Mr Shah had completed an MBA in the  UK
    and therefore was exempt from the English language  test  and  provided
    evidence of this.  He also indicated that he had passed his Life in the
    UK Test and provided a copy of the Lift in the UK Test certificate.  Mr
    Shah concluded in his further grounds of appeal confirming that:

         "I am entitled for indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom
         under Rule 276B of the Immigration Rules.  I therefore request  the
         Tribunal to allow my appeal on this ground."

 5. The appellant was unrepresented both before the First-tier Tribunal and
    the Upper Tribunal.  In her decision promulgated  on  24  October  2016
    Judge Mackintosh confirmed the evidence that she had heard and set  out
    her  reasons  for  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  under  the  long
    residence Rule at paragraphs 15 to 19 of the decision and reasons.

 6. The respondent appeals with permission on the grounds that:

      1) if the judge was seeking to allow the appeal on the  basis  of  the
         Immigration Rules the judge had to make  findings  on  all  of  the
         applicable sections of Rule 276B and that the only finding  was  in
         respect of the length of residence and there was no engagement with
         the rest of the Rule which was a material error;

      2) it was argued that the judge could not lawfully  allow  the  appeal
         with respect to the Immigration Rules in  any  event  as  paragraph
         276B(ii) required a public interest assessment which it is for  the
         Secretary of State to  make  in  the  first  instance  and  it  was
         asserted that the judge had acted unlawfully in seeming  to  accept
         that 276B(ii) was met as a discretion had not yet been exercised by
         the Secretary of State;

      3) that all of the grounds of the  Rules  had  not  been  met  as  the
         appellant had not made a valid application as required by Rule  A34
         under SET.(LR) relying on  Weiss,  R  (on  the  application  of)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 803,  at
         paragraph [12].

Error of Law Hearing

 7. As already indicated Mr Shah was unrepresented before me.  I  explained
    to him that I would him every assistance in  the  presentation  of  his
    appeal.  Mr Shah provided a skeleton argument with annexed case law and
    the respondent's guidance.  Although this had not  been  copied  to  Mr
    Kotas, I adjourned the hearing until later in  the  list  to  allow  Mr
    Kotas an opportunity to read Mr Shah's Rule 24 response, which Mr  Shah
    confirmed was in essence what was set out in his  skeleton.   Mr  Kotas
    told me he was then in a position to proceed.

 8. Mr Kotas, although he  indicated  he  could  not  concede  any  of  the
    grounds, confirmed that he was not making  any  further  submission  on
    grounds 5A and B of the Secretary of State's grounds,  in  relation  to
    the alleged error in the judge making a public interest assessment  and
    allowing  the  appeal  without  the  appellant  having  made  a   valid
    application on the relevant form.  Mr Kotas accepted  that  such  would
    make a nonsense of the Section 120 One-Stop Notice.

 9. Mr Kotas's primary submission was that the judge had not  engaged  with
    all of the requirements of 276B, she did not set the  requirements  out
    and the only findings it was asserted that she made were in relation to
    residence.  Mr Kotas accepted that no challenge had been raised by  the
    Presenting Officer at the hearing and he submitted that it  would  have
    been open to the judge to  allow  the  case  to  the  extent  that  the
    decision was outstanding under 276B and remit it to the  respondent  to
    make the appropriate checks in relation to the public interest test.

10. In reply Mr Shah relied on his skeleton argument and reiterated that he
    had submitted his additional grounds of appeal one and  a  half  months
    before the hearing date (as confirmed by Mr Kotas).  In that grounds of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal he had noted that  he  fulfilled  all
    the requirements of  the  long  residence  Rule  and  had  specifically
    confirmed that it was Rule 276B of the Immigration Rules  that  he  was
    relying on.  Mr Shah submitted that the judge had  taken  into  account
    all of the evidence including that Mr Shah had outlined at  his  appeal
    how he met all of the requirements of 276B and the judge  recorded  the
    evidence in summary at  paragraphs  [11]  through  to  [14].   Mr  Shah
    submitted that after his evidence the judge had  asked  the  Presenting
    Officer whether she had any questions and there were none and that  she
    had said that "everything looks OK".  Mr Shah  relied  on  the  judge's
    findings  including  that  the  judge  found  that  the  appellant  had
    discharged the burden upon him and that the judge  had  clearly  stated
    that burden was upon the appellant  to  demonstrate  that  he  met  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and it was Mr  Shah's  submission
    therefore that the judge had in mind all of  Rule  276B  not  just  one
    aspect of it i.e. the length of residence in the UK.

11. In reply Mr Kotas reiterated that paragraph 276B was not set out by the
    judge.  When it was put to Mr Kotas that no objections had been  raised
    by the Presenting Officer in relation to the appellant's appeal on  the
    basis that he met the long residence  requirements  Mr  Kotas  conceded
    that he could not argue with the fact that there was no  positive  case
    put forward by the Home Office against Mr Shah's grounds of appeal.  He
    relied on the arguments already made.

Discussion

12. As indicated, Mr Kotas did not argue with any force that the grounds of
    appeal in relation to the judge being  in  error  in  making  a  public
    interest assessment and in allowing the appeal with no valid form  were
    misconstrued.  The appellant was issued  with  a  Section  120  Notice.
    Such is not in dispute.   According  to  the  long  residence  guidance
    (Version 15.0) dated 12/2017 it is provided:

         "Under Sections 3C and 3D it  is  not  possible  to  submit  a  new
         application while an appeal is outstanding.  However the  applicant
         can submit further grounds to be considered at appeal."

13. The Court of Appeal in AS (Afghanistan) & NV (Sri  Lanka)  [2009]  EWCA
    Civ 1076 held that Section 85(2) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 was to be construed as imposing a duty on the  Tribunal
    to consider any potential ground of appeal  raised  in  response  to  a
    Section 120 Notice, even if it was not directly related to  the  issues
    considered by the Secretary of State in  the  original  decision.   The
    Upper  Tribunal  in  MU  ("Statement  of  Additional  Grounds"  -  long
    residence - discretion) Bangladesh [2010] UKUT 442  confirmed  that  as
    held in AS (Afghanistan) there is no time limit on serving a  Statement
    of Additional Grounds in response to a "Section 120 Notice".

14. Thus an appellant may accrue ten  years'  lawful  residence  (including
    leave extended by Section 3C of the  1971  Act)  while  his  appeal  is
    pending.  The  Tribunal  may  then  be  asked  to  decide  whether  the
    appellant qualifies for indefinite leave under the long residence Rule.
     In AS (Afghanistan) the Court of Appeal rejected the argument that the
    Tribunal could not be a primary decision maker in these  circumstances.
    In Ruhumuliza (Article 1F and "undesirable") [2016]  UKUT  00284  (IAC)
    the  Upper  Tribunal  rejected  the  submission  that  the  wording  of
    paragraph 276B(ii) imports a discretion and that the wording is that of
    assessment rather than discretion and  that  the  question  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal was whether the claimant met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276B and that the Tribunal made no error  in  making  it  own
    assessment.

15. Mr Kotas also relied on MU  (Bangladesh)  for  authority  that  if  the
    Tribunal is becoming the primary decision maker under  Section  120  it
    must take account all the Immigration Rules if an appellant  claims  to
    qualify for leave to remain in a different category from that for which
    he applied  to  the  Secretary  of  State  (paragraph  11).   Mr  Kotas
    submitted that this was what the judge had  failed  to  do.   I  cannot
    agree.  Whilst the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was  brief  that
    in itself is of course not an error of law.  Whilst I accept  that  had
    the First-tier Tribunal set out in more detail the specific  provisions
    including of 276B this challenge might not be before the Upper Tribunal
    that does not mean that any error, material or otherwise, was made.

16. Paragraph 276B provides as follows:

         "276B.   The requirements to be met by an applicant for  indefinite
               leave to remain on the  ground  of  long  residence  in  the
               United Kingdom are that:

                (i)(a) he has had at  least  ten  years'  continuous  lawful
                    residence in the United Kingdom.

                (ii)   Having regard to the public  interest  there  are  no
                    reasons why it will be undesirable for him to  be  given
                    indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the  ground  of  long
                    residence, taking into account his;

                    (a)    age; and

                    (b)    strength of connections in  the  United  Kingdom;
                        and

                    (c)    personal history, including  character,  conduct,
                        associations and employment record; and

                    (d)    domestic circumstances; and

                    (e)    compassionate circumstances; and

                    (f)    any  representations  received  on  the  person's
                        behalf; and

                (iii)  the applicant does not fall  for  refusal  under  the
                    general grounds for refusal.

                (iv)   the applicant has demonstrated  sufficient  knowledge
                    of the English and sufficient knowledge  about  life  in
                    the United Kingdom, in accordance with Appendix KoLL;

                (v)    the applicant must not be in  the  UK  in  breach  of
                    immigration laws except any period of overstaying for  a
                    period of 28 days or less will be disregarded,  as  well
                    as any period of overstaying between  periods  of  entry
                    clearance, leave to enter or leave to remain of up to 28
                    days and any period of overstaying and in  determination
                    of an application made within that 28 day period."

17. Whilst I accept that the judge ideally ought  to  have  set  out  those
    provisions, particularly in this case as the appellant was  relying  on
    Section 120 Notice and effectively the authority of  AS  (Afghanistan),
    there is no material error in her failing to do so.

18. The judge indicated at paragraph [5] that the  appellant  was  pursuing
    only an application  for  leave  to  remain  on  the  grounds  of  long
    residence.  The judge then directed herself at paragraph [10] that  the
    burden of proof was on the appellant to "establish that  he  meets  the
    Immigration Rules or in the alternative he  is  entitled  to  leave  to
    remain outside of the Immigration Rules" and she correctly set out  the
    appropriate standard of proof.  The judge then went on  to  record  the
    appellant's evidence including in  relation  to  his  arrival  and  his
    absences from the UK.  This included that the appellant  had  completed
    studies in the UK and has passed the Life in the UK Test as well  as  a
    Master of Business Administration (such was not disputed).  At [13]  it
    was further recorded that the appellant has many family members in  the
    UK and that during his years of study and self-employment has developed
    strong friendships and associates and that none of  this  evidence  was
    challenged.  The judge reiterated that the appellant had  produced  the
    original certificate of his Masters' degree and corroborating  evidence
    of his  business  and  partnership  with  his  colleague.   Finally  at
    paragraph [14] the judge stated that the appellant had  confirmed  that
    he was a man of good character with no criminal convictions and who has
    an established marketing business partner and was seeking to remain  in
    the UK making a meaningful contribution to society.

19. As already noted Mr Kotas conceded that the Presenting Officer's  notes
    of the hearing confirmed that there were  no  challenges  made  to  the
    appellant's  evidence  or  case.   That  is  in  line  with  both   the
    appellant's reply to the Secretary of State's grounds for permission to
    appeal and with the record of proceedings.

20. The judge continued at paragraph [15] to indicate that  she  had  taken
    into account all of the evidence and the appellant's submissions.  This
    is corroborative of Mr Shah's account that there were no  questions  or
    submissions from the Presenting Officer.  As already  noted  the  judge
    again confirmed receipt of the appellant's ground of appeal citing long
    residence.  The judge went on to set out that  the  evidence  from  the
    appellant included documents exhibited with his  statement,  copies  of
    his  identification  documents  together  with  business  details   and
    additional information within his passport.

21. The judge found, at [17] the evidence of the appellant to be  "entirely
    consistent and credible".  In the penultimate paragraph of the decision
    the judge confirmed the burden was with the  appellant  to  demonstrate
    that he "meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules".  She went on
    to state that under the long residence Rule it was upon  the  appellant
    to establish continued lawful residence in the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    consistent period of ten years and that there was no dispute as to when
    the appellant entered the UK and that he had  remained  lawfully  since
    that date.  The judge continued that:

         "In the circumstances I find that the appellant has discharged  the
         burden upon him and I therefore allow this appeal."

    She repeated this at [19] stating that "for the reasons outlined  above
    I allow this appeal".

22. Whilst the judge in a fuller decision might have set  out  individually
    the reasons why she  accepted  that  the  appellant  met  each  of  the
    individual requirements of  276B,  I  am  satisfied  that  reading  her
    decision and reasons as a whole she had in mind all of  the  provisions
    of the Rule 276B setting out as she did the appellant's background  and
    the strength of his connections in the United Kingdom, his history, his
    character, his circumstances in the UK, his English language  knowledge
    and Life in the UK Test and that he confirmed his travel to the  United
    Kingdom.  It is significant that no challenge was made in  relation  to
    any of the evidence and indeed it is not contended by Mr Kotas that any
    submissions were made at the hearing that the appellant  did  not  meet
    any of the requirements of 276B.

23. I am satisfied that the  judge  in  finding  as  she  did  in  all  the
    circumstances that the appellant had discharged the burden of proof  on
    him that the judge properly assessed the appellant's appeal against all
    the requirements of 276B and found that the appellant has satisfied all
    of the required elements.

24. As I indicated at the hearing, the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    does not contain a material error of law and shall stand.

No anonymity direction was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Date:  24 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appellant's successful appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal  stands
I make a full fee award in respect of the appellant's fees.



Signed                                  Date 24 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

