
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24799/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd November 2016                |On 23rd November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                       MR VINODKUMAR KOTHARI SUBRAMANI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Malhotra (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal  by  the  Appellant  who  is  a
    national of India born on 24th June 1977. He appeals against a Decision
    and Reasons of First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese promulgated  on  26th
    February 2016.

 2. The Appellant entered the UK in August 2009 with entry clearance  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) student migrant valid until February  2011.  That  was
    extended until 7th September 2014. The Appellant then submitted an  EEA
    application which was refused in October 2014. Since then the Appellant
    has been an overstayer.

 3. He then made an application for leave to  remain  based  on  his  human
    rights, the refusal of which was the subject of the appeal  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. By the time the case came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal the sole issue and ground  upon  which  the  Appellant  sought
    leave to remain was that he is the sole carer of a  young  man  who  is
    quadriplegic following a road traffic accident.

 4. Judge Abebrese dismissed the appeal.

 5. The grounds upon which  permission  to  appeal  was  granted,  although
    lengthy boil down to one issue namely that the  Judge  did  not  engage
    with the GPs evidence as to the effect of the Appellant's removal on Mr
    Whitehead, the person being cared for, and that it  was  not  only  the
    private life of the Appellant that was relevant to the appeal but  also
    the private life of Mr Whitehead who is a British national.

 6. It is accepted that the Appellant does not meet any of the requirements
    of the Immigration Rules. It is argued on his  behalf  that  there  are
    compelling reasons to consider Article 8  outside  the  Rules  in  this
    case; the compelling reason being the effect of the Appellant's removal
    upon Mr Whitehead.

 7. Despite a request, I was not assisted by the Appellant's representative
    as to why it is that the private life of a British  citizen,  unrelated
    to this Appellant should fall for consideration in the  appeal.  Beoku-
    Betts [2008] UKHL 39 made clear that when considering  the  Article  8,
    family life of an  Appellant,  family  life  necessarily  involves  the
    family unit as a whole. There is one family life enjoyed by the  family
    unit and therefore the decision impacts upon all members of the  family
    and therefore the effect on the family life of other family members has
    to be considered. That however is a far cry from finding  that  another
    individual's private life,  however  impacted  by  the  removal  of  an
    Appellant should form part of the assessment. The Appellant's appeal is
    on the basis and can only be on the basis, I  find,  that  his  private
    life; his right to a private life will be disproportionately interfered
    with if he is removed. It is quite clear from the First-tier Tribunal's
    decision that will not be the case. The Appellant  has  maintained  his
    links with his family in India, he has  been  an  overstayer  and  thus
    unlawfully in the UK since 2014. He has been working illegally and  any
    private life that he has built up has been  for  five  years  when  his
    status was precarious and since then unlawful.

 8. The Appellant could not possibly succeed based on any interference with
    his private life.

 9. Based on what I have said above it  is  my  view  that  Mr  Whitehead's
    private life is not  a  matter  for  consideration  by  this  Tribunal.
    However, if I am wrong in  that  view  I  nevertheless  find  that  his
    private life would not suffer an interference such as to be a breach of
    Article 8 if the Appellant were removed.

10. It is said that the First-tier Tribunal gave inadequate weight  to  the
    medical evidence. The medical evidence was a letter from Mr Whitehead's
    GP in which he praised the Appellant's care of him and indicated how Mr
    Whitehead's physical and mental health had lifted during his  excellent
    care.

11. However, the Appellant is employed by a  care  agency  which  allocates
    carers to those requiring personal care. I  do  not  know  whether  the
    agency is aware that they have been committing an offence by  employing
    a foreign national without status. However, that is not material to the
    decision I have to make.

12. The situation is that the Appellant is an  employee,  employed  by  the
    agency to work caring for Mr Whitehead. There is no doubt that the care
    he has been provided has been excellent; so much is acknowledged by  Mr
    Whitehead himself and the professional witnesses, including the GP.  It
    is said that Mr Whitehead has had a number of carers, 15 in total  over
    the last 15 years and that he has not felt comfortable  or  happy  with
    any of them prior to the Appellant. The GP suggests in his letter  that
    it would not be possible to find another person to provide the level of
    care provided by this appellant. That is speculation.  The  UK  has  an
    obligation to provide care for those in need, such as Mr Whitehead.

13. I have no doubt  that  Mr  Whitehead  has  come  to  depend  upon  this
    Appellant. He has come  to  trust  him  and  is  comfortable  with  his
    provision of personal-care. However, that relationship is that of nurse
    and  patient.  Such  relationships  often   become   close   but   such
    relationships also come to an end for a variety of reasons.  It  is  in
    reality a professional relationship. The Appellant does  not,  contrary
    to a suggestion in the GPs letter, live with Mr  Whitehead  but  rather
    lives in relatively close proximity. He does not provide  24-hour  care
    as he does not sleep at Mr  Whitehead's  home.  Furthermore,  there  is
    reference to his twice being away on holiday to India when  alternative
    provision had to be found; as it would be if the Appellant  became  ill
    for any reason. The provision of care is a matter for Mr Whitehead  and
    the agency and it is a matter for the agency  to  ensure  that  a  care
    giver is suitable to meet Mr Whitehead's needs. I simply do not  accept
    that the Appellant is the only person who can do this.

14. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not ignore the medical  evidence.  He
    specifically refers to it in the Decision and Reasons at paragraph  10.
    However, that evidence is not sufficient to support a finding that  the
    Appellant must be allowed to remain in the UK.  The  Appellant  is,  at
    the end of the day undertaking paid employment which could cease at any
    time for any number of reasons.

15. For all of the above reasons I find the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    make an error of law material to the outcome of  the  appeal.  For  the
    reasons I have given I can see no basis upon which  this  appeal  could
    succeed and endorse the finding of First-tier Tribunal when he said  at
    paragraph 15:-"The Appellant and Mr Whitehead claim that  the  standard
    of treatment cannot be obtained from any other carer. The tribunal does
    not believe this is the case as the carers  with  the  agency  are  all
    working to the same professional standard and relationships can develop
    if one is being treated by a particular carer over a period of time."

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 22nd November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

