
IAC-AH-DP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24627/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th June 2015                    |On 6th July 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     f o
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs P Glass of Counsel instructed by Ronik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal JDL Edwards (the Judge) promulgated on 12th February 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Ghana born in May 1976 who applied
    for a derivative residence card to enable her to continue to reside  in
    the United Kingdom as the parent of a British child.  The Appellant has
    a daughter to whom I shall refer as J,  who  was  born  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 5th September 2008.  J is  a  British  citizen  because  her
    father, GK, is a British citizen.

 3.  The  application  was  refused  on  29th  May  2014.   The  Respondent
    considered the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006,
    and the application was refused with reference to regulation 15A(4A)(c)
    as it was not accepted that J would have to leave the United Kingdom if
    the Appellant had to leave.  The Respondent contended that GK would  be
    able to assume primary responsibility for the child,  and  therefore  J
    could live with her father if the Appellant had  to  return  to  Ghana.
    The Respondent did not accept that the appeal could succeed  under  the
    2006 regulations.

 4. It was noted that the Appellant  wished,  in  addition,  to  rely  upon
    Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention on  Human  Rights  (the  1950
    Convention) but the Respondent declined to consider this, on the  basis
    that the Appellant had not made a valid application based upon  Article
    8.

 5. The appeal was heard by the Judge on 9th February  2015  and  dismissed
    under the 2006 regulations and the Judge found that Article 8  was  not
    engaged as there was no suggestion that the Appellant should be removed
    from the United Kingdom.

 6. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and the appeal came before me on 22nd May 2015.   In  brief  summary  I
    found that the Judge had erred in law.  The Judge did not make findings
    on all material matters, and made findings on some immaterial  matters.
    The findings were  brief  and  did  not  adequately  analyse  and  make
    findings upon the relevant issues in the appeal.  The Judge found  that
    the Appellant had failed to provide  sufficient  credible  evidence  to
    discharge the burden of proof, but no adequate reasons were  given  for
    reaching that conclusion.  The Judge had recorded at  paragraph  21  of
    his decision that none of  the  documentation  from  J's  school  named
    either of her parents, but that was  factually  inaccurate.   A  letter
    from the school dated 29th January 2015 specifically  referred  to  the
    Appellant,  and  confirmed  that  she  attended  school  meetings   and
    collected her daughter from school, and this was contained at  page  18
    of the Appellant's bundle which was before the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside with no  findings
    preserved.  Full details of the application for permission,  the  grant
    of permission by Judge Lever, and my reasons for finding  an  error  of
    law are contained in my decision dated 26th May 2015.  The  hearing  on
    22nd May 2015 was adjourned so that further evidence could be given.

Re-Making the Decision

Preliminary Issues

 8. I ascertained that I had received  all  documentation  upon  which  the
    parties intended to rely.  I had the Respondent's bundle with Annexes A-
    K, the Appellant's bundle comprising 106  pages,  a  witness  statement
    prepared by the Appellant's aunt Mrs O dated 28th  May  2015,  and  the
    Appellant's skeleton argument prepared by Mrs Glass.

 9. Mrs Glass confirmed that the  Appellant's  case  was  that  the  appeal
    should be allowed with reference to the 2006 regulations, but  if  not,
    the   Appellant   relied   upon   Article   8,   and   in   considering
    proportionality, the best interests of the  child  must  be  a  primary
    consideration.

10. Ms Everett advised that the Respondent's position was  that  Article  8
    was not engaged as this was an application for a  residence  card,  and
    there was no removal decision.

11. Both representatives indicated that they  were  ready  to  proceed  and
    there was no application for an adjournment.

Oral Evidence

12. I firstly heard evidence from the Appellant in English.  There  was  no
    need for an interpreter.  The Appellant adopted  the  contents  of  her
    witness statement dated 28th January 2015 which may  be  summarised  as
    follows.

13. The Appellant is the biological mother  of  J,  and  she  is  a  single
    parent.  J is a British national who was born in the United Kingdom  on
    5th September 2008.

14. J's father, GK, and the Appellant did not marry.  The Appellant  and  J
    were abandoned by GK and he has played no part in J's upbringing.

15. In 2011 the Appellant arranged through mutual friends to meet GK to ask
    him for financial support.  She met him again in 2013  to  ask  him  to
    make an application for child benefit for his daughter.  The  Appellant
    understood that she could not obtain child benefit as she did not  have
    any legal immigration status in the United Kingdom.   She  had  entered
    this country as a visitor and overstayed.

16. An arrangement was made that GK received child  benefit  payments  into
    his bank account, and he then transferred money  into  the  Appellant's
    account.  This is the only link that the Appellant and J have with him.
     The Appellant does not have a telephone contact number for him.

17. The Appellant believes that GK receives �83 per month by way  of  child
    benefit, but he transfers less than this to her bank  account,  thereby
    keeping some  of  the  benefit  for  himself.   He  makes  no  personal
    financial contribution towards the upkeep of his daughter.

18. The Appellant and J live with the Appellant's aunt, and  the  Appellant
    is the only person who takes decisions  about  her  daughter's  health,
    maintenance and welfare.  She collects her daughter and  picks  her  up
    from school, and the only other person who plays any role in  this,  is
    the Appellant's aunt.

19. Other than brief meetings with her daughter's father in 2011 and  2013,
    the Appellant and her daughter have had no contact with  him  since  he
    attended to register his daughter's birth in 2008.

20. In answering questions put by Mrs Glass the Appellant confirmed that GK
    has no involvement in his daughter's upbringing.  They have never lived
    together as a family.  The Appellant and J live in a property owned  by
    the Appellant's aunt.  GK has never lived there.

21. When cross-examined the Appellant stated that she understood she had no
    right to apply for child benefit for her daughter, because of her  lack
    of legal immigration status.  The Appellant  does  not  know  where  GK
    lives and has no contact with him.

22. I then heard evidence from Mrs O the Appellant's aunt who  adopted  her
    witness statement dated 28th  May  2015  which  may  be  summarised  as
    follows.

23. Mrs O is a British national and lives with her  niece,  the  Appellant,
    and the Appellant's daughter J.  Mrs O confirmed that  J's  father  has
    not been in contact with his daughter.  It is the Appellant  who  cares
    for all her daughter's essential needs,  which  includes  material  and
    emotional needs, and taking  her  to  and  from  school  and  attending
    parents' and teachers' meetings at school.

24. In answering questions put by Mrs  Glass,  Mrs  O  confirmed  that  J's
    father had never lived with the Appellant and J to her knowledge.   The
    only people who pick J up from school are the Appellant and Mrs O.  She
    had never seen J's father play any role in her life.

25. When cross-examined Mrs O said that she had only seen J's father  once,
    which is when they were going to register J's birth.  Mrs O  said  that
    the Appellant and J had been living with her  for  approximately  seven
    years.

The Respondent's Submissions

26. Ms Everett relied upon the reasons for refusal letter  dated  29th  May
    2014.  I was asked to find that J's father played a role in  her  life,
    as evidenced by the fact that he received child benefit  for  her,  and
    thereafter transferred it to the Appellant.  Ms Everett submitted  that
    J's father could therefore look after her,  if  the  Appellant  had  to
    leave the United Kingdom.

27. Ms Everett therefore argued that the  appeal  could  not  succeed  with
    reference to the 2006 regulations, and as Article 8  was  not  engaged,
    the appeal should be dismissed.

The Appellant's Submissions

28. Mrs Glass relied upon her skeleton argument with the exception  of  the
    concluding paragraph which had been included in error.  I was asked  to
    accept the evidence given by both witnesses at the hearing as  credible
    and to accept that J's father had played no part in her upbringing, and
    that his only involvement was to transfer some  of  the  child  benefit
    payments he received to the Appellant.  I was asked to find that if the
    Appellant had to leave the United Kingdom,  J  would  not  be  able  to
    remain and live with her father.  I was asked to note that  documentary
    evidence in the Appellant's bundle, contained letters from J's  school,
    and medical letters, and none referred to or were addressed to  GK.   I
    was therefore asked to allow the appeal  with  reference  to  the  2006
    regulations.

29.  In  the  alternative,  if  the  appeal  was  dismissed   under   those
    regulations, I was asked to consider Article 8 outside the  Immigration
    Rules, and allow the appeal on the  basis  that  it  would  be  in  the
    child's best interests to remain with her mother in the United Kingdom.

30. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

31. I have taken into account all the evidence, both oral and  documentary,
    that has been placed before me, and taken into account the  submissions
    made by both representatives.

32. I have considered the evidence in the round,  and  taken  into  account
    that when considering the 2006 regulations, the burden of proof  is  on
    the Appellant, and the standard of proof is a balance of probability.

33. I set out below regulation 15A(4A) of the 2006 regulations;

    '(4A)    P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if -

         (a)  P is the primary carer of a  British  citizen  ("the  relevant
             British citizen");

         (b)  the  relevant  British  citizen  is  residing  in  the  United
             Kingdom; and

         (c)  the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in  the
             UK or in another EEA State if P were required to leave.'

34. The Respondent refused  the  application,  taking  the  view  that  the
    British citizen child would be able to continue to reside in the United
    Kingdom if her mother, the Appellant, were required to  leave,  because
    she could reside with her British citizen father GK.

35. It is common ground that GK is a British citizen, and because  of  this
    so is J.

36. Regulation  15A(4A)(7)  defines  "primary  carer"  as  being  a  direct
    relative or legal guardian of a person, who has primary  responsibility
    for that person's care, or shares equally the responsibility  for  that
    person's care with one other person who is not  an  exempt  person.   A
    British citizen is an exempt person.

37. I find that the Appellant  is  her  daughter's  primary  carer.   I  am
    satisfied that they  are  related  as  mother  and  daughter,  and  the
    Appellant has primary responsibility for her daughter's care.   I  find
    that there is no satisfactory evidence that GK has  had,  or  has,  any
    responsibility for his daughter's care.  I  make  this  finding  having
    placed weight upon the evidence of the Appellant, and her aunt  Mrs  O.
    In particular I accept Mrs O's evidence, that  the  Appellant  and  her
    daughter have lived with her for approximately seven years, and in that
    time Mrs O has been GK only once.

38. I place weight upon a letter from J's school dated 29th  January  2015,
    at page 18 of the Appellant's bundle.  This refers to the Appellant  by
    name, and is addressed  to  the  Appellant's  solicitors.   The  letter
    confirms that J attends the school,  and  is  written  by  the  interim
    principal, who  confirms  having  spoken  to  the  teaching  staff  who
    verified that the Appellant attends school  meetings,  and  brings  and
    collects J from school for approximately 90% of the time.

39. I accept Mrs O's evidence, that when J is not collected from school  by
    the Appellant, it is Mrs O who collects her.  I  note  that  there  are
    letters at pages 34-36 of the Appellant's bundle from J's school, which
    although addressed generally to parents and carers, have been signed by
    the Appellant giving permission for J to  attend  Saturday  school  and
    giving her name as the individual who will  pick  her  up,  and  giving
    permission for J to attend dance club on Wednesdays  after  school  and
    confirming that Mrs O will pick her up, and naming the Appellant  as  a
    member of the parent representative group at school.

40. I note that there is a letter from J's general practitioner dated  13th
    January 2015, confirming that J has been registered  with  the  surgery
    since 5th September 2008, and referring to the  Appellant  by  name  as
    being her mother.

41. There is no documentary evidence which makes any reference to GK having
    any responsibility for J.

42. I note regulation 15A(8) which confirms  that  a  person  will  not  be
    regarded as having responsibility for another  person's  care  for  the
    purpose of paragraph (7) on the sole basis of a financial  contribution
    towards that person's care.

43.  I  do  not  find  that  J's  father  has  made  a  personal  financial
    contribution  towards  her  care.   I  am  satisfied  that   his   only
    involvement has been to pass on to the  Appellant  some  of  the  child
    benefit received.  I accept that the Appellant believes that she is not
    entitled to receive the child  benefit  directly,  because  she  is  an
    overstayer in this country with no legal status.

44. I therefore have decided that the Appellant is the primary carer of her
    daughter because  of  a  combination  of  the  evidence  given  by  the
    Appellant and Mrs O, together with the documentary evidence referred to
    above.

45. I then have to decide whether J would be unable to reside in the UK  or
    in another EEA State if  the  Appellant  was  required  to  leave  this
    country.  It has not been suggested that the Appellant has the right to
    live in any other EEA country.  If she had to leave the United Kingdom,
    she would have to  return  to  Ghana,  where  she  is  a  citizen.   In
    considering this issue I have taken into account the guidance given  by
    the Upper Tribunal in MA  and  SM  (Iran)  [2013]  UKUT  380  (IAC)  at
    paragraph 41, in which conclusions reached by Hickinbottom J  in  Jamil
    Sanneh v (1) Secretary of State for  Work  and  Pensions  and  (2)  the
    Commissioners for Her Majesty's  Revenue  &  Customs  [2013]  EWHC  793
    (Admin) were adopted.  I  set  out  below  paragraph  41(ii)  in  part,
    together with paragraph 41(iii) and (iv);

    '(ii)    The rights of an EU child will not be infringed if he  is  not
         compelled to leave.   Therefore,  even  where  a  non-EU  ascendant
         relative is compelled to leave EU territory, the Article 20  rights
         of an EU child will not be infringed if there is another  ascendant
         relative who has the right of residence in the EU, and who can  and
         will in practice care for the child.

    (iii)    It is for the national courts to determine, as a  question  of
         fact on the evidence before it, whether  an  EU  citizen  would  be
         compelled to leave the EU to follow a non-EU national upon whom  he
         is dependent.

    (iv) Nothing less than such compulsion will engage Articles 20  and  21
         of the TFEU.  In particular, EU law will not be engaged  where  the
         EU citizen is not compelled to leave the EU, even if the quality or
         standard of life of the EU citizen is diminished as a result of the
         non-EU national upon whom he is dependent is (for example)  removed
         or prevented from working; although

         (a)  diminution in the quality of life might engage EU law if  (and
             only if) it is sufficient in practice to compel  the  relevant
             ascendant relative, and hence the  EU  dependent  citizen,  to
             leave, and

         (b)  such actions as removal or prevention of work may result in an
             interference with some other  right,  such  as  the  right  to
             respect for family  life  under  Article  8  of  the  European
             Convention on Human Rights.'

46. Applying the guidance set out above,  I  have  to  decide  whether  J's
    father can and will in practice care for her, if the Appellant  has  to
    leave the United Kingdom, and this is a question  of  fact  for  me  to
    decide on the evidence.

47. I conclude that J's father will not in practice care for her.   I  base
    this finding upon the fact that I have found  that  he  has  played  no
    meaningful  part  in  her  upbringing,  and  has   not   accepted   any
    responsibility for her since she was born, other than to transfer  some
    of the child benefit that he receives to the Appellant.

48. I have found both the Appellant and Mrs O to be credible on this issue,
    and the totality of the evidence indicates that J's  father  has  never
    lived in the same family unit with her, has had no  meaningful  contact
    with her, and I find that his refusal to take responsibility  to  date,
    indicates on a balance of probabilities that he would not  be  willing,
    and would not in practice, care for J in the absence of the Appellant.

49. For those reasons I find  that  the  criteria  set  out  in  regulation
    15A(4A) are satisfied, as the Appellant  is  the  primary  carer  of  a
    British citizen child, who is resident in the United Kingdom,  and  who
    in practice would be unable to reside in this country, if the Appellant
    had to leave.

50. As I conclude  that  the  appeal  should  be  allowed  under  the  2006
    regulations, it is not necessary for me to go on and consider Article 8
    as an alternative.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal  is  allowed  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2006.

Anonymity

I was not asked to make an  anonymity  order,  but  I  make  such  an  order
because this appeal involves  consideration  of  the  interest  of  a  minor
child.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify the Appellant or any member of her family.  Failure to comply  with
this direction could amount to a contempt of  court.   This  order  is  made
pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed   Date: 23rd June 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Because the appeal is allowed I  have  considered  whether  to  make  a  fee
award.  I take into account that the appeal  has  been  allowed  because  of
evidence presented to the Tribunal that was not initially presented  to  the
decision maker.  I find that it is not appropriate to make a fee  award  and
no fee award is made.



Signed   Date: 23rd June 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

