
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/24642/2013
                                                               IA/24643/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5th February 2014                            |On 17th June 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                      (1) mr Veeravasantha Rao Rayipudi
                       (2) Mr Sudheer Kumar Paladugula
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Z Khan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (HOPO)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M A Khan promulgated on 28th November 2013, following  a  hearing
    at Hatton Cross on 22nd November 2013.  In the determination, the judge
    dismissed the appeal of Veeravasantha Rao Rayipudi  and  Sudheer  Kumar
    Paladugula.  The Appellants applied for, and were  granted,  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are citizens of India, born on 21st  December  1985  and
    15th May 1987, respectively, and both have made a joint application  as
    Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrants, on 19th October 2012 and  8th  November
    2012 respectively.  Their application was dismissed by  the  Respondent
    on 5th June  2013.   There  were  separate  refusal  letters  similarly
    worded.  The Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellants  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 245DD(b) of HC 395.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The essential issue in this appeal was  whether,  documents  which  the
    Respondent had indicated by email  could  be  sent  to  the  Respondent
    decision-maker prior to the time of the  decision,  had  been  properly
    sent, so as to raise an  expectation  that  they  would  be  considered
    before a decision was made.  At  the  hearing  before  the  judge,  the
    Appellants accepted in a joint statement that they had not been able to
    send the documents requested  by  email  by  the  time  set  for  their
    submission in the Respondent's email, because they had not yet received
    the specified documents from India themselves (paragraph 27).

 4. However, they still nonetheless  relied  upon  the  case  of  Rodriguez
    (which at the time had not been decided  on  appeal  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal) and their argument was that since August 2009 UKBA had operated
    a policy relating to the processing of applications under  the  points-
    based system which required a degree of evidential  flexibility  to  be
    shown in cases of this kind.  The  judge  held  that,  given  that  the
    Respondent had not received the documents  by  the  date  specified  in
    their email to the Appellants, the applications fell  to  be  dismissed
    and no issues were raised of evidential  flexibility.   The  Appellants
    were not entitled to 75 points claimed by them to qualify  for  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) status.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds state that the judge should have  taken  into  account  the
    policy  instructions  issued  to   caseworkers   that   if   additional
    information was received it should be considered.  Even though, in this
    case the information was received after the deadline date  set  by  the
    Respondent decision-maker, the decision in question still had not  been
    made, and so if the information arrived after the said date, it  should
    have been taken into account.

 6. On 17th December 2013, permission to appeal was granted.

 7. On 2nd January 2014, a Rule 24 response was entered.





Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me, Mr Z Khan of Counsel,  submitted  that  three
    separate pieces of information had been tendered.  There was  a  letter
    from the bank, a declaration from the third party Sponsor, and a  legal
    representative's letter.  Only the first and second of these  documents
    were questioned.  This was clear  from  paragraph  11  of  the  refusal
    letter.

 9. Mr Khan submitted that he  would  have  to  accept  that  the  original
    letters did not contain the Appellant's name.  However, if one looks at
    the documents at I1 to I4, it  is  clear  that  there  were  additional
    documents submitted as well.  These were sent before the  decision  was
    made.  They should have been taken into account.   The  refusal  letter
    does not even refer to them.  Second, paragraph 41-SD does not  contain
    a requirement that there must be a telephone number.  It only  requires
    disclosure of a telephone number if one exists.  The same  applies  for
    an email.

10. Mr Khan further explained that on 10th May 2013, the Secretary of State
    required of the Appellants to have sent to her the necessary  documents
    within fourteen days.  However, the Appellants were  in  a  predicament
    because  they  were  still  awaiting  these   documents   from   India.
    Therefore, the Appellants requested a further extension of time.

11. On 31st May 2013, they did then send the information requested  to  the
    Respondent decision-maker.  The caseworker did  in  an  email  grant  a
    seven day extension.  That  took  the  Appellants  to  3rd  June  2013.
    However the additional information was sent by the Appellants  only  on
    3rd June 2013 itself.  Mr Khan submitted that they would have to accept
    that it was not sent even by the  time  of  the  second  extended  time
    limit.

12. However, his point was that the refusal letter shows that the  decision
    was then made on  5th  June  2013,  and  during  this  time,  the  late
    information could have been taken into account.  This is not  a  matter
    that is covered by the decision in Rodriguez.

13. It is  a  matter,  he  submits,  that  is  covered  by  the  evidential
    flexibility policy which  states  that  if  additional  information  is
    received prior to the decision being made  "this  must  be  taken  into
    account by the caseworker.  This applies even if a refusal decision has
    been completed but the case has not been despatched on CIDs" (see  page
    2 of 16).

14. For his part, Mr Walker submitted that there was no evidence  that  the
    additional information, which is claimed to have been sent on 3rd  June
    2013, but prior to the decision being made two days later on  5th  June
    2013, was ever before the caseworker. Mr Walker, in his  usual  helpful
    and constructive manner, assisted the Tribunal by handing  up  the  CID
    notes, which he maintained had been provided to the  original  Tribunal
    judge as well, and these are dated 5th June 2013, and they state  that,
    "note of the third party bank letters that have been provided give  the
    names of the applicants that money is available to them  or  a  contact
    telephone number for the third party. Additionally two of  the  letters
    are not official headed paper from the bank ..."

15. In reply, however, Mr Khan submitted that, this only made the case  for
    the Appellants easier to dispose of.  This is because if one  looks  at
    the documentation at I1 to 14, in the Respondent's own  bundle,  it  is
    clear that all the information was in fact provided.  What is  said  at
    CID notes is not correct.  Furthermore, if one looks  at  the  lawyer's
    letters at J1, it is  clear  that  there  was  information  before  the
    decision-maker which was not properly taken into account.

Error of Law and Remaking the Decision

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error of law (see Section 12(1)  of  TCEA  2007)  such
    that I should set aside that decision and remake  the  decision.   This
    case is  not  expressly  about  Rodriguez,  whether  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, or whether more recently before the Court of Appeal.

17. It is expressly about the  'Evidential  Flexibility  Policy',  and  the
    Notes provided by the Secretary of State  to  her  caseworkers.   These
    make it quite clear (see page 2 of 16), that if information is provided
    additionally, which is received prior to the decision, then "this  must
    be taken into account by the caseworker" even if the  refusal  decision
    has been completed, provided it has not been despatched on the CID.

18. If the information was sent on 3rd June 2013, it  was  likely  to  have
    been received the following day on 4th June 2013, but in any  event  by
    5th June 2013, but certainly it was received before  the  decision  was
    actually made.  The CID notes, handed  up  by  Mr  Walker  before  this
    Tribunal, and which were importantly for consideration  by  Judge  Khan
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, do  not  accurately  reflect  the
    position, because they do not refer to the  additional  documents  that
    are in the bundle at I1 to I4.  This is a matter of due process.

19. The Rules are promulgated by the  Secretary  of  State.   The  guidance
    notes are formulated by the Secretary of State for  the  assistance  of
    caseworkers.  They are in the public domain.  Applicants  making  their
    applications as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur have access to them.  Ultimately,
    the issue is one of the Rule of law.  Has the Rule of law been followed
    in this case?  It is clear that it has not.

20. If information was despatched and  received  before  the  date  of  the
    decision, then it is clear that the evidential flexibility  policy  was
    not properly and faithfully followed because the injunction is clear to
    caseworkers that they must take such information into account.  What is
    entered on the CID is quite different from  what  is  the  position  in
    reality.  As such, it was bound to have led to the wrong decision.

21. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the making  of  the  decision  by  the
    judge involved the making of an error on a point of  law  (see  Section
    12(1) of TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside that  decision.   This
    is because the information enclosed at I1 to I4 has not been taken into
    account by the caseworker prior to the making of a decision.  It should
    be taken into account.  I do not, however, remake the decision.

22. It is not for this Tribunal to  make  the  original  decision  for  the
    decision-maker  on  the  documents  that  have  not  been   considered.
    Accordingly, this matter  must  be  remitted  back  to  the  Respondent
    decision-maker for a fresh decision on the documentation that has  been
    submitted, which needs to be faithfully carried out on the basis of all
    the evidence that has now been submitted.

Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  This appeal is allowed to the extent  that  it  is
    remitted back to the Respondent authority to remake on the basis of the
    evidence before that body, and in  particular  the  evidence  that  has
    additionally been provided at pages I1 to I4.

24. No anonymity order is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss


