

                                    [pic]
The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/24338/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On April 7, 2015                     |On April 15, 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                               MR LAMIN GIBBA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Ahmed, Counsel, instructed by Queen's Park Solicitors
Respondent  Ms Johnstone (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Gambia. He entered the United Kingdom  as
    a visitor Appellant on July 7, 2012 with a visa  valid  until  December
    15, 2012. He claimed to have met his "wife" in the Gambia in  May  2011
    where they grew up. The sponsor returned to live in the United  Kingdom
    and they continued to communicate in their local  Gambian  dialect.  On
    arrival in the United Kingdom he contacted the sponsor and they met  up
    in August 2012.  The  sponsor  moved  to  work  in  Birmingham  and  in
    September and November 2012 she invited the appellant to come and  stay
    with her. The appellant overstayed and at the end of January 2013  they
    spent a whole week together and returned to London together. They lived
    apart but decided to marry in September 2013.  They  held  a  customary
    marriage by proxy on September 3, 2013 in Gambia because the  appellant
    was unable to travel to the Gambia due to his immigration status.  This
    customary marriage was registered and sealed on January 15, 2014 at the
    Banjul Islamic Court. Since their "marriage" they have  lived  together
    as husband and wife at [- ] Blackburn.

 2. On April 25, 2014 the appellant applied for a  residence  card  as  the
    spouse of a Dutch national. The respondent considered  the  application
    but refused it on May 28, 2014  stating  the  proxy  marriage  was  not
    recognised  by  the  Dutch  authorities  and  in  the  alternative  the
    respondent refused to exercise his discretion in  issuing  a  residence
    card to an extended family member because the appellant and his  "wife"
    had failed to demonstrate they were in a durable relationship.

 3. The appellant appealed that decision on  May  30,  2014  under  section
    82(1)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002   and
    Regulation 26 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 4. The matter came before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Edwards  on
    October 17, 2014 and in a decision promulgated on October 30,  2014  he
    refused the appellant's appeal finding the proxy marriage was not legal
    and the parties had failed  to  demonstrate  they  were  in  a  durable
    relationship.

 5. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on November 3,  2014  submitting
    the FtTJ had erred by failing to have regard  to  the  expert  evidence
    that had been submitted on proxy marriages and in the  alternative  had
    failed to give due consideration to all of the evidence in  respect  of
    their durable relationship.

 6. On December 19,  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Page  gave
    permission to appeal finding the determination contained a  paucity  of
    reasons for finding the marriage was  not  genuine  and  permission  to
    appeal was given on all grounds.

 7. The matter came before me on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above. The appellant  and  his  "wife"  were  in
    attendance.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 8. Mr Hussain adopted the grounds of appeal and  submitted  the  FtTJ  had
    failed to have proper regard to the expert evidence of both  Mr  Cherno
    Marenah and Jakob Wedemeijer. The former expert had made clear  that  a
    failure to register the marriage within one  month  did  not  make  the
    marriage void and the latter stated that under article 10.31 a marriage
    contracted outside of the Netherlands and valid under the  law  of  the
    State where it took place was recognised as a valid marriage. The  FtTJ
    should have accepted the marriage was valid. Alternatively,  there  was
    ample evidence of a durable relationship in the  form  of  written  and
    oral evidence and various documents that had been submitted. There  was
    no requirement to be together for two  years  and  the  FtTJ  erred  by
    failing to  make  adequate  findings  on  the  evidence  of  a  durable
    relationship.

 9. Ms Johnstone submitted  neither  Mr  Marenah  nor  Mr  Wedemeijer  were
    experts. The former was a barrister and solicitor of the Supreme  Court
    and the latter was an advocate. Neither person was  an  expert  witness
    but had merely provided an opinion on Dutch law.  The  FtTJ  considered
    their opinions in paragraphs [20] and [21]  of  his  determination  and
    made findings that were open to him.  The  Tribunal  in  Kareem  (Proxy
    marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT  00024(IAC)  made  clear  that  without
    independent and reliable evidence regarding how the laws of  a  country
    are applied it should be assumed the Tribunal is likely to be unable to
    find that sufficient evidence has been provided to discharge the burden
    of proof. Mere production of legal materials from the  EEA  country  or
    country where the marriage took place  will  be  insufficient  evidence
    because they will rarely show how such law is understood or applied  in
    those countries. Mere assertions as to the effect of  such  laws  will,
    for similar reasons, carry no weight. The evidence produced  fell  into
    this category and the FtTJ was entitled to find the  marriage  was  not
    valid and the appellant was not a family member under Regulation  7  of
    the 2006 Regulations. As regards the durability  of  the  marriage  the
    respondent had considered this and had found that they  had  only  been
    living together since September 3, 2013 and as this was less  than  two
    years the FtTJ was  entitled  to  find  they  were  not  in  a  durable
    relationship.

10. Mr Hussain reminded me that there was nothing in the  Regulations  that
    stated  the  parties  had  to  be  together  for  two  years  for   the
    relationship to be durable. He submitted "durable" meant committed  and
    he submitted there was ample evidence that they were committed as  both
    had provided witness statements and had made themselves  available  for
    cross-examination. He further submitted  the  FtTJ's  approach  to  the
    opinion of Mr Wedemeijer was not open to him because the articles  made
    clear what was recognised under Dutch law.

11. I reserved my decision.

    ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

12. Two issues were raised in the appeal that  came  before  the  FtTJ  and
    those same two issues form the basis of the matters argued before me.

13. The Upper Tribunal has considered the issue of proxy marriages and  the
    most quoted authorities are the cases of Kareem (Proxy marriages  -  EU
    law) [2014] UKUT 00024(IAC) and TA and Others (Kareem explained)  Ghana
    [2014] UKUT 00316 (IAC).

14. When the matter came before the  FtTJ  he  had  what  can  properly  be
    described as evidence of a marriage taking place in Gambia where nether
    party was present in Gambia but both were in the United Kingdom. One of
    the parties was an EEA national and the other was a  Gambian  national.
    The Tribunal made clear that without independent and reliable  evidence
    regarding how the laws of a country are applied it  should  be  assumed
    the Tribunal is likely to be unable to find  that  sufficient  evidence
    has been provided to  discharge  the  burden  of  proof.  At  paragraph
    [68(g)] of Kareem the Tribunal passed the following observation-

         "It should  be  assumed  that,  without  independent  and  reliable
         evidence about the recognition of the marriage under  the  laws  of
         the EEA country and/or the country where the marriage  took  place,
         the Tribunal is  likely  to  be  unable  to  find  that  sufficient
         evidence has been provided to discharge the burden of  proof.  Mere
         production of legal materials from the EEA country or country where
         the marriage took place will be insufficient evidence because  they
         will rarely show how such law is understood  or  applied  in  those
         countries. Mere assertions as to the effect of such laws will,  for
         similar reasons, carry no weight."

15. The Tribunal in TA and Others  (Kareem  explained)  Ghana  [2014]  UKUT
    00316 (IAC) considered the matter further and sought  to  explain  away
    any doubts on how Kareem should be interpreted by stating at  paragraph
    [20]-

         "Given that which I set out above, it is difficult to see  how  the
         Upper Tribunal in  Kareem  could  have  been  any  clearer  in  its
         conclusion that when consideration is being  given  to  whether  an
         applicant has undertaken a valid marriage for the purposes  of  the
         2006  Regulations,  such  consideration  has  to  be  assessed   by
         reference to the laws of the legal system of the nationality of the
         relevant Union citizen."

16. The FtTJ was therefore tasked with considering the  evidence  that  was
    placed before him and he set out his findings in  paragraphs  [20]  and
    [21] of his determination. He was perfectly entitled to  disregard  the
    non-reported decision of  Mustapha  Touray  v  SSHD  (appeal  reference
    IA/30143/2011) for the reasons he gave and of course the  decisions  of
    Kareem and TA and others have  since  been  reported.  The  appellant's
    representatives had not satisfied  the  requirements  of  the  relevant
    Practice Direction and in  particular  paragraph  11.2  and  11.3.  The
    former  required  the  appellant's  representatives  to  identify   the
    proposition for which the determination is to be cited and certify that
    the proposition is not to be found in any reported determination of the
    Tribunal, the IAT or the  AIT  and  had  not  been  superseded  by  the
    decision of a higher authority.

17. Paragraph 11.3 states-

         "Permission under paragraph 11.1  will  be  given  only  where  the
         Tribunal considers that it would be materially assisted by citation
         of the determination, as distinct from the adoption in argument  of
         the reasoning to be found in the determination. Such instances  are
         likely to be rare; in particular, in  the  case  of  determinations
         which were unreportable (see Practice Statement  11  (reporting  of
         determinations)). It should be emphasised that  the  Tribunal  will
         not exclude good arguments from consideration but it will  be  rare
         for such an argument to be capable of being made only by  reference
         to an unreported determination.

18. The FtTJ considered the two legal opinions and I must stress  they  are
    not independent opinions but opinions obtained for cases of this nature
    and the FtTJ noted that the opinion of Mr Marenah was not for this case
    and the opinion of Mr  Wedemeijer  was  paid  for  by  the  appellant's
    representatives. Both opinions are in effect a mere reciting of the law
    and the author's interpretation of that law.  The  Tribunal  in  Kareem
    made it clear this would not be sufficient.

19. The FtTJ was entitled to find the marriage was not valid and I find  no
    material error in his approach.

20. I turn now to the second ground of appeal and the  FtTJ's  approach  to
    durability of the relationship. The FtTJ considered this at  paragraphs
    [23] and [24] of his determination.

21. In giving permission Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Page  criticised
    the FtTJ for not making clear whether the appellant and his "wife" gave
    oral evidence. Reference to the record of  proceedings  indicates  that
    both were called to give evidence but neither appeared to be asked many
    questions with their  written  evidence  forming  the  basis  of  their
    accounts. In fact, neither representative  put  any  questions  to  the
    appellant and the "wife" was only asked to clarify a couple of  matters
    concerning her payslips and where she lived. Whilst it  may  have  been
    helpful for the FtTJ to record this fact I am satisfied the absence  of
    this from his determination is not material.

22. At paragraph [5] of his determination the FtTJ confirmed he had  regard
    to the bundle of documents placed before him  and  he  noted  that  the
    appellant's bundle consisted of 108 pages. At paragraph [23]  the  FtTJ
    set out the  documentary  evidence  that  he  felt  assisted  him.  The
    evidence was limited in nature with the majority of the papers being in
    the "wife's" sole name with some documents being  in  both  names.  The
    FtTJ heard the evidence and was unimpressed by the evidence. He did not
    find the parties had to live together for two years to prove a  durable
    relationship, as argued by Ms Johnstone, but concluded on the  evidence
    before him including the appellant's own immigration history that  this
    was not a durable relationship.

23. The issue I have to consider is whether that conclusion was open to the
    FtTJ. All he had before him were the  party's  statements,  brief  oral
    evidence and the documents he considered. There were no statements from
    family or friends and there were two photographs taken at the same time
    (page 98) and two other photographs whose origins are  unclear  due  to
    their poor quality. The FtTJ was entitled to conclude they were not  in
    a durable relationship for the purposes of Regulation 8(5) of the  2006
    Regulations.

24. I am satisfied the FtTJ did no materially err in his approach to either
    issue.

    DECISION

25. There was no material error. The original decision is upheld.

26. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I see no reason to alter that order.

Signed:     Dated: April 7, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal I make no fee award.

Signed:     Dated: April 7, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
