
IAC-AH-CO-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24271/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 8th April 2015                    |On 17th April 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                        Raiane Ribeiro Mendis Armalis
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Latymer (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McMahon, promulgated on 1st December 2014, following a hearing at
    Taylor House on 14th November 2014.  In the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of Raiane Ribeiro Mendis Armalis.   The  Respondent,
    Secretary  of  State,  subsequently  applied  for,  and  was   granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Brazil who was born on 30th  April
    1986.  She applied  for  a  residence  card  under  the  provisions  of
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  to  confirm  her
    right to reside in the UK as the spouse  of  an  EEA  treaty  national,
    namely, Mr Valdis Armalis, exercising treaty rights in the  UK.   By  a
    letter dated 27th November 2014, the  application  was  rejected.   The
    Respondent referred to how on two previous occasions the Appellant  had
    applied for a residence card which had been refused.   Furthermore,  in
    the course of the application, Immigration  Officers  had  visited  the
    claimed matrimonial home on 25th February 2014, and spoke to a man, who
    claimed to be the Appellant's husband, Valdis Armalis.  Mr Armalis  was
    unable to say where the Appellant  was  and  the  Respondent  found  it
    difficult to accept that her husband would not know the whereabouts  of
    his wife.  Furthermore, the bank statement and material produced by the
    Appellant showed her to have an address different from the address said
    to be the matrimonial home.

The Judge's Findings

 3. At the hearing before Judge McMahon, there  was  no  attendance  by  Mr
    Valdis Armalis.  Instead, evidence  was  given  by  a  Mr  Namino,  the
    husband of the Appellant's mother, Maria Aparecida,  a  family  friend,
    and Masood Zaher, a friend  (see  paragraph  5).   When  the  Appellant
    herself gave evidence before Judge McMahon, "she  accepted  there  were
    apparent inconsistencies in the accounts given by her and Mr  Armalis."
    Moreover, "she appreciated Mr Armalis had given a wrong date  of  birth
    for his daughter..." (paragraph 13).

 4. Ultimately however, the judge observed that the evidence from the three
    witnesses was to the effect that

         "They had had experience over an extended period  of  time  of  the
         Appellant and Mrs Armalis living together both at the  property  in
         East Acton  and,  more  recently,  in  accommodation  held  by  the
         Appellant's mother.  I am satisfied that each  of  those  witnesses
         gave  reliable  evidence.   Their  evidence  was   consistent   and
         supported by detail" (paragraph 14).

 5. The judge concluded that, "it is clear to me that although  there  have
    been  difficulties  in  the  marriage  this  was  not  a  marriage   of
    convenience entered into with the purpose of providing  an  immigration
    law basis for the Appellant to remain in the United Kingdom" (paragraph
    17).  The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the Respondent had maintained  in
    the refusal letter that this was a marriage of  convenience.   However,
    no Home Office Presenting Officer was provided and  the  Appellant  was
    not cross-examined.  The Sponsor did not attend at all.   The  evidence
    from the Appellant was that she and the Sponsor, Mr Armalis,  were  not
    on speaking terms following an argument.  The judge failed to  consider
    or attach weight to the absence of any evidence, even in the form of  a
    written statement, from the Sponsor.

 7. On 9th February 2015, permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis
    that it was correct to say that there is no apparent  consideration  of
    the weight, if any, to be attached to the absence of evidence from  the
    husband.  There  was  also  scant  reference  to  the  content  of  the
    Appellant's and her witness' oral evidence forming  the  basis  of  the
    credibility findings made.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 8th April 2015, the Respondent Secretary of
    State was represented by Mr Kandola.  He relied  upon  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal.  In particular he relied upon the ground that the  Sponsor,  Mr
    Armalis did not attend, and the judge failed to ascribe any  importance
    to his non-attendance and dealt with it very briefly.  The  failure  to
    factor in his failure to attend affected the whole  decision.   If  the
    Appellant did intend to rely upon  the  evidence  of  her  husband,  Mr
    Armalis, in the manner that she would otherwise  intend,  there  should
    have been an application for an adjournment so  that  he  could  indeed
    attend.  Instead, what paragraph 7 of the determination states is that:
    "Mr Armalis did not attend the hearing.  The Appellant told me that she
    and Mr Armalis  had  had  a  recent  disagreement  and  they  were  not
    currently on speaking terms" (paragraph 7).  If that is what  was  told
    by the Appellant to the judge, there should have been  an  accompanying
    application for an adjournment, if the Appellant's intention was to  be
    able to show that she and her husband were  in  a  subsisting  marriage
    relationship.

 9. For his part, Mr Latymer drew my attention to the well-established case
    of Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience)  [2012]  UKUT  38.
    He submitted that one must  be  aware  of  the  basic  principles  that
    underlie any allegation of a marriage  of  convenience.   There  is  no
    burden on the Appellant to show that his or her marriage is not one  of
    convenience.  The initial burden is upon the Secretary of State.   Once
    a evidential basis for a "reasonable  suspicion"  is  established,  the
    evidential burden then shifts  upon  the  Appellant  to  show  why  the
    reasonable  suspicion  is  not  well-founded.   The  Appellant  did  do
    precisely that.  It was open to the Respondent Secretary  of  State  to
    cross-examine the Appellant and her  witnesses.   As  the  judge  makes
    clear at paragraph 16 of the determination, they did not field  a  Home
    Office Presenting Officer, and chose not to  avail  themselves  of  the
    opportunity to cross-examine  the  witnesses  present.   The  Appellant
    could not be penalised for this.  Secondly, as far as the Sponsor's not
    attending was concerned, whereas the judge refers at paragraph 7 to the
    fact that the Appellant had said that she and  Mr  Armalis  had  had  a
    recent disagreement, if the judge did consider the  attendance  of  the
    Sponsor to be vital to the determination of the issues, he  could  have
    adjourned the matter himself.  There was no Presenting Officer to  make
    a request for an adjournment.  The judge should have done so himself.

10. With respect to the current situation, Mr Latymer submitted before  me,
    after taking due instructions from the Appellant specifically  on  this
    issue in the court room before me, that should there be a finding of an
    error of law, and the second stage of remaking the decision then arose,
    the current state of affairs was that the Appellant and Mr Armalis  had
    indeed now separated.  However, there was a witness statement  prepared
    by the Sponsor initially, but the judge appears to not have had a copy.
     Mr Kandola, on behalf of  the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State,  also
    submitted that he did not have any witness statement from  the  Sponsor
    as alleged.

Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision and remake the decision
    (see Section 12(2) of TCEA 2007).  My reasons are as follows.

12. First, no apparent consideration was given of the weight to be attached
    to the absence of the evidence from the  husband  by  the  judge.   The
    allegation was  that  of  a  "marriage  of  convenience"  and  in  such
    circumstances the evidence of both parties is generally of  importance.
    This was particularly the case here, given that the  parties  were  not
    living together at the time that the Immigration Officers  visited  the
    matrimonial home.  It is  said  that  there  was  a  witness  statement
    prepared by the Sponsor for the purposes of the hearing.   However,  no
    attention was drawn to this witness statement by either  the  Appellant
    or to those representing her for a consideration  by  the  judge.   Had
    this been the case, the judge would have referred to this at  paragraph
    13 of the determination when  he  refers  to  other  evidence  from  Mr
    Armalis.  In any event, it was important for the judge  to  have  heard
    the evidence from the Sponsor where there was a question mark over  the
    marriage.

13. Second, whereas the judge states that he heard evidence from the  three
    witnesses who "had had experience over an extended period  of  time  of
    the Appellant, and Mr Armalis living together both at the  property  in
    East Acton and,  more  recently,  in  the  accommodation  held  by  the
    Appellant's mother", no breakdown is given of this evidence to indicate
    how it shows that  they  were  in  a  marriage  that  was  not  one  of
    convenience.

Remaking the Decision

14. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am dismissing this appeal for the following reasons.  This is
    a case where at the time of the visit to the matrimonial home  on  25th
    February 2014, the Appellant and the Sponsor were not living  together.
    The Sponsor did not know the whereabouts of his wife.

15. Second, at the time of the visit, the evidence was that  the  Appellant
    had an address different from the address said to  be  the  matrimonial
    home.

16. Third, in his conclusions, the judge was clear that there were

         "Apparent  inconsistencies  within  the  accounts  given   by   the
         Appellant and Mr Armalis in interview and there were other concerns
         raised in the refusal letter.  I am  satisfied  that  there  was  a
         proper basis for the Respondent to suspect  that  this  was  not  a
         genuine marriage and was in  a  fact  a  marriage  of  convenience"
         (paragraph 15).

17. The judge had gone on  to  refer  to  how  there  had  been  "turbulent
    periods" in the married life of the Appellant and the Sponsor.  Whereas
    it is, of course, the case that many perfectly genuine  and  subsisting
    married relationships have "turbulent appearance", and are not for that
    reason alone marriages of convenience, the fact here was  that  at  the
    time of the visit by the Immigration Officers on 25th February 2014 the
    parties were not living together, the Sponsor did not  know  where  the
    Appellant was, and the Appellant was living at a different  address  to
    that of the matrimonial home.

18.  For the judge to have concluded  therefore,  that  the  parties  "were
    truly living together as husband and wife" "from October 2013 up  until
    October 2014" is not borne by the  evidence.   In  point  of  fact,  in
    remaking the decision, the evidence before this Tribunal is  now  clear
    that the parties have indeed separated fully.

19. Accordingly, notwithstanding Mr Latymer's valiant efforts  to  persuade
    me otherwise in  his  cleared  and  measured  submissions  before  this
    Tribunal, this appeal fails.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set  aside  the  decision
of the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.   This  appeal  is
dismissed.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed        Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        15th April 2015




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        15th April 2015
