
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24722/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 29th February 2016                         |On 10th March 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 AMETH DIOP

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, instructed by McGuire Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Senegal, born on 2nd February  1987.   On
    18th December 2012 he applied for a residence card as the family member
    of a UK citizen under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006, based  on
    the "Surinder Singh"  principle.   On  6th  June  2013  the  respondent
    refused his application for lack of evidence.

 2. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  N  Manuel
    dealt with the case without an oral hearing (none having  been  sought)
    and dismissed it by determination promulgated on 20th December 2013.

 3. The judge found that the appellant failed to discharge  the  burden  of
    proof to show that he was entitled to a residence card.  In absence  of
    an application, the respondent had not considered whether removal would
    breach Article 8 of the  ECHR.   The  decision  under  appeal  did  not
    require the appellant to remove.  The judge said that save for a  short
    sentence in the grounds of appeal he had no information and was not  in
    a position to give due consideration to any Article 8  claim,  and  did
    not purport to determine the appeal on human rights  grounds.   It  was
    dismissed under reference only to the Regulations.

 4. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal, seeking to argue that the
    judge should have considered and allowed the appeal under Article 8  of
    the ECHR.

 5. Proceedings were delayed pending  further  authority,  which  has  been
    forthcoming in Amirteymour and Others [2015] UKUT 466 (IAC) and then in
    TY [2015] EWCA Civ 1233.  These decisions are to  the  effect  that  an
    appellant cannot raise Article 8 ECHR matters within the  scope  of  an
    appeal such as this.

 6. In a note of argument dated 29th January 2016  the  respondent  invites
    the Upper Tribunal to follow Amirtuymour  and  TY,  to  find  that  the
    appellant's written submissions based on the EU Charter do not lead  to
    any other approach, and to dismiss the appeal.

 7. The respondent applies for evidence to be admitted to show that on 10th
    November 2015 the appellant was sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment
    of 22 months 16 days, dating from 30th  October  2015.   This  followed
    upon his conviction after trial of an assault  on  his  former  partner
    (not his  estranged  wife,  to  whom  the  residence  card  application
    relates).

 8. The respondent says that the further evidence may be relevant  to  both
    error of law and to the remaking of the decision, if that stage were to
    be reached.

 9. Written submissions had also been filed on  behalf  of  the  appellant.
    However, Mr Caskie did not seek to press any argument that  Amirteymour
    and TY ought not to be followed, or that the EU Charter has the  effect
    that Article 8 of the ECHR should be considered on a substantive  basis
    in appeals of this nature.  He did not object to  the  application  for
    admission of further evidence.  His understanding was  that  a  process
    has begun in light of  the  conviction  which  is  likely  to  lead  to
    deportation proceedings.

10. Although Mr Caskie said that there was  no  point  on  the  appellant's
    behalf in pursuing the present proceedings, and that he could not  then
    resist  the  respondent's  submission  that  this  appeal   should   be
    dismissed, he did so under reservation of the appellant's position that
    through his  wife's  "Surinder  Singh"  rights  he  is  entitled  to  a
    residence  card,  and  under  reservation  in  future  proceedings   of
    arguments that Amirteymour and TY should not be followed.

11. In the circumstances, it need only be said that the submissions for the
    respondent are preferred, and that Amirteymour and TY are applied.

12. The appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  dismissed.   The
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

13. Mr Caskie confirmed that the appellant has an  appeal  pending  in  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (reference  IA/23770/2014),  which  is  presently
    sisted pending the outcome of this case.  I  observe  in  passing  that
    both parties should now take steps to bring those proceedings also to a
    conclusion.

14. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


                           [pic]


                           2 March 2016
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
