
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/24790/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 09 November 2016                  |On 23 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                           THE HON. LORD BANNATYNE
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     A I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves child welfare issues.  We  find  that  it  is  appropriate  to
continue the order. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,
the appellant is granted anonymity. No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R. Ahmed, Counsel instructed by Rahman & Company
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to  refuse  to
    vary leave to remain as a person exercising access rights to a child to
    Indefinite Leave to Remain.

2.   First-tier Tribunal Judge R. Cooper ("the judge") dismissed the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 15 February 2016.  The  appellant  appeals
    the decision on the following grounds:

      i) The judge erred on grounds of procedural  fairness  in  failing  to
         consider whether it was necessary to adjourn the appeal in order to
         provide an opportunity for the applicant to  respond  to  an  issue
         raised by the  respondent  on  the  morning  of  the  hearing.  The
         respondent argued that the application  should  have  been  refused
         under the  general  grounds  for  refusal  contained  in  paragraph
         320(7A) (false representations) in light of the appellant's failure
         to disclose the family court order made in February 2012

     ii) Having dismissed the appeal under the immigration rules, the  judge
         erred in failing to make any findings relating to Article 8 outside
         the rules.

Decision and reasons

3.   After having considered the grounds of appeal  and  oral  arguments  we
    are satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making
    of an error on a point of law.

4.   We are satisfied that  the  respondent  did  not  raise  the  issue  of
    whether the appellant  should  have  been  refused  under  the  general
    grounds of  refusal  until  the  morning  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing.  The  respondent  asserted  that  the  appellant  made   false
    representations for the purpose of  the  general  grounds  for  refusal
    under paragraph 320(7A) of the immigration rules.

5.   The appellant's solicitors made an application for Indefinite Leave  to
    Remain as a person exercising access rights to  a  child  on  19  April
    2016. In the cover letter they asserted that the appellant continued to
    have contact with his children, including visits. The respondent relied
    on an order that was said to have been made  by  the  Family  Court  in
    February 2012, when  direct  contact  between  the  appellant  and  his
    children was suspended. The First-tier Tribunal decision indicates that
    the respondent did not produce a copy of the order. No copy appears  to
    have been before the Tribunal [21].

6.   Although it appears that the appellant's representative did  not  apply
    for an adjournment, it seems clear from  the  judge's  summary  of  the
    submissions  that  there  was  an  indication  that   the   appellant's
    solicitors sent a copy of the February 2012  order  to  the  respondent
    [28]. Given that the judge did not even have a copy of the order  which
    the respondent's representative relied upon to support his  submission,
    it was incumbent on the judge  to  consider  whether  it  was  fair  to
    proceed to  determine  the  appeal  without  giving  the  appellant  an
    opportunity to  produce  further  evidence  to  rebut  such  a  serious
    allegation.

7.   The appellant's grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  argue  that
    evidence was available to rebut the respondent's  assertion.  A  letter
    from Rahman & Co. Solicitors to the UK Border Agency dated  22  October
    2012 stated the following:

         "Our purpose of writing this letter to inform you that there was an
         order made by the Bow County Court on 3rd of  February  2012  which
         suspends direct contact of our client with his children. This order
         had not been previously submitted  with  our  client's  application
         because there  was  an  error  in  communication  with  our  family
         department solicitor. The family  department  solicitor  was  under
         impression that this order has already been provided to immigration
         department by the client.

         In reality we have not been provided this order and we  were  under
         impression that previous order made by District  Judge  Gregory  on
         11th November 2011 sitting at Bow County Court was  still  a  valid
         order.

         Our family solicitor recently conducted  review  of  the  case  and
         realised the order dated 3rd February 2012 has not been provided to
         the immigration department. This order was brought to our attention
         today and we enclose it for your consideration.  Please  note  that
         the family court proceedings are still going on to establish direct
         contact of our client."

8.   The letter was  sent  on  the  same  day  the  respondent  refused  the
    application. However, the respondent should have received  it  in  good
    time before the First-tier Tribunal hearing and should have been  aware
    of its contents. The letter  shows  that  there  was  no  intention  to
    deceive  the  respondent.  The  assertions  made  by  the   appellant's
    solicitors in the original application were made on the mistaken belief
    that the most recent family court order was November 2011. As  soon  as
    the mistake was realised a copy of the order dated  February  2012  was
    forwarded to the respondent.

9.   In light of the information now before the Upper Tribunal  we  conclude
    that the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  involved  the  making  of  the
    following errors of law.

      i) Firstly, given the issue was raised at such a  late  stage  of  the
         proceedings, without  supporting  evidence,  and  in  circumstances
         where there was an indication  that  the  appellant  disclosed  the
         February 2012 order to  the  respondent,  the  judge's  failure  to
         consider whether the interests of justice required  an  adjournment
         amounts to an error of law.

     ii) Secondly, having accepted that the appellant  was  now  in  contact
         with his children,  but  having  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the
         immigration  rules  with  reference  to  the  general  grounds  for
         refusal, the judge failed to make any findings relating to  Article
         8 outside the rules. The fact that there was no removal decision is
         immaterial in circumstances where the  relevant  ground  of  appeal
         under section 84(g) related to  removal  "in  consequence"  of  the
         decision, which is what would have happened  following  refusal  of
         leave to remain. The judge's failure to consider a  material  issue
         amounts to an error of law.

10.  We gave summary  reasons  for  finding  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision contained material errors of law at the hearing on 09 November
    2016. The Tribunal initially indicated that the  case  was  appropriate
    for remittal to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh  hearing  without
    objection from either party. However, on reflection the Tribunal issued
    further directions explaining why  it  was  not  in  the  interests  of
    justice to remit the appeal for a fresh hearing in light of the  First-
    tier Tribunal's findings relating to other aspects of  the  immigration
    rules. In particular,  the  effect  of  setting  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's findings relating to the general  grounds  for  refusal  was
    that the appeal should be remade and allowed.

11.  We directed the parties to make further written submissions  by  Friday
    19 November 2016. By way  of  a  letter  dated  17  November  2016  the
    appellant's representatives agreed with the proposed course of  action.
    The Tribunal has no record of a response from the respondent. As  such,
    we give our reasons for remaking the decision as follows.

12.  At the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  the  respondent's  representative
    made clear that the only issue raised under the immigration  rules  was
    whether the appellant met the requirements of paragraphs 248D(ii)-(iii)
    [33].  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  went  on  to  make  clear  and
    unchallenged findings on the evidence [34-46]. The First-tier  Tribunal
    judge made clear findings that she was satisfied that the appellant met
    the requirements of paragraph 248D(ii) [44] and 248D(iii) [46]  of  the
    immigration rules. The only reason why the judge went on to dismiss the
    appeal was her  finding  that  the  appellant  used  deception  in  the
    application. Paragraph 320(7A) therefore applied [47-53].

13.  The Tribunal has found that the failure  to  afford  the  appellant  an
    opportunity to respond to such a serious allegation,  in  circumstances
    where it is clear that he could have produced evidence to  clarify  the
    matter satisfactorily by way of  the  letter  dated  22  October  2012,
    amounted to an error of law.

14.  At the Upper Tribunal hearing the respondent's representative  accepted
    that the letter dated 22 October 2012 was sent to the UKBA  and  should
    have been considered. If that evidence had been before the Home  Office
    representative at the earlier hearing it seems clear that the issue  of
    paragraph 320(7A) should not have been raised. It also seems  clear  to
    us that, had that evidence been before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    judge could not have rationally concluded that the  appellant  intended
    to make false representations in the application.

15.  In light of the above, the consequence of setting aside the  First-tier
    Tribunal's findings relating to paragraph 320(7A) is that  the  judge's
    findings relating to paragraphs 248D(ii)-(iii) should  stand  i.e.  the
    appeal should be remade and allowed based on those findings because the
    appellant met the requirements of  the  immigration  rules.  For  these
    reasons the Tribunal considers that it is not appropriate to remit  the
    appeal for a fresh hearing.

16.  We conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved  the  making
    of an error on a point of law. The part of the decision relating to the
    general grounds for refusal is set aside. The decision  is  remade  and
    the appeal should be allowed as a logical consequence of the First-tier
    Tribunal's  findings  relating  to  paragraph  248D(ii)-(iii)  of   the
    immigration rules.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

We re-make the decision and ALLOW the appeal


Signed   [pic]    Date 23 November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

