
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24415/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  22 March 2013                             |On 12 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                         HESHAM HMDI SHIBANI SAWEHLI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr M. Al-Rashid, Counsel
For the Respondent: Ms L. Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. The appellant is a citizen of Libya, born on 5 November 1977. On  26
       October 2012 a decision was made to refuse to vary leave to  remain.
       His application was for indefinite leave to  remain  based  on  long
       residence. His appeal against the decision to refuse to  vary  leave
       to remain was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hembrough after
       a hearing on 19 December 2012.  Permission  to  appeal  having  been
       granted by a judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  matter  came
       before me.

    2. The issue in the appeal is whether the appellant  has  acquired  the
       necessary 10 years lawful residence such  as  to  mean  that  he  is
       entitled to indefinite leave  to  remain  on  the  grounds  of  long
       residence under paragraph 276B of HC 395 (as amended).

    3. The appellant first arrived in the UK  on  22  September  2001  with
       leave as a student. The application for indefinite leave  to  remain
       which is the subject matter of this appeal, was made on 29  February
       2012. In the intervening periods  he  has  been  granted  successive
       extensions of leave but, to summarise, with periods outside  the  UK
       when it is said that he had no leave  to  remain,  or  at  least  no
       qualifying leave for the purpose of the Rules.

    4. I refer to the parties' submissions before me  as  necessary  during
       the course of my assessment.

My assessment

    5. There are four periods of time which give rise to the issue in  this
       appeal. The first is between 23 November 2001 and 23  January  2003.
       On 21 November 2001, a day before his then leave expired, he applied
       for further leave to remain. The application was still  not  decided
       by 23 September 2002. As recorded at [18] of the determination,  the
       appellant's case is that he received news that his mother  in  Libya
       was very ill. On 23 September 2002 he asked the Home Office for  the
       return of his passport as he needed it to travel to Libya  to  visit
       his mother. He returned to the UK on 23 January 2003 with leave as a
       student, having made the application in  Libya  for  a  new  student
       visa.

    6. The First-tier judge noted that because the appellant  made  an  in-
       time application to extend his leave, by virtue of section 3C of the
       Immigration Act 1971 ("the 1971  Act")  his  leave  was  statutorily
       extended  until  it  was  either   decided   or   withdrawn   (under
       s.3C(2)(a)).

    7. However, he also concluded at [32] that the request for his passport
       amounted to a withdrawal of the application. In addition he referred
       to s.3C(3) which provides  that  statutorily  extended  leave  shall
       lapse if the applicant leaves the UK.

    8. Putting aside the question of  whether  the  judge  was  correct  to
       decide that asking for his passport back amounted to a withdrawal of
       the application, the effect  of  s.3C(3)  is  that  the  appellant's
       statutorily extended leave lapsed when he left the UK.

    9. Further, under paragraph 276A "continuous residence" means residence
       in the UK for an unbroken period. The period is not to be considered
       as broken where there is absence from the UK for  a  period  of  six
       months or less at any one  time  "provided  that  the  applicant  in
       question has existing limited leave to enter or  remain  upon  their
       departure and return". Although the appellant returned on 23 January
       2003 with a valid student visa, his leave lapsed when  he  left  the
       UK. Therefore, he did not have  existing  leave  on  his  departure.
       Albeit for different reasons, at [34] the First-tier  judge  clearly
       concluded that the absence between 23  September  2002  and  January
       2003 amounted to a break in continuous residence.

   10. It is not correct therefore, as the grounds before me suggest,  that
       the judge found that this first period did not amount to a break  in
       "continuous residence". Paragraph 33 of  the  determination,  whilst
       referring generally  to  breaks  in  the  continuity  of  residence,
       indicates that the judge considered that this applied to  the  first
       period as much as to the others. In any event, as I have  explained,
       on the basis that his leave lapsed on his departure on 23  September
       2002, the appellant did not then have existing leave as required  by
       276A. Far from having "existing limited leave  to  enter  or  remain
       upon [his] departure", his leave ceased to exist on his departure.

   11. Mr Al-Rashid  submitted  in  relation  to  that  first  period,  and
       generally, that the appellant had  never  been  in  the  UK  without
       leave, and although he never had leave to  remain  when  he  was  in
       Libya, he did not need it. He only needed leave when present in  the
       UK.  That  submission  however,  is  not  strictly  correct.   Under
       paragraph 276A he needs to have had leave on his departure, which he
       did not; his leave lapsed by the very act of departure.

   12. That conclusion does not mean that no-one with existing leave  would
       ever be able to leave the UK  without  breaking  the  continuity  of
       residence. It is only those  who  have  statutorily  extended  leave
       under section 3C of the 1971 Act to whom this applies.  Others  with
       existing leave  are  free  to  depart  and  return  subject  to  the
       restrictions under paragraph 276A.

   13. On the basis of that analysis, the appellant's  appeal  against  the
       refusal of indefinite leave  to  remain  could  not  have  succeeded
       because of the break in  the  continuity  of  residence  between  23
       September 2002 and 23 January 2003.

   14. The second period potentially representing a break in the continuity
       of residence is that between 7 June  2011  and  27  September  2011.
       However, that potential break in continuous residence was not relied
       on by the respondent as can be seen from [23] of the  determination.
       No further comment on that period is therefore needed.

   15. The next period is between 31 March 2010 and 31 May 2010. His  leave
       is said to have expired on 31 March 2010. On  the  application  form
       for further leave to remain the appellant has given  a  schedule  in
       manuscript of the dates of leaving and returning to the UK, although
       the copy on the Tribunal file is incomplete. He has given  31  March
       2010 as a date of departure; the date his then leave expired. It  is
       not suggested however, that he overstayed at that point and so it is
       reasonable to conclude that although he left on the  day  his  leave
       was due to expire, he left during the  currency  of  his  leave.  He
       returned on 28 June 2010 with a valid student visa issued on 31  May
       2010.

   16. Judge Hembrough concluded at [35] that pursuant to 276A(a)(iii)  the
       appellant had left the UK in circumstances in which  he  could  have
       had no reasonable expectation at the time of leaving that  he  would
       lawfully be able to return. He also concluded that the  "lawfulness"
       of his residence was broken because when he left, and  for  part  of
       the time that he was outside the UK, he did not have existing  leave
       to enter or remain pursuant to  276A(b)(i).   This  relates  to  the
       requirement  of  paragraph  276B(i)(a)  that  he  needed  "10  years
       continuous lawful residence".

   17. As I have indicated, I am satisfied that when the appellant left  on
       31 March 2010 he still had leave, as he needed to have in order that
       the requirement of 276A, of having had leave on departure,  is  met.
       When he was outside the UK his leave expired. Mr Al-Rashid submitted
       that returning with leave granted  out  of  country  is  sufficient.
       Although various authorities were submitted, the only  one  of  real
       relevance   is   TT   (Long   residence.   "continuous   residence",
       interpretation) British Overseas Citizen  [2008]  UKAIT  00038.  The
       Upper Tribunal decided that paragraph 276A does not require a person
       to have the same leave when returning to the UK as the leave he  had
       when he left. In other words, such a person is not  prohibited  from
       obtaining further leave whilst outside the UK.

   18. The situation in that case was rather different  from  that  in  the
       case of the appellant before me. The appellant's leave  in  relation
       to this period expired whilst he was outside the  UK.  It  was  only
       after expiry that he obtained  entry  clearance,  taking  effect  as
       leave to enter. Both grants of leave were as a student.

   19. It does not seem to me that there is  any  difference  in  principal
       between the circumstances in  TT  and  those  in  the  case  of  the
       appellant before me. In relation to that period he entered and  left
       with valid leave. The rule does not state that it has to be the same
       leave.

   20. I have considered whether the judge was correct to conclude that the
       appellant could not have had  any  reasonable  expectation  that  he
       would lawfully be able to return  in  relation  to  that  period  of
       absence following the expiry of his leave on 31 March 2010.  It  was
       submitted on behalf of the appellant  that  that  requirement  under
       276A(iii)(a) relates to those who have been removed from the  UK.  I
       would accept that it  would  include  such  persons  but  I  do  not
       consider that that requirement can be interpreted as  applying  only
       to such persons. If it were meant to apply only to those removed  it
       could easily have said so without any ambiguity. It seems to  me  to
       be much wider in application than the interpretation  contended  for
       on behalf of the appellant.

   21. However, the question  is,  did  the  appellant  leave  the  UK  "in
       circumstances" in which he could have had no reasonable  expectation
       at the time of leaving that he would lawfully be able to return.  In
       this case the appellant had been granted successive periods of leave
       as a student for the previous nine years. It seems to  me  that  far
       from having no reasonable expectation that he would lawfully be able
       to return, the opposite is true.

   22. Thus, I am satisfied that the First-tier judge erred in law both  in
       concluding that the continuity of  residence  was  broken  when  the
       appellant's leave expired when outside the UK, and also in  relation
       to the conclusion that he left in circumstances in  which  he  could
       have had no reasonable expectation at the time of  leaving  that  he
       would lawfully be able to return.

   23. The last period in question is that identified by the judge at [30];
       30 November 2010 to 16 January 2011. It is not clear  when  he  left
       the UK but he returned on 16 January 2011. Again, it  has  not  been
       suggested that he overstayed his leave. It is  reasonable  to  infer
       therefore, that he left prior to its expiry. However, his  leave  at
       the time of his departure was as a student  but  he  returned  as  a
       visitor.

   24. The judge came to the same conclusion in respect of this  period  as
       that previously discussed with reference to 31 March 2010 to 31  May
       2010. The appellant's leave when he left on or  before  30  November
       2010 was as a student but he returned as a visitor. Again however, I
       cannot see that this makes any  difference  in  terms  of  paragraph
       276A. He had existing leave on departure and also on return,  albeit
       in another capacity. Nothing has been put forward in  terms  of  his
       immigration history or the  circumstances  of  his  departure  which
       would indicate that he could have had no reasonable  expectation  he
       would lawfully be able to return. That he  in  fact  returned  as  a
       visitor does not say anything about the circumstances  in  which  he
       left and what he could reasonably have expected at that time.

   25. It is not necessary for me to say much on the  question  of  whether
       the judge was entitled to  'rely'  on  that  period  of  absence  as
       breaking the continuity of residence because it was  not  raised  in
       the refusal letter or at the hearing. Suffice to say that it was for
       the appellant to establish that he met the requirements of the  rule
       and  to  establish  therefore,  the  necessary  10  year  period  of
       continuous residence. The appellant could have been expected to have
       dealt with all periods of leave and absences and the judge  was  not
       wrong to consider that period. For the reasons I have given however,
       I am satisfied that he erred  in  law  in  his  assessment  of  that
       period.

   26. I have concluded therefore, that there are  errors  of  law  in  the
       judge's decision in respect  of  two  of  the  potentially  relevant
       periods of absence, namely between 31 March 2010 and  31  May  2010,
       and 30  November  2010  to  16  January  2011.  However,  given  the
       conclusion I have come to in relation to the first  period  when  he
       left on 23 September 2002 returning on 23 January 2003, those errors
       of law are not material to the outcome of the appeal. The  appellant
       could not have established  that  he  has  had  at  least  10  years
       continuous lawful residence in accordance with paragraphs  276A  and
       B. Thus, the errors of law are not such as to require  the  decision
       to be set aside.

   27. No issue was raised in the grounds to the Upper Tribunal in terms of
       the judge's conclusions in relation to Article 8 and no  submissions
       in relation to it were put before me.

   28. Judge Hembrough dealt with the fact that the removal decision  under
       section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006  is
       unlawful, having been made at the  same  time  as  the  decision  to
       refuse to vary leave to remain. A lawful removal decision will  have
       to be  made  if  the  Secretary  of  State  decides  to  remove  the
       appellant.

Decision

   29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is
       however, not set aside and the decision to dismiss the appeal  under
       the Immigration Rules and under Article 8 stands.










Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 11/06/13
