
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V3

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24366/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11 November 2016                        |On 05 January 2017               |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                  mr E B O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Chakmakjian of Counsel, instructed by Irving &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Nigeria, appealed  two  decisions  of  the
    Respondent, the first, dated 10 June 2014, to revoke an  EEA  residence
    card and refuse admission.  Secondly a  decision  of  22  May  2015  to
    deport the Appellant under Section 32(1) of  the  UK  Borders  Act  and
    Section 32(4) and Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.  In  the
    hearing before me it  further  became  clear  that  there  was  another
    decision by the Respondent (the third Decision) made on  24  July  2014
    involving the cancellation of leave.  But the matter did not form  part
    of the considerations of the judge's  decision  that  has  subsequently
    been heard.

2.   The appeal against the first and second decisions  came  before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge I Howard (the judge), who  on  24  June  2016  with
    significant brevity allowed the appeal in connection with the  decision
    of 10 June 2016 albeit that its purpose and consequences  were  limited
    because the matter was no longer a basis on  which  the  Appellant  was
    seeking to remain.  Nevertheless the judge  went  on  to  consider  the
    deportation decision which was made as a consequence of  the  Appellant
    having been convicted and sentenced to fifteen months' imprisonment  on
    27 August 2014 for the offence of possession  of  counterfeit  currency
    (US dollars).

3.   The judge's consideration of that matter is contained within [D  22  to
    35] of the decision [D].

4.   It is said that the  judge  had  effectively  failed  to  consider  the
    significance and circumstances of the  conviction  which  bore  on  the
    question  of  the  assessment  of   the   public   interest   and   the
    proportionality of removal.  Further it was argued that there  had  not
    been an assessment of the best interests on  the  Appellant's  children
    and I think to a degree his wife's interest, all of  whom  are  British
    citizens by one means or another.

5.   It was further said that an OASys analysis of  the  limited  risk  that
    the Appellant posed was not taken into account by the judge.

6.   The fact of the matter  is  that  the  decision  is  not  full  in  its
    analysis and in particular the issue  of  the  best  interests  of  the
    children might seem to have been somewhat subsumed in  a  general  view
    that so long as the family remain together they could  remove  together
    if the Appellant's wife and children wish to:  They could maintain that
    family unit abroad and that it would not  be  on  the  evidence  unduly
    harsh for that to happen because the family  would  be  one,  they  had
    roots in Nigeria, the children may not have been there but nevertheless
    there were familial attachments and  they  could  make  a  life  there,
    taking account of course of the fact that the benefits of being British
    nationals would at least not be available to them in Nigeria albeit the
    family would be together.

7.   One can on the first reading of the decision feel  some  sympathy  with
    some of those points but it seems to me that the judge was entitled  to
    take the view that public interest properly justified removal.  In  the
    analysis of the children's interests referred to in the decision  in  a
    number of places, particularly D 25 and 32, it seemed to me that  there
    was enough to show that there had been consideration of the involvement
    of the parents in bringing up the children, the role they both  played,
    the fact that they were good parents and that there was  a  close  bond
    between the children and the parents.  All those matters were  for  the
    judge to assess and it is not for me to find an error of law based upon
    the view I might have formed of the evidence which the judge heard.

8.   I do not have the benefit  of  having  heard  the  witnesses  who  gave
    evidence and to that extent the view  that  the  judge  formed  of  the
    matter was entirely for  him.   Accepting  as  he  did  the  extent  of
    connections that the family as a whole had in Nigeria.   It  cannot  be
    contradicted that for the elder child, who had been in school for  what
    seems to me likely for about two or three years, that  the  effects  of
    removal would be noticeable and to a degree upsetting,  leaving  behind
    friends, school and acquaintances in the UK.

9.   However, it does not seem to me on the evidence  that  was  before  the
    judge that there was any assessment made by an educational psychologist
    or a specialist social  worker  to  show  that  there  were  any  other
    significant adverse effects likely to arise for  either  child  by  the
    family's removal back to Nigeria.  Instead the judge must have done the
    best he could on the material that was available  to  him.   For  those
    reasons I find that whilst the judge's analysis might not be the way  I
    might have drafted the decision it does not seem to me on the  material
    that he had and as reported in the decision, bearing in mind  there  is
    no particular criticism that he did  not  take  into  account  relevant
    evidence.  The criticism is to the weight he gave to it it seems to  me
    that the judge made no error of law and that were another  Tribunal  to
    look at it the same would likely to be arrived at the same  conclusion:
    Even if the reasons given were fuller and more to the point.

10.  I further considered the Article 8 ECHR claim  for  the  judge,  having
    considered the matter [D 36 and 38], concluded that Article 8, I think,
    was not engaged.  The presentation on it is slightly confusing  but  on
    the face of it, other than the children's age, the nationality  of  the
    Appellant's wife and children and their circumstances in growing up  as
    they have done thus far in the United Kingdom are not of  the  kind  of
    exceptional  or  compelling  circumstances   that   would   justify   a
    consideration of Article 8 outside of the Rules.

11.  The matter is slightly confused because [D 39] the judge says:  "So  it
    is that on the particular facts of this case as I have found them I  am
    not satisfied that the decision of  the  Respondent  would  engage  the
    Article 8 rights of the Appellant, his wife or children".

12.  It seems to me that that could be no more than  a  general  recognition
    that Article 8 ECHR may be engaged but in effect the judge was  finding
    that the Respondent's decision is Article 8 compliant  come  what  may.
    In the circumstances I find no error of law by the judge.

13.  I was reminded, on behalf of the Appellant, that there  was  inevitably
    a tension between the case law which seeks to give the  best  interests
    of the children the weight that it is a matter of  primary  importance,
    but not paramount importance, and the public interest in the removal of
    the Appellant.  It is said by the Appellant in effect that if the  best
    interests of the children are that they should remain as a family unit,
    the children should be brought up by their mother and  father  and  the
    mother and the children  are  British  nationals  the  only  reasonable
    conclusion can be that the Appellant ought to be staying with  them  in
    the UK where they can reap the benefits of being UK nationals.

14.  I agree there is a tension between those circumstances and  it  was  of
    the kind discussed and considered in EV (Philippines) [2014] in that on
    one hand plainly the children's best interests must be  considered  and
    given significant weight but on the other  hand  the  consideration  of
    that should not simply be driven over by  the  effects  of  a  parent's
    criminality.  It is also the case  that  the  children's  interests  as
    British nationals are not, as is sometimes referred to, a "trump  card"
    but plainly a matter to which considerable weight should be given.

15.  It seemed to me that [D 32 and 35] the judge perhaps felt  without  the
    need that there should not necessarily be a major  discussion  of  that
    tension.  Ultimately on a fair reading of the decision, particularly [D
    34], the position is that the judge was looking at the  impact  on  the
    children and was making an assessment as to whether it would be  unduly
    harsh.  Unduly harsh can only be understood in the sense of its  impact
    on the children's best interests of which the judge was plainly  aware.
    Accordingly it seemed to me that in this respect  the  judge  has  done
    enough to deal with the issue and in particular  the  impact  on  their
    best interests were they and their mother to remove with  their  father
    to Nigeria.  The fact is that if they did not  wish  to  move  that  is
    undoubtedly an unfortunate consequence of the  events  that  have  been
    brought upon them by the criminality  of  the  Appellant  but  that  of
    itself does not determine that he should not  be  removed.   For  these
    reasons therefore I conclude that the judge did  sufficiently  consider
    the matter and justified his view that the impact on the family through
    removal was not of a kind that rendered the decision disproportionate.

16.  I for my part might not have formed that view  it  is  not  for  me  to
    simply rewrite a decision because I think the decision should have gone
    a different way.

NOTICE OF DECISION
The appeal is dismissed.

ANONYMITY
An anonymity order was made and should be continued.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 22 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 22 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
