
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24924/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th April 2015                            |On 21st May 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                               Mohammad sohail
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs A Javed, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  Grimshaw
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 26th August 2014 at  which  the
    appellant did not attend.



Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  On 9th April 2014  he  made  a
    combined application for leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student but was refused on the grounds that he did not have a
    CAS.  His sponsor  had  confirmed  to  the  respondent  that  they  had
    withdrawn the offer of sponsorship and accordingly he  failed  to  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 116C of Appendix  A  to  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Furthermore he did not meet the minimum  requirements  to  show
    competence in the English language at the appropriate level.

 3. The judge recorded that the appellant had made an application prior  to
    the hearing for an adjournment which had been refused by  the  Resident
    Judge.  His counsel sought an adjournment on his behalf but,  since  no
    further medical evidence was before her, and no further  correspondence
    had been received she refused his request and dealt with the appeal  on
    the basis of the submissions made.  She concluded  that  he  could  not
    meet the requirements of the Rules and that the  UK  would  not  be  in
    breach of its obligations under Article 8 of the ECHR were the  refusal
    to be maintained.  Accordingly she dismissed the appeal.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal in lengthy grounds which  was
    initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley but subsequently
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Warr.  Essentially the appellant argues
    that the judge had failed to take into account medical  evidence  which
    was before her confirming that he was not able to  attend  the  hearing
    because of his back pain.  He had also served a  bundle  in  accordance
    with directions. Second, the judge had failed to consider the  case  of
    SSHD v Rodriguez [2014] EWCA Civ 2 which held that the  respondent  had
    to act reasonably and fairly.  Third, she had failed  to  consider  the
    Supreme Court decision in Patel and Alam & Anwar v SSHD [2013] UKSC  in
    which it was  said  that  a  near-miss  was  capable  of  enhancing  an
    individual's case.   Finally  the  judge  had  erred  by  not  properly
    considering Article 8 and the case of CDS (PBS "available"  Article  8)
    Brazil [2010] UKUT 305 and other  relevant  Article  8  cases  such  as
    Gulshan and Razgar.

Findings and Conclusions

 5. There is no error of law in this decision.  The  fundamental  point  is
    that the appellant cannot meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  He does not meet the required standards in respect of knowledge
    of the English language and he does not have a valid CAS.  His case was
    bound to fail.

 6. First the faxed medical report dated 28th August 2014 does not say,  as
    alleged in the grounds, that the appellant was  unable  to  attend  the
    court hearing due to his back pain but that the doctor had been told by
    him that he was unable to attend the court  hearing  due  to  his  back
    pain.  Even if the judge had had that letter before her it  would  have
    made no difference to her decision.

 7. The other grounds are wholly without merit.  The case of  Rodriguez  is
    irrelevant since this is not a case which failed because of a shortfall
    in the specified evidence.  Patel is irrelevant - this is not  a  near-
    miss case.  The remaining grounds challenging the  judge's  conclusions
    in respect of Article 8 have no substance because on any view it  could
    never have succeeded on Article 8 grounds.

Notice of Decision

 8. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

9.   No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
