
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/24020/2014
                                                               IA/24026/2014
                                                               IA/24039/2014
                                                               IA/24033/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |        Decision & Reasons           |
|                                          |Promulgated                          |
|On 10 September 2015                      |        On 24 November 2015          |
|                                          |                                     |

                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                            MVP (First appellant)
                           SMP (second appellant)
                            HMP (third appellant)
                           EAP (fourth appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms G Brown, Counsel instructed by Farani Javid
                  Taylor Solicitors
For the Claimant: Ms R Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are citizens of India and a family of  four.  The  first
    and  second  Appellants  are  the  parents  of  the  third  and  fourth
    Appellants. The first and second Appellants obtained visit visas on  27
    March 2002 which expired on 27 September 2002.  The  first  and  second
    Appellants arrived in the UK on 20 April 2002 and have resided  in  the
    UK to date. The third Appellant was born on 10 June 2005 and is aged 10
    at present, but was aged 9 at the date of his appeal before the  First-
    tier Tribunal. The fourth Appellant was born on 26 October 2007 and was
    aged 7 at the previous and current hearing. Both children were born  in
    the UK.






 2. On 19 May 2009, an application was made  by  the  first  Appellant  for
    leave to remain including his wife and two children as dependents.  The
    application was refused on 3 May 2011 and following  a  reconsideration
    was maintained on 23 August 2011 and the Appellants were simultaneously
    served with removal papers.  The  Appellants  appealed  that  decision.
    However their appeals were dismissed on 31 October 2011.




 3. Thereafter, on 5 July 2012, the Appellants lodged a further application
    on the basis of their family and private  lives.  The  application  was
    refused on 25 July 2013. The Appellants challenged the refusal  by  way
    of judicial review on 6 December  2013  and  on  27  February  2014,  a
    consent order was sealed which ordered that the family's application of
    5 July 2012 be reconsidered and removal directions  be  issued  if  the
    decision was maintained.






 4. In a Refusal  Letter,  dated  22  May  2014,  the  Secretary  of  State
    reconsidered the Appellants' human rights applications in  relation  to
    their right to private and family life under the Immigration Rules  and
    outwith those Rules pursuant to Article 8 ECHR. That Refusal Letter was
    served  upon  the  Appellants  alongside  IS151Bs  dated  27  May  2014
    confirming removal directions for the Appellants'  country  of  origin.
    The  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  its   decision   refusing   the
    Appellants' appeal against that decision on 19 February 2015.




 5. The Appellants appeals were  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Watts under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.





 6. The Appellants appealed against the decision of Judge  Watts  and  they
    were granted permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Osborne
    on all grounds. The grounds upon which permission was  granted  may  be
    summarised as follows:


      i) The judge erred in failing to take relevant evidence  into  account
         and performed a flawed best interests assessment;


     ii) The Article 8 ECHR assessment outwith  the  Immigration  Rules  was
         flawed;


    iii)  The  judge  erred  in  failing  to  apply  section  117B  of   the
         Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("the  2002  Act")
         adequately or at all.






 7. We were provided with a 'Rule 24' response from  the  Respondent  which
    was unable to take any stance as the determination of Judge  Watts  was
    not provided to the Respondent.





    Error of Law


 8. At the close of submissions, we indicated that  we  would  reserve  our
    decision, which we now give. In summary, we  find  that  there  was  no
    error of law in the decision such that it  should  be  set  aside.  Our
    reasons for so finding are as follows.






 9. In relation to the first ground, we find that the judge adequately
    considered the evidence. In her submissions, Ms Brown referred us to a
    letter dated 29 January 2015 from the Headteacher of the school that
    the minor appellants attend, and highlighted the last sentence which
    stated that the removal from the UK will have a detrimental effect on
    the continuity of the children's education. However, this sentence does
    not carry any indication of the level or extent of suggested detriment,
    nor how that detriment might impact upon the children's development.
    Consequently, the judge's failure to refer to it explicitly could have
    made no difference to the outcome of the appeal.


10. Ms Brown further referred us to a letter dated 29 January 2015 from Dr
    Shah, a Dentist, who stated that it would not be in the family's best
    interests for the children in particular to be removed from the UK.
    Again, this opinion does not carry any indication of the level or
    extent of any detriment nor how that detriment might impact upon the
    children's development. Furthermore, there is no indication of how he
    is qualified to give such an opinion, not having explained the extent
    of his acquaintance with the children.


11. Accordingly, the judge's failure to refer explicitly to Dr Shah's
    letter similarly could have made no difference to the outcome of the
    appeal.


12. Finally, we were also referred to a letter from a Mr and Mrs K whose
    child is studying in the same class as the third Appellant. Whilst this
    letter mentions that the third Appellant is a brilliant student, this
    of itself is insufficient to establish that his best interests would
    outweigh the countervailing factors of the public interest, even
    assuming that the judge was required to refer explicitly to that
    letter.


13. As a general principle, we also bear in mind that it is not encumbent
    on a judge to refer explicitly to every piece of evidence. We also note
    the judge's summary of the evidence before him, recorded at paragraph
    21 of the determination.




14. In relation to the second ground, we find that the judge did not err in
    relation to the assessment of Article 8 outwith the rules. Ms Brown
    highlighted that the third Appellant had acquired 7 years residence and
    that their bests interest should be gauged individually and it not be
    assumed that it would be in the child's best interests to remain with
    their parents and leave the UK. However, we have been unable to find
    any evidence put before the First-tier Tribunal, and none was drawn to
    our attention, which would indicate that it would not be in the
    children's best interests to remain with their parents and maintain the
    status quo of a family unit. There was also no evidence from that minor
    appellant before the First-tier Tribunal which might indicate their
    wishes on this topic. As stated by Lady Hale in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD
    [2011] UKSC 4, it might be that the child's best interests would not
    lie with remaining with their parents or the child might voice their
    opinion or wish confirming the same, which might surprise one. However
    as Ms Brown confirmed, there was no written evidence from the children
    as to their wishes and the oral evidence from their parents confirmed
    that the children do not want to go but gave no more detail than that
    plain statement. Therefore, in the absence of evidence demonstrating
    that the children's best interests would be best served remaining in
    the UK as opposed to remaining in the care of their parents, it is
    clear that the judge did not fall into error by not looking at this
    issue separately, merely presuming that the children ought to remain
    with their parents. We find that the judge considered the children's
    best interests as a primary consideration.






15. Finally, in relation to the third ground, although we agree with Ms
    Brown that there could be said to be a tension between the decisions in
    AM (S.117B) [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) and the decision of the President in
    Forman (ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 412 (IAC), we cannot see
    that any perceived or actual difference between those decisions could
    have affected the outcome of this appeal. As stated in Forman, the
    tribunal concerned has no choice and must have regard to the listed
    considerations. However, whilst the determination in the appeal before
    us would have benefitted from express reference to s.117 of the 2002
    Act, this omission is not material to the outcome of the appeal. The
    s.117B considerations in the instant appeal in favour of the appellants
    are that they are financially independent. Regarding English-speaking
    ability, both the first and second Appellants gave evidence in Hindi at
    the appeal and so it is not clear that they would have gained much if
    any 'credit' for their English-speaking ability, even if it could be
    counted in their favour, as it were. Therefore, in terms of the
    family's financial independence not being weighed against the
    appellants with reference to the public interest, in our view any error
    in this regard is not material as it could not have resulted in a
    decision in favour of the appellants in terms of proportionality.






16. We should mention that Ms Brown raised a point that the third Appellant
    turned 10 years of age on 10 June 2015 and since then has been entitled
    to apply for British Citizenship pursuant to section 1(4) of the
    British Nationality Act 1981. She argued that this must weigh in the
    child's favour. However, she also acknowledged that this point was not
    raised before the First-tier Tribunal, nor in Grounds of Appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal. Nor have the third Appellant's representatives acted
    upon the entitlement to British Citizenship despite the passage of
    several months since that entitlement accrued.


17. Consequently, these new facts not having been raised before the First-
    tier Tribunal, it cannot be said that the First-tier judge erred in law
    in failing to consider them.


18. In summary, we are not satisfied that there is any error of law in the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal, or any that could have affected
    the outcome of the appeal. Accordingly, the decision to dismiss the
    appeals is to stand.






    Decision


19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of
    an error on a point of law.






20. The decision to dismiss the appeal of each Appellant therefore stands.




    Anonymity

21. In order to preserve the anonymity of the children referred to in  this
    decision,  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008, this determination identifies  the  children  and
    those associated with them by initials only.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini                              20/11/15






