
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24183/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th November 2016                         |On 20th December 2016         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                    miss Udara Ruwanrasi Silva Hembadura
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam, Counsel, instructed by Farani Javid
                    Taylor Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 23rd January 1991.  The
    Appellant had appealed against the  Respondent's  decision  dated  15th
    June 2015 to refuse to vary by extension her existing leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student.   That  appeal
    originally came before Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Manuell
    sitting at Richmond on 7th March 2016.  The appeal  was  heard  on  the
    papers.  In a Decision and Reasons dated 5th April 2016 the Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed.

 2. On 14th June 2016 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper  Tribunal.
    On 24th October 2016  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McCarthy
    granted permission to appeal.   Judge  McCarthy  noticed  that  it  was
    arguable that Judge Manuell inverted the burden of proof when  deciding
    whether the allegation of forgery was proven.

 3. On 16th November 2016 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds
    of Appeal under Rule 24.  That response contends  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was  aware  of  the  burden  being  on  the  Respondent.
    However, it was argued  that  it  was  incumbent  upon  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to consider whether the Appellant met the Rules  and  it
    was asserted that the  judge  had  rightly  found  that  she  did  not.
    Consequently it was argued that it could  not  be  established  that  a
    different decision could have been reached.

 4. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    initially whether there is a material  error  of  law.   The  Appellant
    appears by her instructed Counsel, Mr Aslam.  The  Secretary  of  State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Bramble.

Submissions/Discussion

 5. Mr Bramble adopts a very helpful and pragmatic approach to this  appeal
    in that he accepts that there is an error in the  judge's  approach  to
    the burden of proof.  He notes that it is highlighted that there is  no
    information available from  the  Secretary  of  State  as  to  how  the
    allegation of forgery is maintained and that whilst  he  has  an  email
    chain he does not know why this was not before the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and in any event it is heavily redacted and he wonders how  much,
    if any, weight could be given to it.  On the basis that the failure  by
    the Secretary of State to adduce further evidence was  not  before  the
    Tribunal he is not certain how far, if at all, it would be  appropriate
    for him to try and make further submissions.

 6. Mr Aslam relies on paragraph 5 of the Grounds of Appeal.

The Law

 7.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 8. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

 9. The way to address this appeal is to look  initially  at  the  approach
    adopted by the judge.  The judge  was  to  a  certain  extent  under  a
    disadvantage as he was dealing with this matter on the papers.  He  has
    stated at paragraph 6:

         "Although  there  was  no  evidence   produced   to   support   the
         Respondent's allegations of forgery, the Appellant  had  chosen  to
         respond  by  a  bare  denial,  itself  unsupported.   Indeed,   the
         Appellant has taken no active interest in her appeal, surprising in
         view of its importance.  The Tribunal infers  that  the  Respondent
         would not make such a serious allegation  without  proof  and  that
         such proof exists.  With reluctance, and  considerable  hesitation,
         the Tribunal concludes that the forgery allegation is made good, by
         the narrowest of margins."

10. The burden of proof is upon the Respondent and  whilst  the  judge  has
    correctly directed himself  that  no  evidence  had  been  produced  to
    support the forgery allegation he nonetheless held that that allegation
    was made out.  He  did  this  on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant  had
    responded by a bare denial, itself unsupported, and that  the  Tribunal
    inferred  that  the  Respondent  must  have  had  proof  to  make   the
    allegation.  I am satisfied that in so proceeding the judge misdirected
    himself in that he failed to direct himself or consider that the burden
    of proof means just  that  and  that  the  Respondent  must  prove  the
    allegation, a  matter  which  necessarily  requires  evidence.   Whilst
    acknowledging that the Appellant's failure to attend any  hearing  will
    not have assisted the fact that the Appellant has not produced evidence
    is irrelevant if  there  is  no  case  for  her  to  answer.   In  such
    circumstances there is a material error of law in the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge and I set aside that decision.

The Remaking of the Decision

11. The above matters are all conceded by Mr Bramble.  Thereafter  he  goes
    on to enquire as to the correct approach that  the  Tribunal  would  be
    best to adopt.  I take the view that it is appropriate for the Tribunal
    to go on and remake the decision today.  The suggestion that there  was
    a redacted email chain which is to be found on the Secretary of State's
    file is a matter I give little weight  to.   I  do  not  know  why  any
    documents were not before the judge and I  do  not  know  whether  they
    would have been of any benefit.  I do  not,  however,  consider  it  is
    appropriate for such documentation to be adduced in evidence.  In  such
    circumstances the position remains that there is no evidence before the
    Tribunal to show that the finding of forgery is  remotely  sustainable.
    On such basis the Appellant must succeed in her appeal and  the  appeal
    is consequently allowed under the Immigration Rules.

Decision

The Appellant's appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

