

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/24865/2015
                                  IA
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 13 July 2017                        |     On 13 October 2017              |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                     R L
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                      v


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                         DECISION AND REASONS

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr. P. Saini, counsel instructed by Universal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. T. Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


 1. The Appellant is a national of the Philippines,  born  on  29.1.74.  On
    1.2.15 she applied for a residence card  pursuant  to  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006 (hereafter "the EEA Regulations") as the  family
    member of an  EEA  national  viz  her  mother's  partner,  Mr  E.  This
    application was refused in a decision dated 24.6.15, on the basis  that
    the Appellant had not established that the EEA national was  exercising
    treaty rights in the United Kingdom; she had not established dependency
    upon the EEA national prior to or since  she  had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom. Her appeal came before First  tier  Tribunal  Judge  Moan  for
    hearing on 31 March 2016. In  a  decision  promulgated  on  3.4.16  the
    appeal was dismissed on the basis that the Appellant did not qualify as
    a family member under regulation 7(1) and failed to establish that  she
    was dependent on the EEA national  prior  to  arriving  in  the  United
    Kingdom.


 2. An application for permission to appeal in time was  made  on  27.4.17.
    The grounds in support of the application asserted that the  Judge  had
    erred materially in law in the following respects:

      (i)   the Judge had applied the incorrect Regulation in that the
           Appellant's case was that she qualified as a family member
           pursuant to regulation 7(b)(ii) of the EEA Regulations, rather
           than an extended family member. Further or in the alternative,
           it was a Robinson obvious point;

      (ii)   the Judge erred in his analysis of and findings as to
           dependency cf. VN (EEA rights - dependency) [2010] UKUT 380
           (IAC); Moneke (EEA-OFMs) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00341 (IAC) and
           Reyes (EEA Regs: dependency) [2013] UKUT 00314 (IAC).

 3. Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  on  7.9.16  by  Designated  Judge
    Appleyard on the basis that the grounds seeking  permission  to  appeal
    are all arguable.

Hearing


 4. The hearing first came before the Upper Tribunal on  17.10.16  when  it
    was adjourned due to the absence of any jurisprudence directly on point
    i.e. whether a de facto stepchild qualifies as a family  member  of  an
    EEA national and the fact that the parties had  not  come  prepared  to
    argue the point. The appeal then came  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    8.12.16 when it was again adjourned as the Presenting Officer  on  that
    occasion,  Mr  Tarlow,  had  only  received  the  Appellant's  skeleton
    argument the previous day and wished to take  instructions.  A  request
    for a panel hearing was acceded to and the Respondent was given 6 weeks
    to set out her position. Directions in respect  of  both  hearings  are
    appended. Due to unforeseen circumstances the appeal did not come  back
    before the Upper Tribunal until 13 July 2017 and we apologise  for  the
    delay.

 5. We had before us a skeleton argument drafted by Mr Saini dated  7.12.16
    and from the Respondent, drafted by Mr Deller dated 18.1.17 further  to
    his previous skeleton  argument  in  which  it  is  asserted  that  the
    Appellant cannot qualify as a family member under the  EEA  Regulations
    on the basis that she is a de facto stepchild of an EEA national, given
    that her mother and Mr E are unmarried partners, rather than spouses.


 6. At the outset of the  hearing,  we  drew  the  parties'  attention  to:
    Depesme [2016] EUECJ C401/15 [15.12.16]; Rahman [2012] C83/11 3 CMLR 55
    per A-G Bot SC and the Supreme Court judgment in R ota Brewster  (2017)
    UKSC 8 and gave them time to consider these judgments.


 7. Mr Saini's submissions, as set out in his skeleton  argument,  comprise
    the following:


    (i)    the term "family member" is not confined to blood relatives  cf.
         Dulger [2012] EUECJ C-451/11 at [23] and in Alarape [2011] UKUT 443
         (IAC)  (Article 12, EC Reg 1612/68) Nigeria [2011] UKUT  413  (IAC)
         the Upper Tribunal found that, although undefined in  the  European
         Regulations,  the  term  "child"  should   be   read   to   include
         "stepchild". Mr Saini asserted  that  there  is  no  preclusion  or
         restriction stating that a stepchild's parent must  be  married  to
         the qualifying person;


    (ii)   to distinguish her as not being a stepchild due  to  her  mother
         and partner not being married (or in a civil partnership) would  be
         an act of indirect discrimination and would be in contravention  of
         European law via Council  Directive  2000/78/EC  article  1  and  a
         contravention of domestic law via the Equality Act 2010 cf. Bull  &
         Anor v Hall & Anor [2013] UKAC 73 and regulation 3 of the  Equality
         Act (Sexual Orientation) Regulations 2007;

    (iii)  it is implicit from the decision of the FtTJ at [49]-[50] that
         the Appellant has been dependent on the EEA national since her
         arrival in the United Kingdom in 2004 and she is thus entitled to a
         residence card pursuant to regulation 7(1)(b)(ii) of the EEA
         Regulations;

    (iv)    in the alternative, Mr Saini submitted that Sala (EFMs: right
         of appeal: Albania) [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC) had been wrongly decided
         on four bases:

          (a)    an unlawful failure to apply a purposive approach in
             interpreting the EEA Regulations transposing the Citizens
             Directive [CD];
          (b)    unlawful assessment of the rights and entitlements of
             OFM's/EFMs against the CD;
          (c)    unlawful assessment of the rights and entitlements of
             OFMs/EFMs against the EEA Regulations;
          (d)    unlawful assessment of parliamentary intent re regulation
             2(1) of the EEA Regulations;
          (e)    the Appellant is entitled to a right of appeal by virtue
             of articles 31 and 15 of the CD;
          (f)    the extinguishment of the right of appeal has the effect
             of unlawfully depriving the EEA national of their right to
             free movement;
          (g)  for the reasons set out by counsel for the Appellant in Sala

    In his oral submissions, Mr Saini submitted that the question  was  not
    simply one of being married or unmarried but a question of  status.  If
    the Directive draws a  distinction  between  a  married  and  unmarried
    status it may be lawful at EU  level  but  not  on  a  domestic  level.
    However, he submitted that the discrimination arises in  both  domestic
    and EU law.


 8. He submitted that a de facto adult  stepchild  could  be  considered  a
    descendant of an EEA national within the meaning of regulation 7(b)  in
    light of the judgment in Ayaz [2004] EUECJ C-275/02 at  [46]  and  [48]
    which makes clear that the term "family member" is not limited to blood
    relations and Alarape (op cit) where the  Upper  Tribunal  found  that,
    although undefined in the Regulations, the term "child" should be  read
    to include stepchildren. He submitted that there is  no  preclusion  or
    restriction stating that the stepchild's parent must be married to  the
    qualifying  person.  However,  he  accepted  that  in  light   of   the
    authorities drawn to his attention by the Upper Tribunal at the  outset
    of the hearing that he was in difficulty arguing that the Appellant  is
    a stepchild given that she did not enter the United Kingdom  until  she
    was an adult.


 9. However, Mr Saini submitted that an adult can still be a  dependant  of
    an EEA national and qualify as a family member and that a dependant can
    still be a direct descendant even if over 21.   He  submitted  that  if
    regulation 7 does not permit a stepchild of  an  unmarried  partner  to
    qualify as a family member then  that  would  represent  discrimination
    against the stepchild of the partner, regardless of whether  she  is  a
    direct  descendant.  The  Appellant  is  a  child  of   the   unmarried
    partnership  and  to  the  extent  that  unmarried  partners  are   not
    considered  family  members,  this  was  a  disadvantage  to  both  the
    unmarried partner and to that child.

10. Mr Saini submitted this disadvantage was not cured  by  virtue  of  the
    fact that such persons could be  considered  as  other  family  members
    because they are considered as a secondary class of family and this was
    contrary to the Equality Act Sexual Orientation  Regulations  2007.  He
    drew attention to the judgment of the Supreme  Court  in  Bull  v  Hall
    [2013] UKSC 73 and Lady Hale's judgment makes clear that  EU  law  only
    goes so far at [3] & [29]. Mr Saini submitted that  sexual  orientation
    only an example and the issue was being unmarried and  sharing  a  bed,
    which was contrary to the Christian values of the hotel keepers.


11. Mr Saini submitted that whilst there  was  nothing  to  stop  the  step
    parent from marrying, it is discriminatory to  treat  them  differently
    because they are not married and that the choice  of  non-marriage  and
    following a non-marriage partnership  has  resulted  in  discriminatory
    treatment. He submitted that [40] of the judgment in Bull v Hall  makes
    clear that  this  is  indirectly  discriminatory  and  it  is  for  the
    Secretary of State to justify such treatment.
12. He submitted that the hallmarks are there in that  the  Regulations  do
    provide for a benefit to family members in  that  they  have  different
    requirements and a right of appeal.


13. Mr Saini further submitted that there is no justification or  rationale
    for the differential treatment, which is prohibited. He submitted  that
    if there is discriminatory treatment in eg pensions this  is  analogous
    to a spousal partner of an EEA national. One does not  have  rights  of
    entitlement simply because one is married. The criterion applied eg  in
    Bull v Hall are not distinguishable from a class of persons based  upon
    gender. In this case there  is  a  distinction  in  civil  law  between
    classes of person. He submitted that if there are Regulations the State
    has responsibility for this area as has sought to regulate it and there
    is a right not to be unlawfully discriminated against cf.  Brewster  at
    [30] per Lord Kerr and at [48].


14. In respect of the issue of dependency, Mr Saini submitted that this had
    been accepted by First tier Tribunal  Judge  Moan.  His  attention  was
    drawn to the decision of the First tier Tribunal Judge at [38] and [39]
    of First tier Tribunal Judge's decision and [47] where the Judge stated
    that she was not satisfied that prior dependency had been  established.
    Consequently, the Appellant could not qualify in any event as  she  did
    not previously live in the same household nor was she dependent on  the
    EEA national, on the findings of the First tier Tribunal Judge.


15. Mr Saini sought to challenge these findings, however, we indicated that
    we were not prepared to permit at this late stage a  challenge  to  the
    findings of fact by the First-tier Tribunal and that it was  long  past
    the time that challenge could  be  made,  particularly  given  that  no
    reasons had been provided as to why this issue was not  dealt  with  in
    the initial grounds and it was not an  immediately  obvious  point.  In
    effect it was an out of time application to challenge a decision  on  a
    particular point and it could not be said that  the  point  is  clearly
    meritorious thus we refused the application to  amend  the  grounds  of
    appeal.


16.  We  further  stated  that  the  alternative  argument  in  respect  of
    Regulation 8 should be put to one side in light of the  fact  that  the
    Supreme Court will be considering the effect of Sala in SM and that the
    Court of Appeal had adjourned MK for this reason.


17. Mr Melvin, on behalf of the Respondent, sought to rely on the  skeleton
    arguments and did not seek to make further submissions.

Error of law

18. The first issue to determine is whether there is a  material  error  of
    law in the decision of First tier Tribunal Judge  Moan.  The  Judge  at
    [18] - [21] of the decision considered whether the Appellant  qualified
    as a family member pursuant to regulation  7  of  the  Immigration  EEA
    Regulations 2006, as amended. She concluded, correctly at [21] that the
    Appellant did not qualify as a family  member  pursuant  to  regulation
    7(1)(c) because she is a  descendant  not  an  ascendant.  However,  we
    consider that the Judge  fell  into  error  at  [19]  in  finding  that
    "regulation 7(1)(b) uses the phase "descendants" to make it clear  that
    this means children." Whilst this is the case in respect of  Regulation
    7(1)(b)(i)  which  provides  that  the  direct  descendant  of  an  EEA
    national, his spouse or civil partner is  under  21,  sub-section  (ii)
    makes provision for  "dependants  of  his,  his  spouse  or  his  civil
    partner." The  Judge  simply  did  not  consider  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant is a dependant of  an  EEA  national,  his  spouse  or  civil
    partner within the meaning of regulation 7(1)(b)(ii) of the Regulations
    as amended.


19. The issue, however, is whether that error is material. The focus of the
    case as put before us  at  the  hearing  was  that  it  was  unlawfully
    discriminatory to treat the Appellant, who is a de facto  stepchild  of
    an EEA national, by virtue of her mother's unmarried relationship  with
    Mr Enright, as falling outside the definition of  "family  member"  for
    the purposes of regulation 7 of the Immigration EEA  Regulations  2006,
    as amended.


20. Whilst we accept that Regulation 7, which is  concerned  with  (direct)
    family members, does not encompass unmarried partnerships and  this  is
    discriminatory, we do not consider that this is an  impermissible  form
    of discrimination. Our reasons are as follows:

      1.  There   is   provision   for   unmarried   partnerships   (durable
         relationships) as extended family members pursuant to regulation 8.
         Whilst the provisions of regulation 8 are less  favourable  and  in
         light of the current caselaw, a negative decision in relation to an
         application made pursuant to regulation 8 does not attract a  right
         of  appeal,  the  decision  to  distinguish  between  married/civil
         partners and unmarried partners  is  deliberate  and  reflects  the
         differing legal status.


      2. There has always been a distinction  between  a  descendant  and  a
         dependant and between  family  members  and  descendants,  who  are
         different in that one is a subset of  the  other.  The  Association
         Agreement was drafted on the  basis  of  family  members,  who  are
         defined at 10[1] of Council Directive 2004/68  which  predates  the
         Regulations and the distinction between the  different  groups  has
         been maintained and carried through.


      3. We accept that the jurisprudence upon which Mr Saini sought to rely
         recognizes the rights of step-children and the  fact  that  "family
         member" in EU law terms encompasses non-blood relations cf.  Dulger
         [2012] EUECJ C-451/11 at [23]; Ayaz [2004] EUECJ C-275/02  at  [46]
         and [48] and Alarape  (Article 12, EC Reg 1612/68)  Nigeria  [2011]
         UKUT 413 (IAC) but these cases concerned  the  step-children  of  a
         marriage and not a de facto step-child as is the case before us.


      4. We further do not accept that the Equality Act (Sexual Orientation)
         Regulations  2007  assist  us,  given   that   the   complaint   of
         discrimination relates to marital status and the position would  be
         identical were the Appellant to be the de facto step  child  of  an
         unmarried gay couple. Whilst in Bull v  Hall  [2013]  UKSC  73  the
         Supreme Court found in favour of a couple in a civil partnership on
         the basis that they had been subjected to discriminatory  treatment
         by the refusal of a Christian hotel keeper to provide them  with  a
         double-bedded room, the Appellants had a  protected  characteristic
         viz their sexual orientation.  However,  Mr  Saini  was  unable  to
         identify the protected characteristic in play in this case.  We  do
         not consider that the fact  of  being  unmarried  partners  or  the
         descendant of an  unmarried  partner  can  constitute  a  protected
         characteristic.


      5. Similarly, whilst in R ota Brewster [2017] UKHL UKSC 8, the Supreme
         Court found in favour of an unmarried partner  in  respect  of  her
         right  to  receive  a  survivor's  pension,  her  legal  right  was
         established  by  way  of  the  Local  Government   Pension   Scheme
         (Benefits,  Membership  &  Contributions)   Regulations   (Northern
         Ireland) 2009, which made express provision  for  the  right  of  a
         cohabiting surviving partner to receive a survivor's  pension.  The
         issue in the case was the fact that she had to be nominated by  the
         member and the administrating body had not received the  nomination
         form. Their Lordships per Lord Kerr disapplied the requirement  for
         nomination essentially on the basis of proportionality, in order to
         give effect to the objective which was to remove the difference  in
         treatment between a longstanding cohabitant and a married or  civil
         partner. The EEA Regulations have a different objective,  which  is
         to preserve family unity whilst maintaining a  distinction  between
         direct and extended family members  on  the  basis  of  inter  alia
         marital status.


      6. It is further clear from both the law and  the  jurisprudence  that
         some forms of discrimination are permissible. It is not unlawful to
         discriminate  against   an   unmarried   person   under   the   Sex
         Discrimination Act 1975 or now the  Equality  Act  2010.  Being  an
         unmarried person is not, in  itself,  a  protected  characteristic.
         Thus being the child or descendant of an unmarried person  is  also
         not a protected characteristic.


      7. Moreover, the logical effect of Mr Saini's argument is that, whilst
         the Appellant's mother falls to be considered as an extended family
         member by virtue of being the unmarried (durable) partner of an EEA
         national, the Appellant is entitled  to  recognition  as  a  family
         member. This is not only inconsistent but perverse.

21. In respect of Mr Saini's alternative argument as to whether or not  the
    Appellant qualified as an extended family member pursuant to regulation
    8(2), it is now clear that, following  Sala  (EFMs:  Right  of  Appeal)
    [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC) promulgated on 19 August 2016 (which post dates
    the promulgation of the First tier Tribunal Judge in this  case)  there
    is no statutory right of appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary
    of State not to grant a Residence Card to a person claiming  to  be  an
    Extended Family Member. We did not consider it appropriate to entertain
    arguments designed to challenge the reasoning underlying  the  decision
    in Sala given that this will  shortly  be  considered  by  the  Supreme
    Court.


22. We have no hesitation in concluding that whilst there are clear  errors
    in the decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Moan, the errors  are  not
    material given that the Appellant does not qualify as a dependant of an
    EEA national,  his  spouse  or  his  civil  partner  within  regulation
    7(1)(b)(ii) of the Immigration EEA Regulations 2006 as amended.

Decision

23. 2. For the reasons set out above, we find no material error of  law  in
    the decision of First tier Tribunal Moan, which we uphold.

Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

24 July 2017
