
[pic]
ST

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/24333/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 September 2015                  |On 10 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                           MRS SHAUKAT SULTANA MIR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Janjua of Morden Solicitors (London)
For the respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  who  appealed  against  the
    decision on 22 April 2014 to refuse  her  a  permanent  residence  card
    under  Regulation  15  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations   2006.
    Following a hearing on 29 January 2015, her appeal was allowed by Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal  J  Bartlett  ("the  FTTJ")  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 12 February 2015.

 2. I refer to the parties as they were in the First-tier  Tribunal  though
    the Secretary of State is appealing in these proceedings.

 3. The appellant has  made  no  application  for  anonymity  and  no  such
    direction was made by the FTTJ.  I see no need for such a direction  in
    this tribunal.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Ransley on 14 April  2015.  In  particular,  he  noted  that  the  FTTJ
    referred erroneously to Regulation 7 in paragraph 17.  Hence the matter
    comes before me.

The Submissions

 5. Mr Avery submitted that the refusal had been under Regulation 15 of the
    EEA Regulations yet the  FTTJ  had  referred  to  the  appellant  being
    "successful under Regulation 7" which was not the  correct  regulation.
    Furthermore, the FTTJ had found that the appellant's husband  had  been
    exercising treaty rights "under a self-employed basis since 1  February
    2015".  This was, he submitted, an error of law because the hearing had
    taken place prior to that date. He also noted a typographical error  in
    paragraph 13 which refers to an income and expenditure account for  the
    period "from 1 April 2013 to 31 March 2013".  In addition,  apart  from
    these errors, the FTTJ's  references  to  the  appellant's  documentary
    evidence suggested that it remained insufficient.  Mr  Avery  submitted
    that the decision was confusing, unclear and erroneous.

 6. Mr Janjua agreed that there were a number of  typographical  errors  in
    the decision but submitted that these did not impact  on  the  decision
    which was not perverse; taking the decision overall, the  decision  was
    clear and identified the relevant issues by reference  to  the  correct
    regulation.

 7. Mr Avery confirmed, in reply, that he did not submit the  decision  was
    perverse, merely that it was so unclear as  to  amount  to  a  material
    error of law.

Discussion

 8. The FTTJ's decision contains two apparent incongruities. The  first  of
    these is in paragraph 13 where she refers to an "income and expenditure
    account prepared by Azed & Co Certified Public Accountants  in  respect
    of the period from 1 April 2013 to 31  March  2013"  (emphasis  added).
    She goes on to list in detail various other documents submitted by  the
    appellant  to  demonstrate  her   husband's   self-employment   history
    including self-assessment forms and accountancy documents  dating  back
    to 1 February 2010.  The appellant's bundle provided  for  the  hearing
    includes an income and expenditure account for the period 1 April  2013
    - 31 March 2014.  For these reasons, the date of 31 March 2013 must  be
    a typographical error and should read 31 March 2014.

 9. In paragraph 15 the FTTJ states that she is  satisfied  "the  appellant
    husband [sic] is exercising treaty rights and that he has been doing so
    under a self-employed basis since 1 February  2015"  (emphasis  added).
    The hearing took place on 28 January  and  although  the  decision  was
    promulgated on 12 February 2015, the date of 1 February 2015 is clearly
    an error as it has no basis in the evidence and simply  does  not  make
    sense.  It is clear that this is a typographical error because  in  the
    preceding paragraph the FTTJ notes  that  the  appellant  had  provided
    accounts for the period 1 February 2010 to 5 April 2010  and,  further,
    because she refers in paragraph 4 to the appellant's evidence that  her
    husband had been working as a  self-employed  minicab  driver  since  1
    February 2010.  Taking the  decision  as  a  whole,  the  FTTJ  made  a
    typographical error in referring to 2015; the correct date, as  in  the
    evidence which she had accepted in paragraph 15, is 2010.

10. The FTTJ also accepted that the appellant's husband had been  employed,
    as claimed, prior to 1 February 2010 at an accountancy firm,  Sarmad  &
    Co.

11. In paragraph 1 the FTTJ noted that the basis  of  the  application  was
    that the appellant's husband had been exercising Treaty rights  in  the
    UK for a period of five years "in accordance with the Immigration (EEA)
    Regulations 2006". Whilst there is no reference in  that  paragraph  to
    regulation 15, it is implicit from the terms  of  that  paragraph  that
    this is the relevant regulation. Indeed the FTTJ goes on to assess  the
    evidence with that timeframe in mind. She concludes that  he  had  been
    employed prior to 1 February 2010 and self-employed  thereafter.  Thus,
    implicitly, she found that, by 29 January 2015 (the date  of  hearing),
    he had been exercising Treaty rights in the UK for a period  in  excess
    of five years.  It is very  unfortunate  that  the  FTTJ  concluded  in
    paragraph 17 that the appeal was "successful under Regulation 7 of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006" but it is clear from  the  totality
    of the decision and the FTTJ's reasons that she applied the criteria in
    Regulation 15(1)(b), as stated in the notice of  decision  and  reasons
    for refusal.

12. I take into account Mr Avery's submission that the FTTJ's references to
    missing documentary evidence suggest that the evidence was insufficient
    to demonstrate compliance with Regulation 15, but,  in  doing  so,  the
    FTTJ has fairly taken into account the issues raised in the reasons for
    refusal letter.  Her finding that  the  appellant's  husband  had  been
    exercising Treaty rights for five years was open to her on the evidence
    before her notwithstanding more documentary evidence  might  have  been
    adduced than it was.

13. In summary, whilst the drafting of the decision is careless  in  parts,
    taking it as a whole it is clear that the FTTJ  applied  the  terms  of
    Regulation 15(1)(b) to the  evidence  and  that,  having  assessed  the
    evidence,  she  found  it  sufficient  to  demonstrate  the   appellant
    fulfilled the criteria in that regulation.  That was an option open  to
    her on the evidence. Her reasons are adequate and sustainable.

Decision

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

15. I do not set aside the decision.

16. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black   Date

