
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24405/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th January 2015                          |On 20th January 2015          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                             MR ADEYINKA ADEBAYO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Pledger
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 31st July 1969 is  a  citizen  of  Nigeria.   The
    Appellant was represented by Miss Pledger of Counsel.   The  Respondent
    was represented by Mr McVeety, a Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application to remain in the United  Kingdom  on
    Article 8  grounds  and  that  application  had  been  refused  by  the
    Respondent on 22nd May 2014.  The Appellant had appealed that  decision
    and his appeal was heard by Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Baird sitting at Manchester on 1st September 2014.  The judge dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal.

 3. The Appellant had made application for  permission  to  appeal  on  the
    basis that the judge had  erred  by  applying  the  wrong  legal  test.
    Firstly it was said that the Appellant was the parent of  a  qualifying
    child and the statutory provisions of Section  117B(6)  were  satisfied
    and the public interest did not require the  Appellant's  removal  from
    the UK.  Secondly it was said the judge had erred in finding there  was
    no evidence that it would be unreasonable for the Appellant's  children
    to accompany him to Nigeria  given  that  the  Respondent  had  already
    granted discretionary leave to the Appellant and his children.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Deans on  30th
    October 2014.  The judge found that it was arguable  that  no  findings
    had been made as to the best interests of the children in  the  UK  and
    other grounds were arguable.  The Respondent had opposed the permission
    on 5th November 2014.  Directions were issued that the  matter  should
    come before the Upper Tribunal firstly to decide whether  an  error  of
    law had been made or not.  The matter  therefore  comes  before  me  in
    accordance with those directions.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 5. Miss Pledger said that the Appellant had  a  qualifying  child  in  the
    sense that there was a child who had been in the UK for more than seven
    years and therefore Section 117B(6) was clear that there should  be  no
    removal unless it was reasonable to do so.  it was submitted  that  the
    assessment of reasonableness made by the judge had not gone far  enough
    in  particular  in  circumstances  where  the  Respondent   had   given
    discretionary leave to the Appellant and his children and therefore the
    proper inference was the Respondent had found it would be  unreasonable
    to remove.  It was further submitted that  a  period  of  discretionary
    leave had been given in 2010 for three years and that had been  renewed
    on 14th November 2013 giving the  Appellant  and  his  two  children  a
    further three years' discretionary leave.

 6. It was further submitted that on the renewal of the discretionary leave
    application in November 2013 very little medical evidence  relating  to
    the child Genesis had been submitted and therefore discretionary  leave
    was unlikely to have  been  based  solely  or  mainly  on  the  medical
    evidence of the child.  It was said that that schedule of evidence  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 7. Mr McVeety noted that the decision disclosed that there  were  no  real
    problems at the date of hearing in respect of the  child  Genesis.   Mr
    McVeety referred me to the case of Zoumbas and EV (Philippines) as case
    law demonstrating that the UK does not  provide  education  or  medical
    facilities for people throughout the world.  It was  further  submitted
    that as the Appellant and her children had discretionary leave  it  was
    not a question of forcing them to go back nor was  the  judge  deciding
    whether they should be removed and the  discretionary  leave  curtailed
    but merely whether at the date of hearing it  was  reasonable  for  the
    children to accompany the Appellant.

 8. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved  my  decision  to  consider
    matters and I now provide that decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 9. This is not an easy case.  The Appellant had first entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 5th October 2005 on a family visit visa  valid  until  28th
    December 2005.  Thereafter he appears to have remained unlawfully until
    an application for leave to remain as a dependent spouse  was  made  on
    23rd February 2009 which was then withdrawn in May 2009.  In June  2009
    his leave to remain application was refused.

10. On 18th April 2012 the Appellant made a further application  to  remain
    outside of the Immigration Rules under Article 8  of  the  EHCR.   That
    application was refused on 5th June 2013.   Thereafter  there  were  a
    number of representations from the Appellant's solicitors and  requests
    for evidence from the Home  Office  which  culminated  in  the  refusal
    letter of 22nd May 2014.  The Respondent has considered the Appellant's
    family and private life under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules  but
    found that he was neither married to his partner nor did  he  meet  the
    partner requirements having failed to provide  sufficient  evidence  of
    cohabitation for two years or more.  The Respondent had looked  at  the
    basis of the Appellant's claim to remain as  a  parent  but  found  his
    evidence that he was the main carer as stated by him on 18th April 2012
    to be in conflict with the evidence submitted by his partner in support
    of her application for discretionary leave to  remain.   Together  with
    other evidence the Respondent therefore concluded  that  the  Appellant
    did not have a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with  the
    two children and furthermore therefore did not fall within the terms of
    paragraph EX1.  In terms of private life the Respondent had noted  that
    the Appellant was 44 years of age and had lived in  the  UK  for  eight
    years and further found that he had social, cultural and family ties in
    Nigeria including two children in that country and  therefore  did  not
    meet the criteria of paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.  The Respondent had
    further considered the best interests of the children and whether there
    were any exceptional circumstances.

11. The judge had outlined in summary the relevant immigration history, the
    concerns raised by the Respondent and the evidence that was provided to
    her at the hearing.  It was noted by the judge at paragraph 25 that the
    Appellant's representatives accepted the Appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM.  The Appellant's representatives as  noted
    within the  skeleton  argument  submitted  to  the  judge  relied  upon
    paragraph 276ADE and Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

12. In terms of background the Appellant had lived with his partner between
    2005 and 2009 and thereafter had been separated from  her  for  two  or
    three years.  There were two children in the UK of  that  union  namely
    Genesis born on 26th June 2007 and Hope born  on  4th  May  2010.   The
    Appellant's partner and the two  children  were  granted  discretionary
    leave to remain for a three year period by the Home Office in 2010.  No
    published reasons were provided to any party so far as can be  seen  as
    to the basis for granting discretionary leave  in  2010.   However  the
    evidence submitted in respect of  a  request  for  discretionary  leave
    together with a Home Office file note would indicate that it was on the
    basis of  the  medical  condition  of  the  eldest  child  Genesis  and
    potentially mental health problems suffered by the Appellant's partner.
     There have been no applications submitted by the Appellant at the same
    time as his partner and their two children.   The  Appellant's  partner
    and her two children were then given  further  discretionary  leave  to
    remain in or about November 2013 until 2016.  Again so far  as  can  be
    seen  there  were  no  published  reasons  given  for  the   grant   of
    discretionary leave in 2013.  As a matter of policy it  is  regrettable
    that when granting discretionary leave the Home Office generally choose
    not to provide reasons for that decision.  Whilst it is  accepted  that
    it is a matter of discretion  for  the  Home  Office  as  a  matter  of
    openness it would seem appropriate that the reasons behind the grant of
    discretionary leave are provided or are a matter of  record.   That  is
    particularly important where those who have been granted  discretionary
    leave seek to regularise their stay in some other capacity or the basis
    of discretionary leave may be germane in other proceedings.

13. The judge was aware that the Appellant's partner and two  children  had
    been granted discretionary leave in 2010 and that had been  renewed  in
    November 2013 for a further three years.  She had asked the Appellant's
    partner as to the basis of discretionary leave granted in November 2013
    and the Appellant's partner's evidence was that it was on the basis  of
    the medical treatment being given to her son.  It was submitted by Miss
    Pledger that in fact the documentary  evidence  provided  to  the  Home
    Office in support of that application for  discretionary  leave  relied
    very little on the medical evidence of Genesis but in  the  absence  of
    any reasoning provided by the Home Office it is extremely difficult for
    any party or representative to know with any  clarity  the  basis  upon
    which that discretion was given.  It is  certainly  understandable  why
    the Appellant's partner would  assume  it  was  based  on  the  medical
    condition of her son as that had clearly played a significant  part  in
    the granting  of  discretionary  leave  in  2010.   There  is  a  clear
    inference from the judge's decision that she  had  presumed  given  the
    evidence provided by the partner  that  discretionary  leave  had  been
    granted essentially on the basis of Genesis's medical condition and  at
    paragraph 22 it is noted that she had questioned his condition  and  at
    paragraph 26 whilst noting that he  was  currently  suffering  from  an
    illness requiring treatment in the UK there were  no  submissions  made
    that that treatment would not be available  in  Nigeria.   She  further
    noted that there was very little medical  evidence,  prognosis  or  any
    real indication of the  child's  condition  or  the  difficulties  this
    condition may cause him.  It is not suggested the judge  was  wrong  in
    her assessment of the  medical  condition  or  the  state  of  evidence
    relating to the medical condition of Genesis.

14. The judge accepted that the Appellant played a part in family life with
    his wife and two children.   She  had  been  specifically  referred  to
    paragraph 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.
    That essentially states that in the case of a person who is not  liable
    to deportation the  public  interest  does  not  require  the  person's
    removal where:

    (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
         a qualifying child; and

    (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
    Kingdom.

    The thrust of the submissions made on the Appellant's behalf  was  that
    as the Home Office had decided that the wife and two children should be
    granted discretionary leave they must have concluded that it would have
    been unreasonable to expect the removal of the wife  and  children  and
    accordingly when looking at Section 117B it  could  therefore  be  said
    that it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
    Kingdom under the terms of Section 117B(6)(b).

15. There is some force in that argument raised.  However there  are  other
    factors of some relevance.  The judge from her  decision  had  accepted
    the Appellant had a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with
    his two children Genesis and Hope.  Those children were  born  in  2007
    and 2010 and one therefore resided in the UK for a sufficient period of
    time to be a qualifying child.  Secondly as outlined  above  there  has
    never been produced so far as can be seen to any  party  any  reasoning
    behind the Home Office decision to grant  discretionary  leave  to  the
    wife and two children in 2013.  It is difficult therefore to know  what
    factors were looked at by the Home Office,  what  assessment  they  had
    made, if any, in respect of reasonableness and what formed the basis of
    the  conclusion  to  grant  discretionary  leave.   There  was  nothing
    therefore before the judge in terms of a reasoned decision by the  Home
    Office that would have allowed her to have assessed those factors.  The
    only evidence before the judge as to what may have been the  basis  for
    discretionary leave was that which she was told by the wife namely  the
    medical condition of the son Genesis and that was evidence that she had
    considered as at the date of hearing and as set out in paragraph 26  of
    her decision.  Further the judge was  not  being  asked  to  review  or
    curtail the discretionary leave granted to the wife  and  two  children
    but merely to decide upon the removal or not of the Appellant  who  had
    never been granted discretionary leave at any stage.

16. The judge had noted that the Appellant and his wife were both  Nigerian
    citizens as were the two children in the UK.  She had also  noted  that
    the Appellant and his wife had two other children in  Nigeria  who  for
    circumstances described in  paragraph  26  of  the  decision  were  not
    eligible to make application to come to the UK.  The  judge  had  found
    that the Appellant did not meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and that much appears to have been conceded.  She  was  therefore
    looking at the Appellant's case outside of the Rules in  terms  of  the
    appropriate case law referred to at paragraph 23 of  the  determination
    namely Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640 and MM [2014] EWCA Civ 985.   The  judge
    found as noted at paragraph 28 that there was  nothing  exceptional  or
    compelling that would warrant a finding that  the  Appellant's  removal
    would be disproportionate.  She was entitled to reach that  finding  in
    respect of the Appellant.  In terms of  the  effect  on  the  wife  and
    children she had also concluded there were no insurmountable  obstacles
    to his wife accompanying him to Nigeria which was a conclusion open  to
    her on the evidence.  In respect of the children and the interplay with
    Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act she was entitled to  conclude  that  it
    would not be unreasonable for the children to accompany him to Nigeria.
     Firstly she had concluded that there  was  no  evidence  of  any  real
    problems from a medical point of view  in  Genesis  going  to  Nigeria.
    Secondly she had noted that the Appellant and his wife  had  two  other
    children in Nigeria and accordingly  therefore  a  removal  to  Nigeria
    would result in the unification of the family.   Further  as  indicated
    above the judge was not being asked to review the  reasons  behind  the
    grant of discretionary leave to the wife and children and  to  reassess
    the factors and evidence taken into  account  by  the  Home  Office  in
    reaching their conclusion to grant discretionary leave.  That  was  not
    the task of the judge in this appeal of the Appellant  and  furthermore
    it would in any event have been an impossible task for her  to  perform
    given the total absence of any reasons  by  the  Home  Office  in  that
    decision.  The question the judge needed to answer was whether  on  the
    evidence presented it would or would not be reasonable  to  expect  the
    children to leave  the  UK.   The  judge  concluded  that  it  was  not
    unreasonable which was a conclusion open to her.

17. It was noted in the permission to grant an appeal that  the  judge  had
    failed to consider the best interests of the children.  It is true that
    she did not specifically refer to Section 55 of the  Borders  Act  2009
    but she had considered the documentary evidence that had been  produced
    together with the oral evidence.  It is clear that she had assessed the
    medical evidence relating to Genesis and indeed  at  paragraph  16  had
    noted the up-to-date medical report stating that  the  child's  general
    health was excellent and that there had  been  an  improvement  in  his
    behaviour.  She had accepted that there  was  a  family  life  existing
    between the Appellant, his wife  and  the  two  children.   Whilst  not
    explicitly stated given the ages of  the  children  in  particular  the
    youngest Hope it is a proper presumption in the absence of any evidence
    to the contrary of which there was none that their best interests  were
    to be with their parents.  The judge had  also  noted  that  those  two
    children in the UK had two  siblings  in  Nigeria  and  the  judge  has
    specifically said that it would be best interests of those two children
    in Nigeria to be reunited with the rest of the family who were  in  the
    UK.  Again whilst not explicitly stated it is a proper  inference  that
    the reverse is also true that it would be  the  interests  of  the  two
    children in the UK to be reunited with their siblings in Nigeria.

18. Whilst the judge could perhaps have provided more  detail  or  analysis
    relating to the best interests of the children in the UK  it  is  clear
    that she had considered all of the documentary evidence  provided,  had
    assured herself of the current medical condition  of  Genesis  and  had
    noted the not insignificant feature of the reunification of siblings to
    form one family.  In those circumstances whilst it could be  argued  it
    was erroneous not to have provided more reasoning it could not be  said
    that the decision reached by the judge would have  been  any  different
    simply on the basis of a somewhat lengthier  assessment  or  reasoning.
    To that extent if there was an error of law it was not material.

Notice of Decision

19. I find no material error of law was made by the judge in this case  and
    I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed   Date 19th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
