

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/24901/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|On 20 January 2015                   |On 21 January 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                               FLORENCE ANYOMI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Jones, of Hamilton Burns, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Ghana.   She  appeals  against   a
    determination by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mozolowski,  dismissing  her
    appeal against refusal of leave to remain  based  on  her  family  life
    interests and those of her husband, a UK citizen.

 2. The five grounds in summary are as follows:

         (i) the judge wrongly thought that  the  sponsor  did  not  receive
         psychiatric back-up care, and so erred in thinking  that  his  care
         needs could be replicated in Ghana;

         (ii) the judge speculated that medication  needed  by  the  sponsor
         might be available in Ghana;

         (iii) the sponsor's visit to the appellant  in  England  for  three
         weeks was not comparable to moving  to  Ghana  when  he  had  never
         travelled outside the UK  and  is  aged  64  with  chronic  medical
         conditions;

         (iv) the assessment that the appellant could return to Ghana  alone
         failed to take account of the economic wellbeing of the UK, as  she
         provides all aspects of personal care, which costs  would  fall  on
         the public in her absence; and

         (v) the tribunal overemphasised the  public  interest  rather  than
         considering the impact of removal on the appellant's family life.

 3. Ms Jones submitted further to the  grounds  as  follows.   Ground  (i):
    there was evidence that the  sponsor  had  counselling  and  outpatient
    psychiatric   appointments,   contrary   to   paragraph   27   of   the
    determination, where the judge said that he received "no social work or
    psychiatric backup as  the  appellant  attends  to  all  the  sponsor's
    needs".  The judge went wrong about the evidence  which  led  into  the
    further error of finding that  his  support  "could  be  replicated  in
    Ghana" because he would be with the appellant.  There should have  been
    a finding that the support for the sponsor would not  be  the  same  in
    Ghana, but rather there would be serious hardship.  Ground (ii): it was
    accepted  there  had  not  been  evidence  about  what  medication  was
    available in Ghana.  However, there had  been  evidence  of  advice  to
    expatriates to buy an  international  health  insurance  plan;  of  the
    sponsor's health problems; his lack of savings; and his  dependency  on
    benefits.  The judge had fallen into speculation  in  saying  that  his
    treatment could continue, there having been no evidence that  he  could
    afford long term health insurance.   Ground  (iii)  spoke  for  itself.
    Grounds (iv) and (v) ran together.  The judge  had  not  mentioned  the
    positive economic effect of the appellant remaining  in  the  UK.   The
    determination should be set aside and reversed.

 4. Mrs O'Brien submitted along these lines.  The judge showed that she was
    aware of the type of support  the  sponsor  receives,  particularly  at
    paragraphs 13 - 15 where several sources are mentioned.  In context the
    judge's conclusion at paragraph 27 was clearly that the sponsor did not
    receive any intensive or day-to-day care and treatment.  His conditions
    were well controlled and his psychiatric appointments are for  biannual
    checkups only.  The determination should be read fairly and as a whole.
     Ground (i) made a point which was only  superficially  attractive  and
    which ignored the earlier paragraphs of the determination.  The  thrust
    of the appellant's case had been the care the sponsor received from her
    not from anywhere else. It had  not  been  shown  that  his  needs  for
    support diminished after the appellant  came  into  his  life.   As  to
    ground (ii) it had been for the appellant to show what care the sponsor
    would need in  Ghana,  what  it  would  cost  and  what  his  financial
    situation would be.  The judge was criticised for speculation  but  any
    absence of evidence went against  the  appellant  not  in  her  favour.
    Grounds (iv) and (v) were only disagreement on matters of weight and of
    proportionality which were for the judge.  There was no such  error  as
    to require the determination to be set aside.  Even if  the  judge  had
    gone wrong about the evidence of support the sponsor required,  it  was
    on examination only support of a limited nature and not such as to lead
    to any different result.

 5. Ms Jones in reply said that the evidence had shown that  the  appellant
    devoted much care to the sponsor  yet  he  still  required  significant
    other input from sources such as his GP, physiotherapy, an  acupuncture
    pain  clinic,  and  a  long  term  conditions  group.   Altogether  his
    conditions including his mental health  difficulties  demanded  a  high
    level of  support  form  the  NHS  and  other  sources.   It  would  be
    devastating for him to be made to move to  an  unfamiliar  country.   A
    letter  from  a  welfare  officer  of  22  August  2013  feared   rapid
    deterioration of his mental health in particular.  A GP's letter of  26
    August 2013 set out the assessments which would take place on departure
    of his wife in relation to matters to which she attends.   A  breakdown
    of costs had not been provided, but it was  evident  that  the  sponsor
    would have expensive care needs in absence of his wife.

 6. I reserved my determination.

 7. The appellant's strongest point at first  sight  is  ground  (i)  about
    overlooking evidence.   However,  I  do  not  think  it  stands  up  on
    examination of the determination as a whole.  As well as  the  passages
    pointed  out  by  the  Presenting  Officer,  in   her   proportionality
    assessment at paragraph 34 the judge referred to the sponsor having  "a
    whole raft of hospital appointments for monitoring and assistance  with
    various  ailments"  and  found  that  the  appellant's  care  would  be
    "consistent ... and superior to anything which could be provided by the
    local authority".  The appellant  could  not  have  asked  for  a  more
    favourable description of her side of the case.

 8. The judge perhaps attached a rather high degree of  significance  to  a
    three week visit to West Sussex, which is a different undertaking  from
    removal to Ghana as a first voyage abroad relatively late in life;  but
    that comparison is only a small part of the whole balancing exercise.

 9.  The  judge  directed  herself  appropriately   about   the   test   of
    insurmountable obstacles at paragraph 24 and went  on  to  justify  the
    conclusion on that point reached  at  paragraph  32.   In  that  light,
    although she  went  on  to  balance  the  various  considerations  from
    paragraphs 33 - 40, it is doubtful  whether  there  was  any  remaining
    Article 8 proportionality issue to consider.  No legal flaw is shown in
    the exercise that was conducted, even if it was not strictly required.

10. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal do not in the end  disclose
    any more than reassertion of the case put to the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    It was for the appellant  to  make  her  case  there.   The  judge  was
    entitled to find that she had not done so, for the reasons given.

11. No error has been shown  which  would  entitle  or  require  the  Upper
    Tribunal to interfere.  The determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    shall stand.

12. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




         [pic]


         20 January 2015
         Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


