
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/24742/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Columbus House, Newport    |Determination Promulgated            |
|On: 19 October 2015                  |On: 23 October 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                HATICE DENIZ
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr N Diwnych, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Gobir, Counsel instructed by Stuart Karatas
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Rourke in which he allowed the appeal of
    Mrs Deniz, a citizen  of  Turkey,  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse to vary leave to remain. I shall refer to Mrs  Deniz
    as the Applicant, although she was the  Appellant  in  the  proceedings
    below.

 2. The application under appeal was made on 1 April 2014 and  was  refused
    by reference to paragraph 284 of the Immigration Rules  (HC395)  on  20
    May 2014.  The Applicant exercised her right of appeal  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  This is the appeal which came before Judge O'Rourke  on
    14 January 2015 and was allowed. The Secretary  of  State  applied  for
    permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  application  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge P J M Hollingworth on 27  November
    2014 in the following terms:

         "An arguable error of law has arisen in relation to the finding  of
         the Judge as to the ability to delegate the running of the business
         as referred to at paragraph 23(ii). The Judge has referred  to  the
         position in the past and then stated that there  was  no  guarantee
         that this could continue. It is arguable that inadequate  reasoning
         has been shown. Given that the Judge has identified this factor  as
         discrete in relation to the question of proportionality of  removal
         doubt now arises as to the degree of weight attached  in  assessing
         the individual factors identified  by  the  Judge.  The  Judge  has
         specifically stated:

             "Nor would it be reasonable to expect him to return  full-time
             to Turkey, again because of his business  and  property  here,
             combined with him having spent the last 20  years  in  the  UK
             having, as he said, made his life here.""

 3. At the hearing before me Mr Diwnych appeared to represent the Secretary
    of  State  and  Mr  Gobir  represented  the  Applicant.  No  additional
    documents were submitted.

Background

 4.  The  history  of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
    challenged, are that the Applicant was born in Turkey on 4 March  1968.
    She has been in a relationship with her husband, the sponsor, for  most
    of the last 35 years. The Applicant married the sponsor  in  Turkey  in
    1980 and they had three children together  who  are  now  adult.  Their
    relationship broke down in 1993 and in 1995 the  sponsor  came  to  the
    United Kingdom and settled in this country. The couple reignited  their
    relationship in about 2005 and in  2010  they  went  through  a  formal
    marriage ceremony in  Turkey.  Between  2005  and  2012  the  Applicant
    regularly visited the sponsor in the UK and  he  also  visited  her  in
    Turkey. The Applicant applied for entry clearance to enable her to join
    the sponsor in the United Kingdom, this was granted and she arrived  in
    this country on 31 January 2012 and has remained here ever  since.  The
    sponsor owns a business in  the  United  Kingdom  and  also  owns  some
    property. One of their adult children is a British  citizen  and  lives
    nearby in the United Kingdom with the couple's two grandchildren.

 5. The Applicant's initial period of leave to remain expired  on  5  April
    2014 and before this she made an in time  application  to  extend  that
    leave to remain. The application was refused and the  sole  reason  for
    refusal was her failure to meet the English  language  requirements  of
    the  Immigration  Rules.  In  considering  her  application  under  the
    exception provisions (EX1) of  the  Immigration  Rules  the  Respondent
    considered that there were no insurmountable obstacles to the Applicant
    and the  sponsor  continuing  their  family  life  outside  the  United
    Kingdom. The Respondent also, if briefly,  considered  the  application
    outside the rules by virtue of Article 8 ECHR  and  noting  that  every
    state has the right to control the  entry  of  non-nationals  into  its
    territory and that Article 8 does not give a person the automatic right
    to pursue  family  life  in  the  UK  decided  that  the  decision  was
    proportionate.

 6. At the appeal hearing on 14  January  2015  it  was  accepted  by  both
    parties that the requirements of the Immigration Rules  were  not  met.
    Submissions  were  directed  solely  to  the  issue  of   whether   the
    Respondent's decision  was  in  breach  of  Article  8  ECHR  with  the
    Respondent's opening submission being recorded as "Article 8 should not
    be relied upon where the Rules are not met". The Judge found  that  the
    decision was in accordance with  the  law  and  the  Immigration  Rules
    (paragraph 14) and went on to deal with and allow the appeal by  virtue
    of Article 8.

Submissions

 7. On behalf the Secretary of State Mr Diwnych  referred  to  the  lengthy
    grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal. He did expand upon  the  first
    ground in which it is suggested  that  the  First-tier  Judge  set  the
    standard of proof at too high a level. Mr Diwnych said that  the  Judge
    was wrong to use Article  8  as  a  general  dispensing  power  and  to
    undertake a free standing assessment. There was  no  finding  that  the
    Appellant's circumstances were compelling by which  an  examination  of
    the Article 8 issues was justified. He confirmed that the  only  aspect
    of the Immigration Rules not met was the English language provision.

 8. For the Applicant Mr Gobir said that  she  and  the  sponsor  had  been
    married for a considerable  time.  There  is  nothing  wrong  with  the
    marriage  and  they  have  three   children.   After   resuming   their
    relationship they have been together  for  10  years.  The  sponsor  is
    settled in the United Kingdom and has been running  his  business  here
    for 20 years and has property  here.  Mr  Gobir  said  that  these  are
    compelling circumstances.

 9. I gave an oral decision dismissing the appeal and reserved  my  written
    reasons.

Error of law

10. In my judgement the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not
    disclose a material error of law. The facts  are  simple  and  are  not
    disputed. The Applicant is, and at all times has been, lawfully present
    in the United Kingdom. She came here as a spouse to  join  her  husband
    who has been settled in the United Kingdom for more than  twenty  years
    and who has a business and property interests here. Theirs  is  a  long
    standing relationship of some 35 years albeit with  a  10  year  hiatus
    between 1995 and 2005. There is no  doubt  about  the  genuineness  and
    subsistence of the marriage or of the ability of the couple to maintain
    themselves in the United Kingdom. They are not  a  burden  on  the  tax
    payer. When the Applicant made an in time  application  to  extend  the
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom that had been granted some  three
    years previously to enable her to settle  here  with  the  sponsor  her
    application failed because the English language  certificate  that  she
    submitted although coming from an organisation recognised by Ofqal  and
    the Welsh Assembly Government did not come from an organisation on  the
    Respondent's list of approved providers. The Respondent in the  refusal
    letter submits that this refusal and the consequent requirement for the
    Applicant to leave the UK is proportionate to  the  legitimate  aim  of
    immigration control.

11. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the Appellant's appeal finding after  a
    detailed consideration of the issues involved that the decision was not
    proportionate. The Respondent appeals  this  decision  on  two  grounds
    firstly that the wrong standard of proof was applied and secondly  that
    Article 8 was used  as  a  general  dispensing  power  there  being  no
    compelling circumstances to justify its application.

12. The first of these grounds has no merit and the grant of permission  to
    appeal is not helpful in this regard. In  the  grounds  of  appeal  the
    Respondent suggests that paragraph 23(ii) of the decision in which  the
    Judge postulates that there is no guarantee that  the  Appellant's  son
    would be able to look after his fathers business in the  future  as  he
    has in the past has  set  too  high  a  standard  of  proof.  It  is  a
    misconceived argument. The  Judge  is  quite  clearly  considering  the
    possibilities of what may happen if the Applicant and the sponsor  were
    to leave the United Kingdom and live in Turkey,  he  is  not  requiring
    proof to a particular standard of a future event. How could he? It is a
    novel argument for the Respondent to suggest the standard of  proof  is
    set too high when the burden of proof is on the Appellant.

13. So far as the second ground  is  concerned  this  is  now  one  of  the
    standard grounds where an appeal has been allowed under Article 8.  The
    jurisprudence in  this  regard  has  developed  and  is  probably  best
    summarised SS (Congo) and Others  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  and  Sunassee
    [2015] EWHC 1604.   If the requirements of the rules cannot be met, and
    a judge finds that an Article 8 assessment  outside  them  is  required
    there needs to be compelling circumstances although it will usually  be
    necessary to go through the Article 8 assessment  to  identify  whether
    compelling circumstances exist.  Paragraph 33 of  the  judgment  in  SS
    (Congo) provides guidance.

         "In our judgment, even though a test  of  exceptionality  does  not
         apply in every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it  is
         accurate to say that the general  position  outside  the  sorts  of
         special contexts referred to above is that compelling circumstances
         would need to be identified to support a claim  for  grant  of  LTR
         outside the new Rules in Appendix  FM.  In  our  view,  that  is  a
         formulation which is not as strict as a test of exceptionality or a
         requirement of "very compelling reasons"  (as  referred  to  in  MF
         (Nigeria) in  the  context  of  the  Rules  applicable  to  foreign
         criminals), but which  gives  appropriate  weight  to  the  focused
         consideration of public interest factors as finds expression in the
         Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules in Appendix FM."

14. As a result it  is  not  sufficient  to  simply  find  that  if,  in  a
    particular case,  the  requirements  of  the  rules  are  not  met,  an
    assessment outside them will be required. Compelling reasons need to be
    identified taking  into  account  the  public  interest  although  that
    identification may need to undertaken by carrying  out  the  Article  8
    assessment. In this case it was common ground that the requirements  of
    the rules  were  not  met  and  whereas  the  Judge  does  not  mention
    compelling circumstances to justify consideration outside the rules  it
    is very clear that he considers the circumstances compelling firstly by
    reference to his consideration of proportionality and secondly  by  his
    conclusion. It is fallacious argument to suggest where  an  appeal  has
    been properly and rationally allowed by virtue of Article  8  that  the
    error of law was to consider Article 8 in the first place. Where  there
    are no compelling circumstances justifying a consideration of Article 8
    outside the rules it must be inconceivable that on  such  consideration
    the appeal could properly be allowed.

15. Any proportionality assessment will still need to be made "through  the
    lens" of the new rules (see paragraphs 37 and 74 of the judgment in  AQ
    and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 250).   This means that the  reasons  why  a
    claimant fails to meet the requirements of the rules will usually still
    need to be taken into account and will  form  part  of  the  assessment
    outside them, in order to give due weight to the public  interest.   In
    this case  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  clearly  explained  why  the
    Appellant did not meet the requirements of the rules,  it  was  not  in
    dispute, and has properly considered proportionality through  the  lens
    of the rules. Indeed the First-tier Tribunal has addressed  the  public
    interest requirement very carefully. This is not the  same  as  a  near
    miss argument as suggested in  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. Put the other way around could it really be proportionate for
    the Secretary of State to say that it was in the  public  interest  for
    family lawfully settled in this country who were not a  burden  on  the
    taxpayer to be removed because the one partner had  passed  an  English
    language test approved by the Welsh Assembly Government rather than one
    provided by an examiner on the Home Office list of providers?

16. In my judgement the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in his  failure  it
    use the word compelling in his decision but this did not amount  to  an
    error of law let alone a material error of law  because  in  a  clearly
    reasoned decision the Judge explains why the Appellant's  circumstances
    are compelling and reaches an inevitable conclusion taking into account
    the   public   interest   that   the    Respondent's    decision    was
    disproportionate. My conclusion from all  of  the  above  is  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of  law  material
    to the decision to allow the appeal. The appeal  of  the  Secretary  of
    State is therefore dismissed.

Summary

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law. I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.


Signed:     Date:

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
