
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24368/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 November 2015                  |On 23 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               JULIA BOAMPONG
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr N. Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Unrepresented and not in attendance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  Neither  the  respondent   (hereinafter   "the   claimant"),   nor   a
    representative on her  behalf,  attended  the  hearing.  I  nonetheless
    decided to proceed as the claimant had been given proper notice and had
    offered no explanation for her absence.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Ghana who was born on 2  March  1988.  Her
    partner, also a citizen of Ghana, was born on 10 May  1986.  They  have
    two children, born on 17 June 2006 and 5 February 2011,  who  are  also
    citizens of Ghana.

 3. The claimant first entered the UK on 7 December 2003 on  a  visit  visa
    which expired on 27 April 2004. Her husband entered in UK in  2004.  He
    was issued an EEA case residence document (Dependent) in  2005  as  the
    dependent of an adoptive father which expired in 2008.

 4. In a decision dated  15  May  2014,  the  appellant  (hereinafter  "the
    Secretary of State") considered  whether  the  claimant  satisfied  the
    requirements of Appendix FM and Paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and concluded that she did not. A decision was made to remove her
    from the UK under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 5. The claimant appealed and her appeal was heard by  First-tier  Tribunal
    (FtT) Judge Kennedy. In a decision promulgated on 13 March 2015 the FtT
    found  that  the  claimant  satisfied  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(vi) because she did not have  ties  to  Ghana  and  allowed  her
    appeal. The factual findings of the FtT in support of  this  conclusion
    included that:

      a. Her father died she was young and she had been taken away from  her
         family at the age of ten by a lady she met when selling  water  who
         subsequently brought her to the UK

      b. She came to the UK at the age of 15 were she was  pressurised  into
         prostitution which she refused and ended up living on the streets.

      c. She is one of 8 siblings but they are all dissipated

      d. She formed a relationship with her partner in 2005 and subsequently
         they have lived together and had two children, both born in the UK

      e. For the last four years she and her partner have been homeless

      f. Her children speak English and Ghanaian.

      g. She and her partner consider Britain their home and are  culturally
         connected to it

      h. She and her partner have no contact with friends  or  relatives  in
         Ghana.

      i. She spent 11 years in the UK during which time she progressed  from
         childhood to adulthood.

 6. The wording of paragraph 276ADE(vi) relevant to this appeal, and  which
    was applied by the FtT, is that which was in force between 9 July  2012
    and 27 July 2014, which provides that the applicant:

         "... is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously  in  the  UK
         for less than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but
         has no ties (including social, cultural or family) with the country
         to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK"

 7. The grounds of appeal submit that the FtT  erred  by  failing,  in  its
    assessment of the claimant's ties to Ghana, to give adequate weight  to
    (a) the claimant's  children  speaking  Ghanaian;  (b)  the  claimant's
    partner's brother and sister living in Ghana; (c) the lack of  evidence
    about the claimant's partner's mother being deceased; (d)  the  support
    the claimant could receive from friends in the UK who  are  members  of
    the Ghanaian diaspora; (e) support the claimant could receive from  her
    church; and (f) the capacity of the claimant  to  re-establish  contact
    with  siblings.  The  grounds  also  submit  that  the  Upper  Tribunal
    decisions of Ogundimu [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC) and Bossadi  [2015]  UKUT
    00042 (IAC) have not been properly followed or applied.

 8. Mr Bramble made brief submissions. Having  reiterated  that  the  issue
    under appeal was the meaning of "no ties" under 276ADE(vi),  he  argued
    that although the FtT had identified the relevant legal test  and  case
    law, it  had  reached  a  conclusion  that  was  not  open  to  it.  In
    particular, he drew a distinction between Ogundimu and  Boassdi,  which
    concerned individuals, with the present case, which concerned a  family
    unit who would be returned to their country.

 9. The issue raised in the grounds, and put before me by  Mr  Bramble,  is
    whether the FtT erred in its consideration of the claimant's  ties  (or
    absence thereof) to Ghana. The question of whether this was in fact the
    correct test for the FtT to apply, given the change  in  the  Rules  in
    July 2014, has not been raised and therefore is not considered in  this
    decision.

10. In Bossadi, the Upper Tribunal recently considered the term "ties". The
    headnote to that case states that assessment of "ties":

         "requires a rounded assessment as to whether  a  person's  familial
         ties could result in support to him in the even to his  return,  an
         assessment  taking  into  account  both  subjective  and  objective
         considerations and also  consideration  of  what  lies  within  the
         choice of a claimant to achieve".

11. There is also helpful clarification of  the  term  "ties"  in  Ogundimu
    where at paragraph [125] the Upper Tribunal set  out  factors  to  take
    into consideration:

         "Whilst each case turns on its own facts, circumstances relevant to
         the assessment of whether a person has ties to the country to which
         they would have to go if they were required  to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom must include, but are not limited to: the length of time  a
         person has spent in the country to which he would have to go if  he
         were required to leave the United Kingdom, the age that the  person
         left that country, the exposure that person has had to the cultural
         norms of that country, whether that person speaks the  language  of
         the country, the extent of the family and friends that  person  has
         in the country to which he is being deported  or  removed  and  the
         quality of the relationships that person has with those friends and
         family members."

12. This is a case in which the FtT has carried out precisely the  type  of
    rounded assessment required under Bossadi and Ogundimu. The FtT has had
    regard, but not limited itself, to  all  of  the  factors  set  out  in
    Ogundimu  and  has  undertaken  a  rounded  assessment  that   includes
    consideration of the claimant's age of arrival  in  the  UK  (15  years
    old), her absence of contact with or  connection  to  her  family  (her
    father died when she was young, she was separated from her mother at 10
    and has not seen her brothers), her cultural connection to  Ghana  (the
    judge was satisfied that she has none, although she speaks Ghanaian  to
    her children) and her family circumstances in the UK.

13. The Secretary of State has argued that this case differs to Bossadi and
    Ogundimu because the claimant would be returned to Ghana  as  a  family
    unit with her partner  and  children  and  this  constitutes  "familial
    ties". But the FtT has clearly taken into  account  that  the  claimant
    would return to Ghana with her family  and  it  is  apparent  from  the
    decision that the FtT carefully considered her partner's ties to  Ghana
    before finding that he has no family capable  of  giving  him  and  the
    claimant support.

14. This is a clear and cogent decision in which  the  FtT  has  reached  a
    conclusion that was open to it based on the evidence before it.

Decision

 a. The appeal is dismissed.

 b. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law and shall stand.

 c. No anonymity order is made.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 19 November 2015              |

