
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA 24796 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 May 2014                                |On 26 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                           Varinderpal Singh Malhi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr V Makol, legal representative from Maalik & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of India against a decision by the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against refusal of leave to  remain
    as an entrepreneur.  The immigration decision and the explanation given
    for the  decision  identified  two  deficiencies  in  the  application.
    Firstly, the appellant did not disclose  a  telephone  number  for  his
    business.  The Secretary of  State  said  that  he  should  have  done.
    Secondly the appellant did not sign all the documents  that  he  should
    have signed in support of his application.

 2. The Rules are precise to the point of being pedantic,  one  might  even
    say infuriatingly pedantic, but they are part of a  legitimate  attempt
    to  simplify  the  decision-making  process.  There  is  a  very  heavy
    obligation on applicants to read the Rules carefully,  understand  them
    and do as they are told.  This the appellant did not do.

 3. When the case got to the First-tier Tribunal, by some  mechanism  which
    is not entirely clear, a third ground of contention was raised  and  it
    is that the business was not a genuine business at all.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found for the  respondent  on  all  three
    points.

 5. I deal first with the failure to  sign  the  document.   The  Rules  do
    provide a mechanism for relief where there had  been  minor  or  simple
    mistakes subject to certain conditions including the condition in  this
    case that the truth can be verified from the documents  already  before
    the Secretary  of  State.   Here  the  missing  item  was  the  missing
    signature of the appellant and the signature I  am  told,  I  have  not
    checked this, was before the Secretary of State on other  documents  in
    any event.

 6. I think this is exactly the  kind  of  thing  which  comes  within  the
    province of the Rules.  It is something which can  be  checked  against
    the information already available, readily  corrected  and  capable  of
    being corrected.  However, it is not for me to make a finding on  that.
    It is for me simply to say that the  Rule  requires  the  Secretary  of
    State to consider  asking,  giving  the  appellant  an  opportunity  to
    rectify their documents in certain circumstances and  a  decision  that
    fails to do that is a decision that is not in accordance with the  law.
    That criticism I think is made out but it may not be material.

 7. The failure to provide a telephone number is a failure to comply with a
    qualified obligation.  The obligation only exists to disclose a  number
    where it is available and the  appellant  had  said  here  through  his
    witnesses that it is not available because it does not exist.  He  says
    there is no telephone landline because "we do not use landlines to  run
    our business", and that is something that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    found surprising to the point of being unbelievable.

 8. Whilst that is not a decision everybody  would  have  reached  on  that
    evidence I would have found it hard to  describe  that  as  a  perverse
    finding if that was all that was before me.  The problem is,  from  the
    point of view of preserving the decision,  that  it  is  a  credibility
    finding and credibility  rarely  is  decided  on  discrete  issues  but
    decided from looking at the case as a whole.  Here  there  are  adverse
    credibility findings relating to the bona fides of the business which I
    think are unreliable or unsafe findings in law  because  the  appellant
    was not on notice before the hearing that these were points that he had
    to answer.   If  he  had  been  on  notice  he  may  have  done  things
    differently.

 9. Mr Makol for the appellant was  somewhat  vague  about  precisely  what
    would have to be done.  He has pointed out that  there  is  before  the
    Tribunal very detailed evidence about the appellant's skills as  an  IT
    operative and these are important matters but they do  not  necessarily
    go to the bona fides of the business.

10. I am satisfied that  now  the  point  is  clearly  in  issue  that  the
    appellant ought in fairness to have an opportunity to prepare the  case
    that he now has to answer and to deal with that element  of  his  case.
    How he fares there may well impact on the credibility of  the  evidence
    that there is no landline available although I do make the  observation
    for the benefit of anybody looking at this  case  that  the  suggestion
    that there must be a landline is based on speculation.  A  judge  might
    want to think carefully in concluding without evidence  that  landlines
    are commonly available to businesses in India and business are unlikely
    to be contactable by mobile 'phone alone.  I just do not know  if  they
    are, and it may be something that needs particular thought.

11. It follows therefore that I am remitting the  case  to  the  First-tier
    because this is a case where the appellant has not had a  fair  hearing
    and all issues will be decided again.  As far as I can  see,  if  those
    issues result in the appellant's favour  it  will  not  result  in  the
    appeal being allowed except to the extent that it would be an  unlawful
    decision for the Secretary  of  State  to  remedy  by  considering  the
    operation of 245A.

12. It follows therefore for the reasons given that this is an appeal  that
    I allow and I substitute the decision saying  that  the  case  must  be
    decided by the First-tier Tribunal.  I set aside the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and remit it to be decided again in the First-tier.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 24 June 2014                   |








