
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24771/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided at Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 July 2013                               |On 15 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Appellant
                                     and

                                MYRNA MARTIN
                                                                  Respondent


                                  DECISION

    1. The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal against  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal which allowed  the  Respondent's
       appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse her leave
       to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.

    2. The procedural history of the proceedings before the Upper  Tribunal
       is of little  relevance  in  the  circumstances  that  now  prevail.
       Suffice to say that the appeal before me was  to  determine  whether
       there was an error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
       and, if so, what should follow.

    3. By letter dated 3 July 2013 the Respondent's  legal  representatives
       were notified that the UKBA had "implemented the allowed appeal". Ms
       Martin who represented the Secretary of State before me on  12  July
       indicated that the Respondent has now been granted leave to  remain.
       I was told that that had been done by mistake, seemingly in response
       to a determination of an  Upper  Tribunal  judge  who  had  in  fact
       reversed the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. That determination
       followed  a  hearing  at  which  neither  the  Respondent  nor   her
       representatives attended. The determination was set aside under rule
       43 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

    4. Nevertheless, it was accepted on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State
       that, leave to remain having been  granted,  the  appeal  is  to  be
       treated as abandoned.

    5. In the circumstances,  the  appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
       therefore treated as abandoned pursuant to section  104(4A)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.






Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                               12/07/13

