
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/24826/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th September 2015                        |On 29th September 2015        |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH

                                   Between

                        CHANTILLE PATRICE BLAKEGROVE
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Nicholson instructed by One Immigration
(Leicester)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant had applied for leave  to  remain  as  the  spouse  of  a
    British citizen.  Her application was refused by the Respondent  and  a
    decision made to  remove  her  to  Jamaica.   An  appeal  against  that
    decision was heard before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Pickup  at
    Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent on 4th September 2014.  In his  decision,
    promulgated on 17th September 2014, the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal.
    Amongst his findings he stated (at paragraph 24 of his  decision)  that
    the Appellant could not succeed under Appendix FM  to  the  Immigration
    Rules as she was in the UK in breach of immigration laws  and  did  not
    have any valid leave.  He considered that the refusal decision  by  the
    Secretary of State was flawed in that it appeared to consider paragraph
    EX1 when that paragraph could not be reached because of  a  failure  to
    meet paragraph E-LTRP2.1-2.2.  He also found that the  Appellant  could
    not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Rules and that her
    removal would be proportionate under Article 8 ECHR.

 2. In the grounds of application it was stated that the judge had erred in
    his approach  to  paragraph  FM.   The  Respondent  accepted  that  the
    Appellant met the suitability requirements of the Rules.  The judge had
    been incorrect in considering that the Appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph E-LTRP2.2, which  at  the  time  stated  "the
    applicant must  not  be  in  the  UK  in  breach  of  immigration  laws
    (disregarding any period of overstaying for a  period  of  28  days  or
    less) unless paragraph EX1 applies".  It was said that the  Rules  were
    framed precisely to allow a spouse to remain in the UK despite a breach
    of the Rules if EX1 applied.  With regard to his decision under Article
    8 the judge had  noted  at  paragraph  19  of  his  decision  that  the
    insurmountable  obstacles  test  did  not  mean  obstacles  that   were
    impossible to surmount but implied a reasonableness  test.  However  it
    appeared that in fact he had  applied  a  test  of  obstacles  and  his
    approach to "reasonableness" was unlawful.  It was also said  that  the
    judge had failed to address the evidence of the Appellant's  spouse  as
    to the reasons why he could not relocate to Jamaica.  The spouse was  a
    39 year old man who had lived in the UK all of his life, had no ties to
    Jamaica and would encounter risks if  he  went  there.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted on all grounds.

 3. At the commencement of the hearing Mr Smart on behalf of the  Secretary
    of State accepted that there was an error in the decision as the  judge
    had incorrectly regarded paragraph EX1 as not being in  issue  when  it
    was.  However he argued that the accepted error was not material to the
    outcome  as  the  judge  had  gone  on  to  consider  the   matter   of
    reasonableness in the context of Article 8 ECHR.  As to  whether  there
    were findings upon the evidence of the spouse, Mr Smart said  that  the
    judge had considered that evidence at paragraph  31  of  his  decision.
    For his part, Mr Nicholson said that there  were  fundamental  problems
    with  the  decision.   There  had  been  a  misunderstanding  of  where
    paragraph EX1 fitted into the scheme of Appendix FM.  The reasoning  at
    paragraph 24 of the decision was simply wrong.   If  EX1  applied,  the
    Appellant could succeed.   With  regard  to  the  suggestion  that  the
    decision could be sustained because of  the  judge's  assessment  under
    Article 8 ECHR. In that assessment the judge had not had regard to  the
    experience of the spouse on his one visit to Jamaica nor to the Foreign
    and Commonwealth Office  advice  to  British  citizens  going  to  that
    country.  It could not be said that the judge had taken  that  evidence
    on board but in any event he should  have  considered  matters  in  the
    context of EX1.  It was also the case that the judge had at  one  point
    referred to the test under Article 8 being one  of  reasonableness  but
    had then applied a test of obstacles.  There were good reasons why  the
    spouse could not go to Jamaica, including the dependency of his father.
     After some discussion the two advocates accepted that the  version  of
    the Rules in play as at the date  of  decision  under  appeal  did  not
    include the words now appearing as EX2.

 4. Having considered the grounds and those submissions I came to the  view
    that there was a material error of law in the  judge's  decision.   The
    correct construction of the position of paragraph EX1 in Appendix FM is
    helpfully set out in the reported decision of Sabir (Appendix FM -  EX1
    not freestanding) [2014] UKUT 00063 (IAC).  In  the  current  case  the
    Respondent accepted that the Appellant met the suitability requirements
    of the Rules.  Section R-LTRP1.1 sets out the requirements  to  be  met
    for limited leave to remain as a partner and by virtue of sub-paragraph
    (d) EX1 was relevant if the Appellant could come within  (ii)  of  that
    sub-Section which requires an applicant to come  within  E-LTRP1.2-1.12
    and (as at the time of decision) E-LTRP2.1 and 2.2.  The Appellant  did
    not fall foul of E-LTRP2.1.  2.2 reads "the applicant must  not  be  in
    the UK in breach  of  immigration  laws  (disregarding  any  period  of
    overstaying for a period of 28  days  or  less)  unless  paragraph  EX1
    applies".  It will be seen that the Appellant does come within this sub-
    paragraph.  The judge therefore erred in considering that paragraph EX1
    was not in issue, as Mr Smart quite readily accepted.

 5. The issue is therefore whether the decision made may  be  sustained  in
    the light of the other findings made, not in relation to the Rules  but
    under Article 8 outside of the Rules.   I  find  that  it  cannot.   At
    paragraph 23 the judge said that the Appellant's application and appeal
    fell to be considered first and foremost under the  Immigration  Rules.
    The fact that in his  assessment  she  failed  under  the  Rules  would
    therefore appear to have  coloured  his  approach  to  Article  8.  His
    starting point in  that  respect  was  that  she  failed  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules, a potentially relevant factor in considering
    proportionality.

 6. It is correct that at paragraph 21 the judge referred to  the  evidence
    of the Appellant's spouse but he made no express findings on either the
    difficulties which leaving his elderly UK family would involve  or  his
    fears of what could  befall  him  as  a  British  citizen  resident  in
    Jamaica.  In  the  circumstances  I  set  aside  the  decision  in  its
    entirety.

 7. I then canvassed with the representatives whether it would be  possible
    to go on to make fresh findings on the same occasion.  Mr Nicholson for
    the Appellant said that the statements produced were now  out  of  date
    and there was further evidence that the spouse suffered from a  medical
    condition which was relevant to Article 8.  There were new facts and it
    was not his client's fault that an error of law had been  made  at  the
    initial hearing.  In the circumstances, and bearing in mind the  layers
    of appeal to which the Appellant is entitled, I  considered  that  this
    was an appropriate case to remit to the First-tier Tribunal  under  the
    provisions  of  Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts   and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and in accordance with Practice Statement 7.2(b).


Notice of Decision

There was a material  error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal.  That decision is set aside and the  appeal  is  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing in accordance  with  the  directions
below.

No anonymity order was sought and I could see no basis upon  which  one  was
required.  None is made.


Signed                              Date: 28 September 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French


DIRECTIONS FOR HEARING IN  THE  FIRST-TIER  TRIBUNAL  PURSUANT  TO  SECTIONS
12(3)(a) and 12(3)(b) OF THE TRIBUNALS, COURTS AND ENFORCEMENT ACT 2007

 1) The findings of the First-tier Tribunal are  set  aside  in  whole  and
    fresh findings are required to be made on all issues.


 2) The members of the First-tier Tribunal to sit on  the  remitted  appeal
    should not include First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup.


 3) The appeal is to be reheard in the First-tier  Tribunal  at  the  Stoke
    Hearing Centre or such other hearing centre as  may  be  directed.  The
    time estimate is two hours.


 4) Each party shall serve upon the Tribunal and upon the other  party  all
    witness statements and other documentary evidence upon which they  seek
    to rely at least seven days before the resumed hearing.



Signed                              Date: 28 September 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

