

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/24965/2013
     IA/24953/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17th July 2014                             |On 22nd July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey

                                   Between

            BIMMAL LAKNATH COLAMBAGE AND CHATURI WASANA LIYANAGE
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

Appellants:   Mr S Khan, Solicitor.
Respondent:   Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. By its determination promulgated on 20 December  2013,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (the "FtT") dismissed the  Appellants'  appeals.   The  first-
    named Appellant's appeal was against a decision made on behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of  State"),
    dated 07 June 2013, refusing his application for leave to remain in the
    United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  1   (Entrepreneur).    The   second-named
    Appellant's application was for leave to remain as the dependent  of  a
    Tier 1 Migrant.
 2. At the conclusion of the hearing of  this  appeal,  I  provided  an  ex
    tempore judgment dismissing the appeals, for the following reasons,  in
    summary:

    (a)  On the purely factual issue of whether the application made to the
         Secretary of State included any advertising or marketing  materials
         containing the first Appellant's name (to be  contrasted  with  his
         business name) all the available evidence pointed decisively  to  a
         negative answer. Ultimately, this  was  properly  conceded  by  the
         Appellants' legal representative, Mr Khan.

    (b)  While it is clear that the name of the registered company,  Bilaco
         Limited, is an abbreviation of the first Appellant's full  name,  I
         consider this to be insufficient  to  comply  with  the  clear  and
         specific requirement of the Rules.  At best, this  is  a  shortened
         version of the Appellant's two forenames and his surname.  I am  of
         the opinion that the Rules cannot be construed in  a  manner  which
         renders this description compliant.

    (c)  Giving effect to well established principle, I consider that there
         is no scope  for  allowing  this  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
         Appellant's failure to comply with the serial requirements  of  the
         Rules is both single and of narrow  dimensions.   This  species  of
         provision in the Rules establishes a  bright  line.  Either  it  is
         satisfied or it is not. There is no hybrid, third possibility.  The
         latest authority on this issue is the decision of the Supreme Court
         in Patel - v - Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2013]
         UKSC 72, at [50] and following.

    (d)  Finally, I consider that the original decision maker committed  no
         error of law in not invoking paragraph 245AA of the Rules. The only
         provision therein which could conceivably have been  of  assistance
         to the Appellants is the "document in the wrong format" one.  I  am
         satisfied that this provision cannot be applied to the  defect,  or
         omission, which rendered the  application  non-compliant  with  the
         Rules, which was one of content, rather than shape, layout or form.

 3. I dismiss this appeal with considerable regret.   The  FtT  found  that
    this is an authentic serious application, a point readily  acknowledged
    on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  representative.   The  non-
    compliance does not, as the FtT noted, frustrate the underlying purpose
    of the rule in question, which is to demonstrate that the business is a
    real one and, further, that it is the applicant's.  This was at no time
    doubted and, further, there was ample  evidence  to  this  effect.  The
    application of the Rules in this particular instance produces an unfair
    and  austere  outcome,  with  an  unjustifiably  harsh  impact  on  the
    Appellants.   Moreover,  it  frustrates  the  public  interest  of  the
    economic wellbeing of the country.

 4. If, as seems likely, the Appellants proceed to make fresh applications,
    I trust  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  officials  will  take  full
    cognisance of  the  comments  above,  and  further,  will  process  and
    determine the further applications as  expeditiously  as  possible  and
    with such priority as can be accorded to them.


DECISION

 5. I dismiss the appeals and affirm the decision of the FtT.






                                                     [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                          Date: 17 July 2014
