
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24701/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 October 2016                            |On 11 January 2017            |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                               Muhammad Sabeel
                          (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Patel, Riaz Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Muhammad Sabeel, was born on 8 October  1989  and  is  a
    male citizen of Pakistan.  By a decision  promulgated  on  7  September
    2016, Upper Tribunal Judge Storey found that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law such that its decision fell to be  set  aside.   Judge
    Storey's reasons for making that decision were as follows:

             The respondent  (hereafter  the  claimant)  is  a  citizen  of
             Pakistan who had entered the UK in May 2011 as a student on  a
             Tier 4 (General) Student visa  which  was  extended  until  30
             January 2014.  His application for  a  further  extension  was
             refused on 2 May 2015 as were  further  applications  made  on
             family and private life grounds. The appellant (hereafter  the
             SSHD) made a decision on 25 June 2015  to  refuse  his  latest
             application for leave to remain on  private  and  family  life
             grounds and gave directions for his removal.   The  SSHD  also
             considered the claimant had used deception contrary to para S-
             LTR.2.2 of the Rules. The claimant's appeal came before First-
             tier Tribunal Judge (FtT) Judge Robson who on 4  January  2015
             allowed it on human  rights  grounds  and  also  rejected  the
             SSHD's decision that he had used deception, contrary to para S-
             LTR.2.2 which states that the application  would  normally  be
             refused on the grounds of suitability if any of the  paragraph
             S-LTR.2.2-2.4 apply. S-LTR.2.2 states that:

                  "Whether or not to the applicant's knowledge

                  (a)  false information, representations or  documents  had
                      been  submitted  in  relation  to   the   application
                      (including false information submitted to any  person
                      to  obtain  a  document  used  in  support   of   the
                      application)."

         2.   The reason why the SSHD considered that the claimant fell foul
             of S-LTR.2.2 was that ETS had  confirmed  that  the  test  the
             claimant took on 15 May 2012 at Darwin  College  had  involved
             deception. The reasons why the judge rejected this  allegation
             was essentially because the only evidence submitted in support
             of it  was  the  generic  evidence  in  the  form  of  witness
             statements of Peter Millington of 23  June  2015  and  Rebecca
             Collins dated 23 June 2014. It  was  the  claimant's  case  on
             appeal that there was evidence that he had  taken  and  passed
             English language tests before and after the one in  May  2012;
             and that his evidence that he had  personally  taken  the  May
             2012 test himself and  did  not  indulge  in  any  malpractice
             should be accepted.

         3.   In allowing the  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds  the  judge's
             analysis was set out  in  [78]  -  [81]  of  his  decision  as
             follows:

                  "78. The evidence before me is that in fact there has been
                      evidence  of  cohabitation   produced   and   it   is
                      supportive of their claim that the  relationship  has
                      been cemented not only before  the  Islamic  marriage
                      but by the civil marriage at Gretna Green.

                  79.  Furthermore it is a fact that has not  been  disputed
                      and I find as a fact that a child was  born  to  both
                      parties and the respondent was put on notice  at  the
                      earliest possible opportunity about the pending birth
                      of the child. I have to take into account  the  birth
                      of that child  who  would  of  course  be  a  British
                      citizen.

                  80.  Given the views of the sponsoring wife and her  close
                      ties to the United Kingdom I consider that  it  would
                      be disproportionate and impractical to  consider  the
                      separation of this family.

                  81.  Looking at the evidence in its  totality  I  conclude
                      that in fact the claim for leave  to  remain  on  the
                      basis of family life has been  made out and that  the
                      appellant's removal would place the United Kingdom in
                      breach of its  obligations  under  the  Human  Rights
                      Act."

         4.   The SSHD's grounds attacked both of  the  main  parts  of  the
             judge's decision.  First, it was contended that the judge  had
             failed to provide adequate reasons for rejecting the  evidence
             provided by the claimant regarding the taking of  his  English
             Language Test in  2012.  This  evidence,  it  was  emphasised,
             comprised not just the  generic  evidence  but  a  spreadsheet
             identifying the claimant's results as invalid  and  indicating
             he had used a proxy or allowed  himself  to  be  impersonated.
             Second, the FtJ had failed to consider the claimant's  Article
             8 position under the Immigration Rules at para 276ADE and  had
             also failed to apply the considerations set out in  s.117B  of
             the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

         5.   I am grateful for the succinct submissions I  heard  from  Mrs
             Pettersen and Mr Patel. As regards the SSHD's first ground,  I
             do not consider it has been made out. The  judge  was  clearly
             aware that in addition to the generic  evidence  there  was  a
             spreadsheet identifying his specific test taken in May 2012 as
             invalid. But as recognised by the Upper  Tribunal  in  SM  and
             Qadir (ETS - evidence - burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC)
             it is within the range of reasonable responses for a judge  to
             consider  whether  or  not  the  evidence  of  an   individual
             appellant as to the circumstances under which he or  she  took
             the IELTS test with ETS is sufficient  to  rebut  the  generic
             evidence relied on by the SSHD in IELTS-ETS  cases.  The  SSHD
             does not in terms challenge the judge's findings of fact  that
             the claimant had given a credible account of  his  history  of
             taking tests apart from the May 2012 test.

         7.   A further important point overlooked by the SSHD's grounds  is
             that the  Immigration  Rules  under  which  the  claimant  was
             refused - S-LTR.2.2 - is not in mandatory terms but affords  a
             discretion. That was a  further  reason  the  judge  gave  for
             rejecting this application to the claimant, the judge  stating
             at [77] that:

                  "The essence of the respondent's objection  was  based  on
                  deception. Whilst a deception will 'normally' result in  a
                  refusal, in view of my findings above, I do  not  perceive
                  this is a case where it is appropriate  that  the  refusal
                  should be treated as normal."

         8.   However, I am satisfied that the SSHD's second ground is  made
             out. The judge's reasons for allowing the appeal on Article  8
             grounds were wholly inadequate. He failed to consider  whether
             the  claimant  stood  to   succeed   under   the   substantive
             Immigration Rules (para 276ADE and EX.1) and not  only  failed
             thereby to approach the case (as enjoyed by SS (Congo)  [2015]
             EWCA Civ 387 through the prism  of  the  Rules,  but  also  to
             consider any public interest considerations  weighing  in  the
             Article 8 balance.    The claimant had ceased  to  have  valid
             leave  as  a  student  at  the  end  of  July  2014  and   had
             nevertheless  chosen  to   remain   in   the   UK.    Previous
             applications he had made based on his marriage  to  a  British
             citizen partner had been rejected and  in  the  decision  made
             against him in June 2015 it had been found that there were  no
             insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life  with  his  partner
             continuing outside the UK and it was also found  that  he  did
             not meet the eligibility requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi).
              The SSHD also  considered  that  there  were  no  exceptional
             circumstances warranting a grant of leave outside  the  Rules,
             noting inter alia that he had been present in the  UK with the
             full knowledge that he only had limited leave to remain in the
             UK as a student; had established  his  relationship  with  his
             partner at a time when his immigration status was  precarious,
             and had provided no evidence that it would  cause  the  couple
             hardship to relocate to Pakistan.

         9.   Given the detailed nature of the SSHD's refusal  decision  and
             the submissions made by the Presenting Officer at the hearing,
             the judge's failure to give due weight to the public  interest
             and his failure to give more than the most cursory of  reasons
             for allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds,   were  manifest
             and material errors of law.  Accordingly his decision  is  set
             aside.

         10.  I agree with Mrs Pettersen and Mr Patel that if I decided  (as
             I have) that the FtT decision  was legally  erroneous,  I  was
             not in a position to  re-make  the  decision  at  the  hearing
             before me, not least because of the  time  allocation  for  my
             cases.  This  is  not  a  case,  however,  when  it  would  be
             appropriate to remit it to the FtT as  the  areas  of  factual
             dispute are very limited. As  a  result  of  my  decision  the
             claimant's Article 8  circumstances  must  now  be  considered
             shorn of the original assumption that he used deception  (this
             being an assumption which the SSHD sought to rely  on  in  her
             Article 8 assessment at para 42 of her refusal decision).  She
             can no longer  do  so.   The  respondent  has  not  sought  to
             challenge the judge's findings on the claimant's  relationship
             with his wife.  Accordingly the case can be  retained  in  the
             Upper Tribunal and can largely be decided on the basis of  the
             primary findings of fact made by the judge.   Given  that  the
             couple have a child and  that  at  the  date  of  hearing  the
             claimant's partner's employment situation was unclear,  it  is
             directed that the couple produce witness  statements  updating
             their family and private life circumstances and  submit  these
             to the UT with copies to the SSHD at least 14 days before  the
             hearing which will be fixed for a date as soon as possible  at
             the hearing centre in Bradford.

         11.  For the above reasons:

         12.  The FtT judge materially erred in law and his decision is  set
             aside.  Whilst  the  judge's  primary  findings  of  fact  are
             preserved, the case is adjourned to  be  heard  in  the  Upper
             Tribunal at a date to be fixed.

         No anonymity direction is made."

 2. The resumed hearing took place before me  following  the  making  of  a
    transfer order on 19 October 2016 at Bradford.  I heard  evidence  from
    the appellant and also from his wife, Nosheen Akhtar  (hereinafter  Mrs
    Akhtar).  They adopted their written statements as  their  evidence-in-
    chief.  Mrs Akhtar is working for an employment agency  (offering  work
    as a teaching assistant).  She is pregnant with her second child by the
    appellant.  The baby is due to be born on 8 April 2017.   The  couple's
    first child was born on 4 September 2015.  Mr Diwnycz told me that  the
    Secretary of State took no issue with the claimed relationship  between
    Mrs Akhtar and the appellant and the parentage of the child who is  now
    a little over a year old.

 3. The burden of proof in the appeal is on the appellant and the  standard
    of proof is the balance of probabilities.  Mr Diwnycz told me  that  he
    considered both witnesses to have given credible evidence.

 4. It is important for the Tribunal to consider Article 8 through the lens
    (so to speak) of the relevant Immigration Rules (SS Congo  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 387).  I have considered paragraph 276ADE of HC 395:

         'Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on the
         grounds of private life

         276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the
         date of application, the applicant:

         (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-
         LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.5. in Appendix FM;
         and

         (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the
         grounds of private life in the UK; and

         (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years
         (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
         UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of imprisonment)
         and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the
         UK; or

         (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent at
         least half of his life living continuously in the UK (discounting
         any period of imprisonment); or

         (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above, has
         lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting
         any period of imprisonment) but there would be very significant
         obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to which
         he would have to go if required to leave the UK.

         276ADE (2). Sub-paragraph (1)(vi) does not apply, and may not be
         relied upon, in circumstances in which it is proposed to return a
         person to a third country pursuant to Schedule 3 to the Asylum and
         Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004.'

    In his evidence, the appellant states that his parents in Pakistan  did
    not approve of his marriage to Mrs Akhtar and that this constitutes  an
    insurmountable obstacle to his returning to his country of nationality.
     I disagree.  The  particulars  provided  by  the  appellant  are  very
    scanty.  He says no more in his statement [5] than that "my  family  in
    Pakistan are not happy with my marriage.  They have made it clear  they
    would not accept me".  There was no suggestion that  the  family  would
    offer violence to  the  appellant  or  Mrs  Akhtar  in  Pakistan.   The
    appellant is an adult and a father and husband; I see no reason why  he
    should not be able to support the  appellant  and  his  family  without
    additional support of his own family members in  Pakistan.   I  do  not
    consider there are any very significant obstacles  to  the  appellant's
    integration into the country of his nationality.  It follows  that  the
    appellant cannot satisfy paragraph 276ADE given that he cannot meet the
    requirements of subparagraph (vi) and is over the age of 18  years  and
    has not lived continuously in this country for at least twenty years.

 5. The Secretary of State accepts [refusal letter, 23] that the  appellant
    has a genuine relationship with Mrs Akhtar and that she  is  a  British
    citizen.   However,  the  Secretary  of  State   considers   that   the
    application of Appendix FM EX1 cannot be met  by  the  appellant.   The
    respondent asserts that there  are  no  insurmountable  obstacles  that
    would prevent him returning to Pakistan with his family.

 6. As Judge Storey noted in  his  error  of  law  decision,  there  is  no
    question of deception arising in the present case either as a means  of
    excluding the appellant under the provisions of HC 395 or as  a  factor
    in any Article 8 proportionality assessment.  However, the fact remains
    that the appellant entered his relationship with his partner at a  time
    when his immigration status was  precarious.   Having  said  that,  Mrs
    Akhtar had now given birth to a  child  since  the  date  of  the  last
    refusal letter and, in consequence, Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act (as
    amended) is relevant:

         '(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a qualifying child, and

         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         United Kingdom.'

 7. It is apparent that the crux of this appeal lies in whether it would be
    reasonable to expect the child of  this  couple  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom and to live in Pakistan.  That is certainly the test which must
    be  considered  in  the  application  of  Section   117B(6)   and   the
    reasonableness or otherwise of the family including Mrs Akhtar  leaving
    the country  is  plainly  the  central  issue  in  the  proportionality
    assessment under Article 8 ECHR.

 8. I remind myself that I am considering this appeal as at the date of the
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal.  As at  that  date,  Mrs  Akhtar  is
    pregnant with  the  couple's  second  child.   She  also  has  the  not
    inconsiderable responsibilities of looking after a young  baby  who  is
    now just over a year old.  In addition to that, she provides  financial
    stability for the family by working as a teaching assistant.   At  some
    point, she will have to cease her work in  order  to  prepare  for  her
    confinement.  The child which she is carrying will, like her young son,
    be a British citizen.  I have, as  I  have  explained  above,  attached
    little weight to the fact that the appellant's family may  not  approve
    of the relationship but the fact remains that I must  consider  whether
    it is reasonable for the appellant's young baby to leave the country of
    its nationality at this particular time to live in Pakistan.  Given the
    particular circumstances, there is a strong argument for  finding  that
    it would not be reasonable for the child to leave at the present  time.
    Set against that is the  public  interest  concerned  with  the  proper
    regulation of immigration.  Part of that public interest is  recognised
    in the fact that a relationship formed with a qualifying partner  which
    was established at a time when the person was  in  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully should be given little weight (Section 117B(4)).

 9. So far as the appellant is concerned, I am required to consider whether
    there are insurmountable obstacles such as may prevent  her  return  to
    Pakistan and whether the effect that the separation of the family would
    produce unduly harsh results for any members of  it.   Ultimately,  and
    having regard to the nature of the test, I find  that  at  the  present
    time it would not be reasonable for the child of  the  couple,  who  is
    barely a year old and whose welfare will depend to some extent  on  the
    maintenance of a stable home and family life,  to  travel  to  live  in
    Pakistan in circumstances where the finances of  the  family  would  be
    uncertain and whilst his mother (the family breadwinner in  the  United
    Kingdom) is having to deal with the care of a young child at  the  time
    of her second pregnancy.  Given that it is my judgment  that  it  would
    not be reasonable to expect the family to relocate at the present time,
    I find that the appeal should be allowed outside the Immigration  Rules
    and under Article 8 ECHR.  I have taken proper account  of  the  public
    interest concerned with the appellant's removal but ultimately, I  find
    that it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
    Kingdom.

Notice of Decision

The previous decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  having  been  set  aside,
this appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 11 December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

