
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA 24042 2015
                                                               IA 24043 2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 June 2017                               |On 12 July  2017              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                               md iqbal kabir
                               mohammad sayed
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan, Counsel instructed by Universal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I see no need for and do not make any order restricting  reporting  about
this case.

2. These linked appeals are brought by two nationals of  Bangladesh  against
the  respondent's  decision  on  5  June  2015  refusing   their   combined
application for leave to remain as Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrants under the
points-based system.  The main reason for refusing the application was that
the application was supported by a false document.  The  appellants  denied
that they had relied on false documents and there was  an  appeal  hearing.
The hearing was first listed for 27 June 2016 but on that occasion  it  was
adjourned at the request of both parties because the appellants had changed
solicitors and had recently  received  original  bank  documents  that  the
respondent wanted to verify.

3. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal again on 27  October  2016
and there was a difficulty with a document  verification  report  dated  27
July 2016 on which the Secretary of State wished  to  rely.   The  document
verification report was very damaging to the appellants' cases.   Precisely
what happened next is not entirely clear.  The report had been served by e-
mail on the appellants' representatives.  In my judgement service by e-mail
is something that is to be encouraged, if for no other reason than the fact
that it usually provides a very accurate record about when it was sent  and
when it arrived and there is no argument that the necessary documents  were
sent and received by the appellants' solicitors.  For some reason it  seems
that no further action was taken.  It is a matter of fact that the covering
e-mail to which the document verification reports  were  attached  did  not
give the solicitor's reference number but it identified the clients clearly
by name and clearly came from the Presenting Officers Unit.  If  it  really
is the case that the appellants' solicitors were unable to  identify  their
clients from their names, something which I find  hard  to  believe  but  I
suppose is possible, the difficulty could have been resolved by the  simple
step of contacting the Presenting Officers  Unit  and  asking  for  further
details.  I am confident  that  that  information  would  have  been  given
gladly.  It appears that none of this was done.  The difficulty  is  we  do
not know the reasons for this omission.  It may  be  that  the  appellants'
then solicitors were particularly dozy; it may be that they did  not  think
it helpful to their clients to make further enquiries; it may be  something
that  cannot  be  explained  to  us  because  of  reasons  of  professional
privilege.  There is no direct evidence that the appellants themselves knew
that  the  document  verification  reports  had  been  received  by   their
solicitors.

4. Nevertheless, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  mindful  of  the  previous
adjournment said at paragraph 6:

  "I took the view that the appellants had been given six weeks  notice  of
  the  verification  report  which  to  provide  adequate  time  to  obtain
  additional evidence if they wanted to.  I decided that it  would  not  be
  fair or reasonable or in the interests of justice to adjourn the  hearing
  a second time."

5. Clearly, it  was  the  judge's  view  that  the  appellants  had  had  an
opportunity and had not done anything with it.

6. The judge was impressed by the respondent's evidence.  It consisted of  a
report from two members of the High Commission staff who visited a bank  in
Dhaka.  Curiously, they had not visited the bank from  which  the  disputed
reference came but a different branch of the same bank. I am told, I do not
know if this is right, that the two branches are about ten  minutes  apart.
Why the Secretary of State's officer went there rather than the  bank  that
was  supposed  to  have  issued  the  document  is,  to  me,   a   mystery.
Nevertheless, the evidence is that they were well-received; that the  staff
at the branch they did visit explained that the documents  that  they  were
asked to verify did not look right and gave reasons.  These concerned,  for
example, items not being given in the footer of  the  document  that  could
have been expected to be there,  and  most,  significantly,  the  purported
author of the letter was not known either to the bank  officials  that  the
Secretary of State saw or, according  to  the  evidence,  the  branch  that
issued the letter, allegedly, because enquiries were made and the record is
that no-one who could be contacted at that branch recognised the name.  The
judge said "It is relevant that the enquiry was made [a]  less  than  three
months after the date of the May 2016 letter."

7. The point is that the judge considered the evidence and was impressed  by
the fact that a bank official making direct enquiries of the relevant  bank
could not trace the purported manager and could not find any  reference  at
that branch to somebody who was supposed to have been a manager  less  than
three months before.  I can  see  no  basis  for  criticising  the  judge's
analysis of the evidence before him.  Neither  can  I  see  any  basis  for
criticising the decision not to adjourn.  It is trite law that judges  have
a great deal of discretion about whether to adjourn cases.  The judge  took
a view on the quality of the evidence, took a view on  the  opportunity  of
obtaining further evidence, and, I find, entirely rationally  and  properly
decided that it was in the interests of justice to go on with the  evidence
that was before that Tribunal. That decision led,  perhaps  inevitably,  to
the decision to dismiss the appeals.

8. The present solicitors have gone to  the  trouble  of  producing  further
evidence, although, curiously, they did not serve this by way of  a  proper
notice of intention to call further evidence. It was simply appended to the
grounds. It is another letter from the Natun  Bazar  branch,  it  is  said,
insisting that the original documents were genuine and that the phone  call
made from the Gulshan Bank did not happen.

9. Admitting this evidence could lead to the hearing descending into a  non-
fathomable realm  of  allegation  and  rebuttal.   The  fact  is  that  the
Secretary of State, by officers of the High Commission,  tried  to  examine
the evidence,  took  a  view,  disclosed  it  to  the  appellants  and  the
appellants did not take advantage of the opportunity to get their  evidence
together before the First-tier Tribunal.

10. In all the circumstances I  cannot  say  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
erred in law in refusing to adjourn and, having  refused  to  adjourn,  the
decision was entirely sound.

11. It follows therefore that although Mr Khan has patiently done  all  that
could have been expected of him this morning, I dismiss  the  appeals  that
are before me.

Notice of Decision

These appeals are dismissed.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 12 July 2017                   |





