
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24234/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 October 2016                    |On 2 November 2016                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Arjun Bohara
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Halligan of Counsel, Malik & Malik Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                    (Delivered orally on 6 October 2016)

Introduction

 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department. Nevertheless, for the sake of convenience  I  will
    continue herein to refer to Mr Bahara as the appellant.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal, born 20 May 1982.  On 24  February
    2014 he applied for indefinite leave to  remain  as  the  spouse  of  a
    person present and settled in the United Kingdom (pursuant to paragraph
    287 of the Immigration Rules).  The Secretary  of  State  refused  this
    application by way of a decision dated 16 June 2015, ostensibly on  the
    basis that she did not believe the appellant to be  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his spouse, Ms Shahi.

First-tier Tribunal's decision

 3. The appellant appealed the aforementioned decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Green  in
    Birmingham on 22 March 2016 and allowed "on human rights grounds" in  a
    decision promulgated on 8 April 2016.

 4. Within the First-tier Tribunal's decision there is  careful  recitation
    of the reasons given  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  refusing  the
    application. There then follows a lengthy description of the evidence -
    including the oral evidence (paragraphs 6 to 10), which is  immediately
    followed by  a  record  of  the  submissions  made  by  the  respective
    representatives.

 5. The reasons given for allowing the appeal are found  within  paragraphs
    15 to 23 of the decision, the critical finding being that appellant and
    his wife are in a genuine and subsisting relationship.

Decision and Discussion

 6. The  Secretary  of  State  appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  with  the
    permission of Designated Judge Manuell granted on 1 September 2016.

 7. Turning to the grounds of challenge, it is first to  be  observed  that
    for the most part they demonstrate a misunderstanding by  their  author
    of the grounds of appeal available to the appellant before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  The  appellant  was  entitled,  as  identified  in  the
    Secretary of State's decision letter, to deploy only one ground  before
    the First-tier Tribunal i.e. that the Secretary of State's decision was
    unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

 8. Once  the  aforementioned  misconception  is  stripped  away  from  the
    Secretary of State's grounds they resolve themselves into the following
    two submissions (as was accepted to  be  the  case  by  Ms  Brocklesby-
    Weller):

          i) The First-tier Tribunal failed to take into  account  material
             matters when concluding that the appellant's  marriage  to  be
             genuine and subsisting.

         ii) The First-tier Tribunal's  conclusion  that  the  marriage  is
             genuine and subsisting is irrational.

 9. I take these in turn. In support of the first  ground,  Ms  Brocklesby-
    Weller drew attention to passages in the Secretary of  State's  refusal
    letter which identify, amongst other things,  numerous  inconsistencies
    as between the appellant and his wife during their respective  marriage
    interviews.  She asserted, in particular, that the First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to take account of the inconsistent answers given by the  couple
    regarding their 'first date'.

10. I conclude that this ground is not made  out.  Reading  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision as a whole it cannot be said, in my view, that  the
    Tribunal failed to take into account any of the matters  identified  in
    the Secretary of State's decision letter.   Significantly,  as  already
    identified above, the First-tier Tribunal carefully recited the reasons
    given  in  this  letter  refusing  the  appellant's  application   (see
    paragraph 1 thereof).  In particular, I observe that half  way  through
    paragraph 1(i) of its decision the First-tier Tribunal makes  reference
    to the fact that the couple gave  contradictory  answers  during  their
    marriage  interviews,  with  further  reference   to   one   of   those
    contradictions being in relation to the circumstances of  their  'first
    date'.

11. It is trite that the First-tier Tribunal do not have to deal with  each
    and every point raised before it. In the instant  case  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, having considered all of the evidence, was entitled  to  take
    an overarching view of that evidence. If one reads paragraph 16 of  its
    decision it is perfectly clear that the First-tier Tribunal  was  alive
    to the discrepancies  between  the  answers  given  in  the  respective
    marriage interviews; indeed, it rejected  the  appellant's  explanation
    for those discrepancies in terms in paragraph 16.

12. The First-tier Tribunal proceeded thereafter on the  basis  that  there
    were discrepancies between the marriage interviews and this  conclusion
    formed a component part of its  consideration  of  the  evidence  as  a
    whole. In my conclusion the First-tier Tribunal was required to  do  no
    more than it did and I find, as a consequence, that the first ground is
    not made out.

13. Moving on to the second ground, once again in my  conclusion  this  has
    not been established.

14. The weight to be attached to the discrepant answers  given  during  the
    marriage interviews was a matter for the First-tier Tribunal. The First-
    tier Tribunal clearly took into account all of the evidence and  looked
    at that evidence in the round. It  gave  each  piece  of  evidence  the
    weight it saw fit. There is nothing in paragraph 16 of the decision, or
    any other paragraph thereafter, that leads  me  to  conclude  that  the
    finding that the appellant's marriage is genuine and subsisting was one
    which was  not  open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  available
    evidence.  That is not say that it would not have been open to  another
    judge to come to a different conclusion, but that is not the  threshold
    the Secretary of State must surpass in order to succeed on  the  second
    ground.

15. Once it is established that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  conclusion  in
    relation to the Immigration Rules is not flawed, it  is  a  short  step
    thereafter to conclude that on the facts of this particular appeal  the
    Article 8 ground must be allowed.

16. On the First-tier Tribunal's findings there was clearly a  family  life
    between the appellant and  his  wife.   There  can  be  no  doubt  that
    interference with that family life would be of sufficient gravity so as
    to engage Article 8. Given that the Secretary of State  identifies  her
    view of the public  interest  through  her  Immigration  Rules,  it  is
    difficult for the her to thereafter assert that the public interest  is
    met by removal when the requirements one of those Rules is met.  It  is
    certainly the case that the First-tier Tribunal was  entitled  to  find
    that requiring the appellant to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  would  be
    disproportionate, and a breach of his Article 8 rights.

17. I, therefore, conclude that there is no error of law in the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal, and
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision must remain standing.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
