
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/24199/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 June 2014                                |On 17 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                              MRS ZAITOON BIBI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr Naqvi, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge I  Howard  promulgated  on  3  February  2013
    dismissing her appeal against a decision of the  respondent  to  refuse
    her leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant's case is that she is married to Saeed Shah, a citizen of
    Pakistan, who has indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom  and
    has done since 5 November 2011.  She entered the United  Kingdom  with
    entry clearance as a visitor valid from 10 July 2011 until  10  January
    2012.  On 5 January 2012 she applied for an extension of stay  pursuant
    to Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the Human Rights Convention on the basis that
    her husband required a kidney transplant, was at that point  undergoing
    dialysis four times a week and his wife had offered herself as a donor.
     That application was refused on 29 May 2013, the respondent concluding
    that the appellant did not fall within the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  An appeal was lodged  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on the grounds that the appellant and her  husband  could
    not enjoy life apart and that requiring  the  appellant  to  return  to
    Pakistan would be a breach of her and her husband's  right  to  respect
    for their family life and due to the sponsor's medical problems.  It is
    also averred that the decision was wrong in that an  incorrect  Rule  -
    276ADE - had been applied.

 3. On appeal Judge Howard noted [6] that there was no dispute  as  to  the
    evidence and, having directed himself to follow the five steps set  out
    in Razgar [12], found that her removal was proportionate given the need
    to maintain effective immigration control.  He found:-

      i) that the family life  he  would  change  would  be  one  where  the
         appellant cares for her husband  who  has  kidney  failure  and  is
         awaiting a transplant to one where contact is by telephone and  the
         like;

     ii) that the appellant had not named her husband as the person she  was
         visiting in the UK or as a member of her family in the UK when  she
         applied for a visit visa;

    iii) albeit her husband's indefinite leave to remain had been granted as
         a result of his professed  relationship  with  Susan  Wilkinson,  a
         British citizen, the relationship had since ended;

     iv) that the appellant had flagrantly ignored the Immigration Rules and
         he was satisfied that when she had applied for a visit visa she had
         every intention of staying with her husband;

      v) that at the time of  the  application  the  appellant  had  offered
         herself as a donor for her husband but that two years  had  elapsed
         and nothing had come of this and was therefore disregarded;

     vi) that he was only concerned with the care the applicant offers  him,
         rejecting any claim that he was unable to care for  himself  as  he
         was employed and care administered by the appellant  could  not  be
         accurately described as essential;

    vii) he did not accept the appellant's statement that she had no home to
         return to in the USA.

 4. The appellant sought permission on the grounds that:-

      i) the judge had erred in  failing  to  take  into  account  that  the
         application for further leave to remain had  been  submitted  on  5
         January 2012 prior to the changes in the  Rules  implemented  on  9
         July 2012 and thus the "new Rules" should not have been applied [2]
         and thus paragraph 276ADE should not have been considered [3];

     ii) that the judge had erred in failing to know that the  Secretary  of
         State had erroneously relied upon Section 47  of  the  Immigration,
         Asylum and Nationality Act 2006;

    iii) that the judge made mistakes of fact in finding (wrongly):

          a) that the sponsor had been granted indefinite leave  to  remain
             as a result of his relationship with a British citizen;

          b) failed to take into account that Susan Wilkinson had left  the
             sponsor rather than the other way round,  that  the  appellant
             had in her visa application referred to going to see her niece
             and her family in the UK, the appellant also being related  to
             the sponsor out with their  marriage  as  their  families  are
             intermarried;

          c) that the kidney donation had in fact  gone  ahead,  the  donor
             being somebody other than the appellant, a fact referred to in
             the witness statements and in all the submissions;

     iv) that the judge had erred in failing to consider whether the  couple
         could live together in Pakistan, in doing so failing to have regard
         to the decision of the Court of Appeal in SSHD v Hayat [2012]  EWCA
         Civ 1054.

 5. On 16 April 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade granted permission on
    all grounds.

 6. I heard submissions from both representatives.

 7. It is not properly arguable  that  the  Secretary  of  State  erred  in
    applying Section 47 of the 2006 Act given that with effect from  8  May
    2014 the provision had been amended by the Crimes and Courts  Act  2013
    to permit removal directions being given in these circumstances.

 8. Similarly, it is not arguable that the  Secretary  of  State  erred  in
    having  had  regard  to  paragraph  276ADE  given  that   the   initial
    application was made not under the Immigration Rules but on  the  basis
    that discretionary leave should be granted.  The application  does  not
    suggest that any particular provisions of the Immigration  Rules  could
    be applied nor was it put to the judge in the First-tier that  it  fell
    to be allowed under the Immigration Rules which are preserved for these
    purposes by the transitional arrangements  set  out  in  HC 194  which
    brought Appendix FM into force.  Further, the judge assessed this  case
    in line with Razgar and there is no indication from his  decision  that
    he took into account paragraph 276ADE or any  other  provision  of  the
    Immigration Rules as having weight in so doing.

 9. It appears from the Record of Proceedings and  the  determination  that
    neither the appellant  nor  the  sponsor  gave  evidence  before  Judge
    Howard.  The refusal letter contains no submission that the appellant's
    immigration history is poor nor, so far as can be determined  from  the
    brief Record of Proceedings,  was  any  such  submission  made  by  the
    respondent.  It is unclear where Judge Howard found the  evidence  that
    the appellant had entered the United  Kingdom  without  mentioning  her
    husband in the Visa Application Form.  There is no copy of that form on
    file nor was Mr Tufan able to  provide  such.   Further,  whilst  Judge
    Howard does refer to the appellant's witness statement which he  quotes
    as "I Mrs Zaitoon Bibi DOB 1/1/1970 came to visit  my  husband  with  a
    valid visit visa to the  United  Kingdom  starting  from  10/7/2011  to
    10/1/2012", it is not immediately apparent from  that  that  the  valid
    visit visa had been obtained to visit the husband - that appears to  be
    a gloss added by the judge.

10. The documents presented  to  the  judge  and  attached  in  the  bundle
    indicate that the  sponsor  was  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain
    outside the Rules, not as a result of  any  marriage  application,  and
    thus he made an error of fact which appears  to  have  led  to  adverse
    conclusions.

11. It is evident also from the documents before me that, contrary to  what
    Judge  Howard  had  thought,  the  sponsor  had  undergone   a   kidney
    transplant; it is just that his wife was not the donor. Again, this was
    an error of fact.

12. I am therefore satisfied that there were a  number  of  factual  errors
    which were taken into account by the judge in reaching his  conclusions
    adverse to the appellant.  Further, he appears,  without  having  given
    the appellant the  opportunity  to  reply,  to  have  drawn  inferences
    adverse to her without putting her on  notice  of  the  same.  That  is
    procedurally unfair, and thus the findings of fact are undermined.

13. In addition, the judge appears to have accepted a family  life  between
    the appellant and the sponsor yet fails to have engaged with  the  fact
    that this is a family life between a husband and wife; it is not simply
    a carer and patient relationship.   There  is  no  proper  analysis  of
    whether  there  would  be  insurmountable  obstacles  in  family   life
    continuing in Pakistan, a point raised in the skeleton put before him.

14. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the judge's approach  to  the
    proportionality exercise was flawed to such an  extent  that  it  is  a
    material error of law.

15. I am satisfied also that the approach to the fact-finding  exercise  in
    this case is flawed to such an extent that none of the findings of fact
    reached by Judge Howard can stand and that  accordingly,  it  would  be
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    finding of facts on all issues.

Summary of Conclusions

 1. The determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Howard  involved  the
    making of an error of law and I set it aside.

 2. I direct  the  matter  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  for  a  fresh
    determination on all issues.  For the avoidance of doubt, none  of  the
    findings of fact made by Judge Howard are to stand.


Signed                                  Date:  12 June 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


