
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/24507/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 11th May 2016                          | On 27th July 2016               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                              MR MUHAMMAD RAEES
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Reynolds, Counsel; Buckingham Legal
                  Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This matter comes before me as a consequence of a previous Error of Law
    Decision and Reasons by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson  finding
    that the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Coaster  contained  a
    material error of law and that her findings  should  be  set  aside  in
    respect of the Appellant's Article 8  matters  under  and  outwith  the
    Rules. The decision of Judge Coaster in respect of the  Tier  4  appeal
    was affirmed.






 2. At the previous hearing  on  9  March  2016,  the  Respondent's  Senior
    Presenting Officer, Ms Fijiwala, conceded that the  Appellant  had  met
    the requirements of Appendix FM-SE in terms of the documentary evidence
    that had been submitted. Judge Hutchinson adjourned the hearing so that
    the Respondent could have an opportunity  to  check  the  documentation
    that was submitted by the Appellant. Any further  evidence  to  arising
    from those checks was to be served by 18 April 2016.





 3. At the outset of the hearing I indicated to Mr Walker that the Tribunal
    had not received any further evidence from the  Respondent.  Mr  Walker
    confirmed that general enquiries had been made with HMRC concerning the
    Appellant's financial documentation  but  that  no  response  had  been
    received. Upon my enquiry, Mr Walker confirmed that  he  would  not  be
    seeking a further adjournment to accommodate  the  receipt  of  further
    evidence from the Respondent and was content to proceed.






 4. Given the nature of the error of law decision, and that the  Article  8
    issue had arisen by virtue of amendments to the grounds of appeal,  and
    that no decision had been taken on Appendix FM  or  Article  8  by  the
    Respondent, I asked the parties to assist me as  to  what  extent  each
    element of Appendix FM was not met.





 5. With the assistance of the parties, I began an analysis  of  each  rule
    underlying R-LTRP and the requirements for limited leave to remain as a
    partner.





 6. The parties were in agreement as to the following:


      i) The Appellant and partner were in the  UK  and  had  made  a  valid
         application for the Appellant to receive limited leave to remain as
         a partner,


     ii) The Appellant did not fall for refusal under any part of Section S-
         LTR and the suitability requirements,


    iii)  The  Appellant  satisfied  the  relationship  requirements  at  E-
         LTRP.1.2. to 1.12 (notably, the Appellant  and  partner's  Marriage
         Certificate appears at page 5 of  the  Appellant's  Bundle  and  is
         dated 28 April 2014),


     iv) The Appellant did not fall foul of E-LTRP.2.1 to 2.2 in respect  of
         his immigration status ,


      v) The Appellant met the financial requirements at E-LTRP.3.1 and  the
         accommodation requirements at E-LTRP.3.4,


     vi) The  Appellant  met  E-LTRP.4.1(b)  and  had  provided  an  English
         language certificate showing a minimum level of  A1  (notably,  the
         requisite English language certificate appears at  page  1  of  the
         Appellant's bundle and is dated 12 March 2014), and


    vii) The Appellant had provided the necessary documents specified  under
         Appendix FM-SE.






 7. In view of the above agreed position of  the  parties,  section  D-LTRP
    makes clear that if the requirements of R-LTRP.1.1.(a) to (c) are  met,
    which they are, the applicant will be granted limited leave to remain.






 8. Consequently, given that the parties are  in  complete  agreement  that
    every aspect of the Rules has been met that is necessary to result in a
    grant of leave pursuant to D-LTRP, and given that  I  am  in  agreement
    with the parties' interpretation of the Rules  in  question,  there  is
    nothing left for me to  determine  and  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of
    Appendix FM falls to succeed.





    Decision


 9. For the above reasons, I re-make the  decision  under  Appendix  FM  by
    allowing the Appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules in  respect
    of his family life with his partner.





    Fee Award


10. I do not see fit to make a fee award  given  that  the  Respondent  was
    required to assess the Appellant's evidence, which was crucial  to  the
    just disposal of the appeal under Appendix FM.










Signed                              Date 27th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini


