

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/24534/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |         Decision & Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 23 May 2017                        |         On 15 August 2017           |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                 TAHIRA BIBI
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Baruah of Counsel instructed by Marks & Marks
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction


   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Birk promulgated on 6 July  2016  dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal
      against a decision of the Respondent dated 30 April  2015  refusing  a
      human rights claim.




   2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 12 February  1989.  Her
      immigration history is helpfully set out at page 2 of the Respondent's
      'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL'). This is a matter of record, and
      accordingly it is unnecessary to set out in detail the entire  history
      here; in due course I  will  focus  upon  particular  aspects  of  it.
      Suffice to say for the moment: the Appellant arrived in the UK  on  10
      March 2001 (at the age of 12) and was included as a dependant  in  her
      father's asylum claim, which although ultimately unsuccessful resulted
      in a grant of discretionary leave to remain  ('DLR')  from  18  August
      2011 until 17 August 2014; an application for further leave to  remain
      was made on 17 July 2014; the application was refused for reasons  set
      out in the RFRL.




   3. The Appellant appealed to the IAC. The appeal was dismissed by  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Birk for reasons set out in a Decision promulgated
      on 6 July 2016. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper
      Tribunal, which was initially refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Wellesley-Cole but subsequently granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
      Davey on 1 March 2017.




   4. The case was listed before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty  on  20
      April 2017. The Appellant sought  and  obtained  an  adjournment  with
      Directions. In due course the matter was relisted  and  thus  it  came
      before me.




   5. Ms Baruah, who had appeared before Judge McGinty (but had not appeared
      before the First-tier Tribunal and had  not  drafted  the  Grounds  of
      Appeal),  applied  for  a   further   adjournment.   The   adjournment
      application was resisted by  Mr  Norton.  After  hearing  argument  in
      support of the application I refused  the  adjournment  and  indicated
      that the appeal would proceed. I then - after  the  intervening  lunch
      break - heard submissions on the issue of error of law. I reserved  my
      decision.




Refusal of Adjournment

   6. Before addressing  specifically  the  adjournment  application  it  is
      helpful to set out in some more detail the contextual history -  which
      also in due course, as may be seen, will be  relevant  to  considering
      the substantive issue of error of law.




   7.  The  following  chronology  of  pertinent  events  emerges  from  the
      materials on file:


      23 JUN 2011:     Letter from the Respondent's Case Assurance and Audit
                    Unit  to  representatives  acting  for  the  Appellant's
                    father on the subject of the Case Resolution Directorate
                    programme dealing with the backlog of older asylum cases
                    - i.e. so-called 'Legacy' cases.  The  letter  requested
                    confirmation of current address and the personal details
                    of the Appellant's  father's  and  his  dependants.  The
                    Appellant was included in the list of family members  of
                    which the Respondent was aware; her date  of  birth  was
                    also stated by the Respondent - from which it would have
                    been manifest that she was  already  over  18  (in  fact
                    being 22 years of age at the date of this letter).


      18 AUG 2011:      Standardised  letter  from  the  Respondent  to  the
                    Appellant's father "+ Dependants" informing them of  the
                    grant of Discretionary Leave to Enter. Leave was granted
                    until 17 August 2014.


      16 JUL 2014:     Solicitors letter to the Respondent's  Status  Review
                    Unit written on behalf of the Appellant, her parents and
                    siblings, requesting a grant of a  further  three  years
                    discretionary leave to remain. Amongst other things  the
                    letter asserts that "this is one family unit", and  that
                    there has been "no fundamental changes" since the  grant
                    of discretionary leave to remain in 2011.  (See  further
                    below.)


      30 APR 2015:     Respondent's decision refusing the Appellant  further
                    leave to remain. The decision was taken  with  reference
                    to  Appendix  FM  of   the   Immigration   Rules   after
                    consideration of the Appellant's family  life  with  her
                    partner and her status as  a  parent;  by  reference  to
                    paragraph 276ADE after consideration of 'private  life';
                    moreover it was  not  considered  that  there  were  any
                    exceptional circumstances in the case. In the context of
                    the  issues  that  have  become  the  focus   of   these
                    proceedings it is particularly  pertinent  to  note  the
                    following: "You entered the UK with your family on 10-03-
                    2001 and you were granted leave as  a  dependant  on  18
                    August 2011 until 17 August 2014. It is noted  that  you
                    are no longer being considered as  a  dependant  in  the
                    case as you have now established your own life and  will
                    be considered accordingly".


      19 JUN 2015:     The Appellant's parents  and  four  of  her  siblings
                    granted further leave to remain "in accordance with  the
                    published  Home  Office  Asylum  Policy  Instruction  on
                    Discretionary  Leave"  until  18  June  2018.  (A  fifth
                    sibling is now a British citizen.)


      3 JUL 2015: Appellant's Notice of Appeal and Grounds  of  Appeal.  The
                    Grounds plead amongst other things that  the  Respondent
                    failed to have regard to  her  own  Discretionary  Leave
                    Policy Guidance:  "In  particular,  the  Appellant  will
                    submit that she was not granted discretionary  leave  to
                    remain 'as a dependant' in 2011.  At  the  time  of  the
                    grant she was aged 22 years; she had then lived  in  the
                    UK from the age of 12 to 22 and she was 'eligible' for a
                    grant of discretionary leave in her own right under  the
                    policies in place at that time"  (Grounds  at  paragraph
                    4).


      21 JUN 2016:     Hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Birk. It  is
                    apparent from the Appellant's Skeleton Argument dated 19
                    June 2016 (drafted by Counsel who  appeared  before  the
                    First-tier Tribunal) that at the core of her case was  a
                    submission that she should have been granted a further 3
                    years leave to  remain  in  accordance  with  policy  in
                    respect of transitional arrangements for  those  granted
                    discretionary leave to remain before 9 July 2012. It was
                    acknowledged that such policy did not apply if it  could
                    be shown that the  circumstances  that  related  to  the
                    grant of leave had changed such that it  could  be  said
                    that the basis upon which the previous  leave  had  been
                    granted did not persist: however it was  submitted  that
                    there had been no such material change of circumstances.
                    In particular it was argued that "Whilst it is  accepted
                    that [the Appellant] was  dependent  upon  her  father's
                    asylum claim by the time the family were  granted  leave
                    to remain in 2011 she was aged 22 and  thus  was  not  a
                    dependent  child  under  18"   (Skeleton   Argument   at
                    paragraph 4). Further it was contended that at the  time
                    of the grant of discretionary leave the  Appellant  "had
                    her own private life in the UK that was separate to  her
                    ties  to  her  family",  and  in  consequence  "It   was
                    submitted that she  was  not  granted  leave  to  remain
                    because of her family life in  the  UK,  rather  it  was
                    based on her private life" (paragraph 9). In essence  it
                    was argued that her current circumstances were an aspect
                    of her own private life and thereby did not constitute a
                    material change of circumstances from the  time  of  the
                    grant of DLR;  in  the  same  vein  it  was  essentially
                    contended that she had not been granted DLR as a  family
                    member of her father and  therefore  she  could  not  be
                    denied the benefit of the 'transitional arrangements' on
                    the basis that she was now living independently  of  her
                    father and that there  had  therefore  been  a  material
                    change of circumstances.


      5 JUL 2016: Decision of Judge Birk dismissing the  Appellant's  appeal
                    promulgated.


      20 APR 2017:     Hearing before Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  McGinty.
                    The Appellant applied for an adjournment to seek clarity
                    by way of disclosure from the Respondent in  respect  of
                    the basis of the grant of  discretionary  leave  to  the
                    Appellant. It was  observed  that  the  application  was
                    "made exceedingly late in the day" (paragraph 4), and it
                    was acknowledged by Ms Baruah that such  an  application
                    had only been instigated upon her advice on the previous
                    day: Ms Baruah had not previously been involved  in  the
                    appeal. Nonetheless Judge McGinty was persuaded that the
                    basis of the grant of discretionary leave to remain  was
                    potentially relevant to a  consideration  of  Article  8
                    grounds,  and  in  particular  whether  the   First-tier
                    Tribunal Judge may have "proceeded on a mistaken factual
                    basis" (paragraph 8). Specifically the issue was whether
                    the  Appellant's  current  circumstances  represented  a
                    material change in circumstances such that she could not
                    take advantage of Home Office policy, or  whether  -  as
                    she contended - there had been  no  material  change  of
                    circumstances and accordingly she could  take  advantage
                    of policy.


      28 APR 2017:      Judge  McGinty's  adjournment  decision  promulgated
                    include a Direction that "The  Respondent  do  file  and
                    serve the case notes supporting  the  previous  decision
                    letter in respect of the previous grant of discretionary
                    leave in  2011  for  the  Appellant,  plus  any  further
                    documentation in respect of any  other  members  of  the
                    family that the Respondent seeks to rely upon...".


      10 MAY 2017:     Respondent's written response to  the  Directions  of
                    the Upper Tribunal, prepared by Mr Chris  Avery  of  the
                    Specialist Appeals Team, (who had  been  the  Presenting
                    Officer   before   Judge   McGinty),    enclosing    the
                    Respondent's letters of 23 June 2011 and 18 August  2011
                    (see above). In material part the Respondent's  response
                    to Directions is in these terms:
                       "This was a Legacy case handled initially by the Case
                       Resolution Directorate and then  the  Case  Assurance
                       and Audit Unit. Consideration of the  case  had  been
                       considerably complicated by  the  appellants  initial
                       claim to be Indian nationals from Kashmir.
                       In this instance  there  does  not  appear  to  be  a
                       specific case-working note relating to  the  decision
                       to grant DL  but  the  normal  criteria  relating  to
                       Legacy cases will have been applied in the making the
                       decision. It is however clear that  the  family  have
                       always been treated as a family unit  with  Mr  Abdel
                       Qayoom, the appellant's father, as the principal. ...
                       There is nothing in the papers to indicate that  this
                       appellant had ever been granted DL on  the  basis  of
                       her own private life, or even that such  a  case  was
                       put..."


      18 MAY 2017:     Letter from the Appellant's solicitors  to  Mr  Avery
                    notifying  the  Respondent  of  an  application  for  an
                    adjournment of the hearing listed on 23  May  2017.  The
                    letter states in  part  "the  issue  within  the  appeal
                    centres on our contention that  as  an  18-year-old  our
                    client was not granted discretionary leave on the  basis
                    of family life with her father but on the basis  of  her
                    private life in the UK". The letter was 'copied' to  the
                    Tribunal by way of application for adjournment.


      19 MAY 2017:     Notice issued to the parties informing  them  of  the
                    refusal of the adjournment application by Upper Tribunal
                    Judge Rintoul in these terms: "Your application  for  an
                    adjournment is refused. While  the  assertion  that  the
                    respondent is in breach of directions is noted, she  has
                    not asked for additional time, and it is not clear  that
                    the breach of directions would prejudice the appellant."




   8. Ms Baruah renews the application for an adjournment already  dismissed
      by Judge  Rintoul.  It  is  argued  that  the  Respondent's  reply  to
      Directions is not categorical. It is also said that the Appellant  now
      wishes to pursue a 'subject access request' to obtain details  of  her
      file held by the Respondent.




   9. I have noted the contents of the adjournment application letter of  18
      May 2017, expanded upon in part by Ms Baruah  in  the  course  of  her
      submissions. The letter in particular seizes upon Mr  Avery's  use  of
      the word 'appear' in the  phrase  "there  does  not  appear  to  be  a
      specific caseworking note relating to the decision to grant  DL",  and
      suggests that this does not constitute  "a  categoric  and  definitive
      answer". In my judgement this seeks to place too much emphasis on  one
      word. I am satisfied  that  Mr  Avery  as  an  experienced  Presenting
      Officer aware of his duties to the Tribunal intended  to  convey,  and
      adequately conveyed, the meaning that there was not to be found on the
      Appellant's file a specific caseworking note relating to the  decision
      to grant her discretionary leave. Ms Baruah makes no  suggestion  that
      Mr Avery's integrity is to be impugned.




  10. I remind myself that this is an error of law hearing. The  adjournment
      is sought to obtain evidence as to a 'hoped-for' fact upon  which  the
      Appellant would like to support a submission of error of law by way of
      contending that the First-tier Tribunal  proceeded  on  a  fundamental
      misconception of fact. In  essence  it  may  be  seen  that  what  the
      Appellant is seeking to do is to obtain evidence from  the  Respondent
      that might support the factual premise  of  her  submission  that  she
      should have the benefit  of  the  Appellant's  policy  in  respect  of
      transitional arrangements.




  11. I make no personal criticism of Ms Baruah for seeking to do  the  best
      by her client. However, in so doing she has in substance embarked upon
      the pursuit of 'new' evidence  ('new'  in  the  sense  of  not  having
      previously  been  before  the  Tribunal)  in  the  hope  of  obtaining
      something useful to support a contention of fact. It seems to me  that
      save in very exceptional circumstances the  pursuit  of  new  evidence
      will not  ordinarily  be  appropriate  in,  or  appropriately  inform,
      consideration by the Upper Tribunal of 'error of law' on the part of a
      first  instance  Tribunal.  To  that  extent  I  seriously  doubt  the
      appropriateness of granting the adjournment that Ms Baruah  sought  in
      April 2017 and the making of the Direction of 28 April 2017. It  seems
      to me that  the  evidential  basis  of  the  Appellant's  case  should
      properly have been dealt with by her in the context of the proceedings
      before the First-tier Tribunal, and the  Appellant's  preparation  for
      those proceedings. For my own part I am  not  persuaded  that  it  was
      appropriate that the proceedings before the Upper Tribunal in  respect
      of error of law should have been permitted to afford the  Appellant  a
      further opportunity to gather evidence in support of her case.




  12. Be that as it may, an adjournment was indeed granted with a  Direction
      to  which  the  Respondent  has  now  replied.  In  my  judgement  the
      Respondent's reply is entirely adequate. In so far as  the  Respondent
      was directed to "serve the case notes supporting the previous decision
      letter in respect of the previous grant of discretionary leave in 2011
      for the Appellant", Mr Avery adequately responds by stating that there
      are no such case notes  apparent  on  the  file.  In  so  far  as  the
      Direction extends  to  "any  further  documentation"  upon  which  the
      Respondent seeks to rely, the letters of 23 June 2011  and  18  August
      2011 have been filed.




  13. Ms Baruah's submission in support of the application for yet a further
      adjournment really comes  down  to  this:  the  material  produced  in
      response to the Direction of the Upper Tribunal is unsatisfactory  and
      the Respondent should be redirected to  produce  further  evidence  in
      respect of this issue, or the Appellant should  be  afforded  time  to
      obtain it for herself by way of a 'subject access request'. I  do  not
      consider the Respondent's response to the Direction to  be  inadequate
      and I do not consider that any useful purpose is  served  by  inviting
      the Respondent to look again at the materials  that  it  is  clear  Mr
      Avery has appropriately considered and reported upon.  Nor,  given  Mr
      Avery's  response,  is  it  possible  to  discern  that  any   further
      information supportive of the  Appellant's  case  would  be  available
      pursuant to a 'subject access request'.




  14. In all such circumstances  I  could  identify  no  useful  purpose  in
      adjourning the hearing on the basis  that  the  Respondent  should  be
      directed to scrutinise further the Appellant's file, and/or her family
      members' file/s, or for the Appellant  to  pursue  a  'subject  access
      request'. The response to Directions makes it clear, in my  judgement,
      that there is nothing material to the issue that has become central in
      these proceedings to be uncovered by scrutiny of the Appellant's file.




  15.  The  Appellant's  application  for   an   adjournment   was   refused
      accordingly.



Consideration of 'error of law'

  16. The matters set out above are relevant to an understanding of,  and  a
      consideration of, the  principal  line  of  argument  pursued  by  the
      Appellant  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  Appellant   essentially
      contends that she was granted discretionary leave to remain in  August
      2011 in her own right independent of her family and  by  reference  to
      her own private life, and that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  was  in
      error in concluding otherwise. In particular the  Appellant  seeks  to
      impugn paragraphs 24 and 25 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision.




  17. In the first instance, bearing in mind the context of an error of  law
      hearing, I would observe that the contentious issue as  to  the  basis
      upon which the Appellant had been granted leave in  August  2011,  and
      the  related  issue  as  to  whether  there  had  been  a  change   in
      circumstance relevant to the  Respondent's  policy,  were  essentially
      issues of fact for the evaluation of the First-tier Tribunal Judge. To
      that extent any challenge to the Judge's conclusions is  in  substance
      an attempt to revisit findings  of  fact.  It  was  for  this  reason,
      perhaps, that so much significance was placed on seeking  to  identify
      what might have been recorded in the Respondent's case file  in  order
      to argue that both the Respondent in the RFRL, and in turn the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge, had proceeded on a fundamental  misconception  of
      fact amounting to an error of law by concluding that the Appellant was
      granted discretionary leave as a dependent of her father (e.g. as  per
      the RFRL at the bottom  of  page  5  of  11,  and  as  quoted  in  the
      chronology at paragraph 7 above).




  18. As indicated above the Appellant has been unsuccessful  in  her  quest
      made in hope that something determinative would  be  apparent  on  the
      Respondent's caseworker notes.




  19.  In  my  judgement  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  conclusion  at
      paragraph 25 that the Appellant was in  different  circumstances  when
      she made her application for further leave to remain compared with the
      circumstances at the date of the grant  of  discretionary  leave  such
      that she could not avail herself of the benefit  of  the  Respondent's
      policy was entirely sustainable and adequately reasoned.




  20. Moreover, in the premises it seems to me  absolutely  clear  with  the
      benefit of the letters filed in response to the  Direction  sought  by
      the Appellant from the Upper Tribunal, that as between the  letter  of
      23 June 2011 inviting confirmation of  the  personal  details  of  the
      Appellant's  father  and  his  family  members,  and  the   grant   of
      discretionary leave to remain approximately 8 weeks later, nothing  of
      substance was communicated to  the  Respondent  to  suggest  that  the
      Appellant was no longer a dependant of her father. In my judgement  it
      is clear that the Respondent granted discretionary leave to remain  to
      the Appellant on the basis that on the information  available  to  the
      Respondent's decision-maker the Appellant was indeed still a dependant
      of her father.




  21. Further in this context, and in any event I note that nothing has been
      filed in the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal  or  since  to
      suggest that the Appellant had  established  an  independent  life  by
      August 2011. In the Appellant's witness statement  before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal she refers to completing her  A-levels  in  2011,  being
      unable to apply to go to college at that time because she did not  yet
      have discretionary leave to remain, and then states "after my A-levels
      and until my marriage I was at home helping my mother with the care of
      the rest of the family" (Appellant's appeal bundle before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal at page 41, paragraph 6). The Appellant states that  she
      was married in an Islamic ceremony in November 2012 (later  registered
      pursuant to a civil ceremony on 8 January 2013), and  that  she  began
      cohabitation with her husband from the date of  the  Islamic  ceremony
      (paragraph 8). This sequence suggests that the  Appellant  was  indeed
      living at home as a  member  of  her  father's  family  unit,  not  in
      employment and not studying, at the date  of  discretionary  leave  to
      remain - and it was not until over a year after such  grant  that  she
      moved away from her  parents  and  siblings.  (However  even  in  this
      context it is to be noted that in the  Appellants  DL  Form  submitted
      with the application for further discretionary  leave  to  remain  she
      gave a later date for leaving the family address - 27 April 2013:  see
      Respondent's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal at E3.)




  22. In the application covering letter of 16  July  2014  seeking  further
      leave to remain - drafted by the  same  representatives  to  whom  the
      Respondent had written on 23 June 2011 - the Appellant is included  in
      the list of family members that appears as the subject of the  letter;
      all family members, including the Appellant, are listed with the  same
      current address. The opening paragraph states in  terms  "Please  note
      that  this  is  one  family  unit".  Indeed,  the  letter  closes   by
      emphasising this claimed circumstance: "You will also note that in the
      culture of the Asian community, especially in the subcontinent,  there
      is a strong belief in the family  unit.  As  you  will  see  from  the
      documents before you they are all living in the same family  residence
      and have strong family ties". Yet further it  seems  to  me  that  the
      specific request for a grant of a further three years leave to remain,
      and the reference to "no fundamental changes" having taken place is  a
      conscious echo of the transitional arrangements. On its  face  I  find
      that this letter was written on the basis that it was understood  that
      the Appellant, despite being 22 years of age at the time, was  granted
      discretionary leave to remain as a member of her father's family,  and
      it was now sought to secure further discretionary leave to  remain  on
      the basis that she continued to be a member  of  her  father's  family
      unit and as such there had  been  no  change  of  circumstances  since
      August 2011.




  23. It has subsequently transpired that the contents of the letter  of  16
      July 2014 were inaccurate, that is untruthful, in asserting  that  all
      members of the family including the Appellant constituted "one  family
      unit". For example, it is  apparent  from  other  documents  on  file,
      including in particular the Appellant's daughter's  birth  certificate
      based on a registration date of 5 March 2014, and  a  letter  offering
      employment from 10 July 2014, that the Appellant was not living at the
      address given in the application letter of 16 July 2014.  Indeed,  the
      Respondent in due course refused the Appellant's application,  despite
      granting discretionary leave to  the  other  members  of  the  family,
      because it was determined - as indeed the Appellant accepts - that she
      was no longer living as a member of her father's household  or  family
      unit.




  24.  Notwithstanding  the  inaccuracies,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the
      application letter of  16  July  2014  confirms,  and  encloses,  "our
      clients' letters of authority dated 15 July 2014".




  25. Be that as it may, it seems to me that the real  significance  of  the
      letter of 16 July 2014 in the context of the issue at hand is this. On
      its face the letter of 16 July 2014 constituted an attempt  (seemingly
      made  with  due  authority  from  the  Appellant),  to  represent  her
      inaccurately as still being a member of her father's household, on the
      premise that such a circumstance did not represent any change from the
      circumstances in August 2011. It may be inferred from  this  that  the
      Appellant's representatives at  that  time  (who  had  also  been  the
      family's representatives in 2011) understood, and in turn  the  family
      understood, that they had all been granted DLR on the basis  of  being
      members of the family unit of their father. It was only subsequent  to
      the Respondent's decision in respect of the Appellant that  any  other
      scenario was advanced. In my judgement the submission  that  has  been
      formulated to advance the Appellant's case has essentially been driven
      by expedience rather than because it is soundly rooted in fact. In  my
      judgement it is transparent that hitherto the Appellant,  her  family,
      and their advisers understood and acknowledged  that  she  had  indeed
      been granted discretionary leave to remain  in  line  with  her  other
      family members and on the basis of being  a  member  of  her  father's
      family unit.




  26. Moreover, and in any event I have ultimately  reached  the  conclusion
      that it is more likely than not that there is no evidence by way of  a
      file note to  support  the  notion  that  the  Appellant  was  granted
      discretionary leave to remain independently of the discretionary leave
      granted to all of her other family members, or that she was so granted
      discretionary leave on some different  basis  from  her  other  family
      members.




  27. In all such circumstances I reject  the  notion  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge fundamentally misconceived  the  facts  by  overlooking
      that the Appellant had been granted discretionary leave to  remain  in
      her own right independent of her relationship to her father.




  28. Even if it were otherwise, I am  not  satisfied  that  that  would  be
      determinative of the appeal in the Appellant's favour. It seems to  me
      that the way  in  which  the  Appellant  has  sought  to  advance  her
      submission that there has been no material change of  circumstance  is
      so fundamentally tenuous in nature that it lacks merit.




  29. In essence the Appellant has sought to  argue  that  because  she  was
      granted DLR in August 2011 on the basis of her own private  life  (and
      not on the basis of her shared family life with  her  father  and  his
      other dependants), and because she seeks to rely upon her own  private
      life in her application for further leave to remain, there has been no
      material change of circumstances. In short, the Appellant  has  argued
      that  because  the  umbrella  term  'private  life'  covers  both  her
      circumstances in August 2011 and in July 2014 to date, there has  been
      no change. In substance this is to equate  a  change  of  circumstance
      with whether or not  the  term  'private  life'  can  be  consistently
      applied; that is, a change of circumstance only takes place  if  there
      is a shift from reliance upon 'family life' to reliance upon  'private
      life', or vice versa.




  30. I do not consider such a proposition to be sound.  Such  a  submission
      guilefully avoids the facts that the Appellant  was  a  single  person
      with no independent income living in her  parents'  home  helping  her
      mother with domestic chores in 2011, but was by 2014 a married  person
      living with her husband, was a mother, and had undertaken  employment.
      The fact that both sets of plainly different  circumstances  might  be
      characterised as  falling  within  the  ambit  of  the  umbrella  term
      'private life' within the  meaning  of  Article  8  does  not,  in  my
      judgement, determinatively indicate that there has  been  no  material
      change of circumstances. Indeed on the facts it flies in the  face  of
      commonsense to suggest that there had been no change of circumstances.
      Irrespective of the fact that she had reached her  majority  by  2011,
      the Appellant was plainly still a dependant of her father (who was  in
      effect the fons et origo of the grant of DLR to her), whereas by  2014
      she was not.




  31. As was acknowledged in the Skeleton  Argument  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal,  the  Appellant  could  not  claim  the   benefit   of   the
      Respondent's policy if "the circumstances that related to the grant of
      leave have changed so that it can be said that the grounds upon  which
      [the Appellant] was previously granted leave to remain do not continue
      to exist" (Skeleton Argument at paragraph 2). In my  judgement  it  is
      absolutely  clear   that   the   circumstances   had   changed.   More
      particularly, the First-tier Tribunal  reached  such  a  conclusion  -
      which in my judgement was the only reasonable conclusion open  on  the
      evidence.




  32. In all such circumstances I reject the Appellant's principal challenge
      to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.




  33. The Appellant also raised grounds  of  challenge  in  support  of  the
      application for permission to appeal  in  respect  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge's approach  to  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
      Rules. Ms Baruah did not  pursue  such  grounds  before  me  with  any
      vigour: she indicated that they were relied upon as drafted, and  were
      not abandoned; however she also indicated that she  did  not  seek  to
      amplify such grounds by way of oral submissions.




  34. Challenge to the Judge's approach to paragraph 276ADE is  set  out  in
      the renewed grounds to the Upper Tribunal at paragraphs 7-9: (see also
      the initial grounds at paragraphs 11-13). The challenge relates to the
      Judge's consideration of 'significant obstacles'.  It  is  pleaded  in
      particular  that  the  Appellant  would  be  returning  "to   a   very
      conservative society where  the  rights  and  freedoms  of  women  are
      significantly restricted".




  35. I see no merit in this challenge.  Contrary  to  paragraph  8  of  the
      Grounds, the Judge did have regard to the fact that the Appellant  had
      been present  in  the  UK  since  the  age  of  11;  did  factor  this
      circumstance in to her consideration of the question of relocation and
      reintegration; and was plainly aware that the Appellant had  grown  up
      in a liberal Western society. The contention that the Judge failed  to
      have regard to such matters is unsustainable. See in this  context  in
      particular paragraph 14 of the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,  but
      also paragraphs 15-17.




  36. At paragraph 9 of the Grounds it is pleaded that  although  the  Judge
      identified that the Appellant had expressed a concern that her in-laws
      in Pakistan would restrict her ability to work there, the Judge  erred
      in failing to conclude that this  did  not  constitute  a  significant
      obstacle to reintegration. This is essentially a disagreement with the
      outcome, and does not in itself identify an error of law. In any event
      I note that under paragraph 276ADE the issue  is  one  of  integration
      into the country to which a person is expected to depart. The issue of
      integration is to be considered irrespective  of  the  nature  of  the
      social and cultural norms or mores  of  the  particular  country:  the
      question is whether or not the individual would face very  significant
      obstacles to integration; it is not a question to  be  determinatively
      decided on the basis of some comparative analysis of the  freedoms  of
      that country (or restrictions thereupon) and the freedoms of the UK  -
      albeit that such matters may be relevant to an  overall  consideration
      of the ability to integrate. The Judge sustainably concluded that  the
      Appellant would be able to integrate into Pakistan notwithstanding the
      differences between that country and the UK,  fully  recognising  that
      the Appellant would encounter real  differences  and  experience  some
      difficulties in adjusting.




  37. In all the circumstances I do not identify any error  of  law  in  the
      approach of the First-tier Tribunal Judge




NOTICE OF DECISION


  38. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of law  and
      stands. The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.




Signed:                                    Dated:   14 August 2017

...............................................
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis



