
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA241482015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12 July 2017                            |On 14 July 2017                  |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                              avimanyu bhandari
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Butterworth, instructed by Marsans Solicitors and
Advocates
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. By a decision which I promulgated on 25 April 2017, I  found  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred in law such that the decision fell to  be
    set aside.  My reasons for so finding were as follows:

         1.   The appellant, Mr Avimanyu Bhandari, was born on 3 March  1983
         and is a male citizen of Nepal.  He appealed against a decision  of
         the respondent dated 15 June  2015  refusing  his  application  for
         further leave to remain.  The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Miller) in
         a decision promulgated on 13 October  2016  dismissed  the  appeal.
         The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   The appellant had entered the United Kingdom as a  student  in
         August 2010 on a  visa valid until April 2012.  In April  2012,  he
         made an application for further leave to remain as  a  student  but
         that was refused on the basis that  the  CAS  and  sponsor  licence
         which he had, had been withdrawn.  The appellant appealed and Judge
         Walker in the First-tier Tribunal allowed his appeal  on  18  March
         2013 indicating that the appellant should be allowed a  further  60
         days to find  an  alternative  college,  as  provided  for  in  the
         respondent's policy guidance.   Thereafter,  the  appellant  claims
         that he heard nothing further from the respondent  until  September
         2014 when he instructed  his  present  solicitors  to  contact  the
         respondent.  The respondent emailed  the  solicitors  in  September
         2014 to state that the appellant had been granted  60  days'  leave
         outside the Rules in order to find  a  new  sponsor  but  that  the
         decision letter granting such leave had been returned by  the  Post
         Office as undelivered.  In consequence, the  respondent  considered
         that the appellant had been without leave since 6  September  2013.
         The appellant then made a further application for leave  to  remain
         outside the Rules claiming that the decision of  Judge  Walker  had
         not been put into effect as the appellant himself had not  received
         any formal communication from the respondent to enable him to  take
         advantage of any 60 day period of further leave granted.

         3.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  acknowledged  that  there  was   a
         difficulty as regards the service of the respondent's decision upon
         the appellant.  Mr Butterworth, who appeared before the  First-tier
         Tribunal on behalf of the appellant and had appeared  before  Judge
         Miller,  had  relied  upon  R  (on  the  application  of   Mahmood)
         (effective service - 2000 Order) IJR [2016]  UKUT  00057  (IAC)  in
         particular at [49]:

         Secondly, in any event, the legislative scheme particularly in Arts
         8ZA and 8ZB of the 2000 Order is, in my judgment,  indicative  that
         more is required in order for a notice to be  "given"  than  it  is
         merely sent. Take, for example, the service "to file" provision  in
         Art 8ZA(4) of the 2000 Order. That  provision  contemplates,  inter
         alia, situations where attempts to "give notice" in accordance with
         Art 8ZA(2) and (3) have  failed.  That  is  not  concerned  with  a
         failure to "send" the notice whether by post or  electronically  or
         otherwise as permitted but rather because,  having  been  sent,  it
         cannot be said that it has been "given" because,  for  example,  it
         has  been  returned  undelivered.  That,  in  my  judgment,  points
         strongly towards a conclusion that notice, in order to  be  "given"
         has to be both sent and in some sense "delivered" or "received"  by
         the method lawfully chosen to send it.

         4.   At [22] Judge Miller wrote:

         ...it is difficult to see what more the respondent  can  do,  if  a
         letter is returned undelivered, and phone calls to an appellant are
         not answered or responded to.

         5.   The use of the words "not answered or responded  to"  seem  to
         suggest  that  the  appellant  had  been  evading  the  service  of
         documents upon him by the respondent.  Indeed, it is clear from the
         following paragraph that Judge  Miller  took  a  dim  view  of  the
         appellant's stated wish to continue living in the United Kingdom as
         a student:

         Of course, I appreciate that, if an appellant who generally  wishes
         to continue his studies, through no fault  of  his  own,  does  not
         receive a notice from the  respondent,  this  should  not  be  held
         against him and he should not be prejudiced.  However, for  reasons
         I have stated above, I do not find that this appellant has  evinced
         any real desire to study, rather simply  to  continue  working  and
         living in the UK.  He was aware of Judge Walker's findings and, had
         he seriously intended to study, I am satisfied that he  would  have
         taken action to assure that  he  could  do  so.  Accordingly,  this
         appeal must fail.

         6.    It  is  probably  fair  to  say  that   many   administrative
         institutions encounter problems with the service of documents.  The
         Secretary of State relies upon service by ordinary first class post
         and the 2000 Order  seeks  to  provide  for  the  continued  smooth
         administration of business in the event that service of a  document
         may not occur or their service may not be proved as intended.   The
         civil courts (under the  Civil  Procedure  Rules)  have  additional
         provisions for personal, deemed and, where appropriate, substituted
         service.   The  Secretary  of  State  enjoys  no  such   additional
         provisions.  However, I am troubled (as was Judge Grubb in Mahmood)
         by the notion that  a  document  may  be  validly  served  when  it
         manifestly as not come to the attention of the  intended  recipient
         because it has been returned by the Post Office.   In  the  present
         appeal, Judge Miller was fully aware of the  difficulties  involved
         but his solution (as set out in [23] quoted above) is  not,  in  my
         opinion, satisfactory.  On the one hand, Judge Miller finds that  a
         "genuine" applicant should not be prejudiced if a document sent  to
         him by the respondent does not reach him.  Judge Miller's  solution
         is to find that the present appellant is not a "genuine"  applicant
         and, therefore, it  did  not  really  matter  whether  or  not  the
         document reached him at all because he did not intend to  make  use
         of any 60 day period awarded to him to obtain a new sponsor for his
         studies.  I find that Judge Miller has conflated the  two  separate
         issues of  service  of  the  decision  on  the  appellant  and  the
         genuineness or otherwise of the appellant's intentions to  continue
         studying.  I am not persuaded that  the  solution  to  the  problem
         adopted by Judge Miller was available to him. Accordingly,  I  find
         that the decision should be set aside  and  the  matter  considered
         further by the  Upper  Tribunal  which  will  remake  the  decision
         following a resumed hearing.  I am satisfied that the appellant was
         not served in any proper sense with the  decision  granting  him  a
         further 60 days' leave.  However, I do not  (as  Judge  Walker  did
         previously) leave it for the respondent to grant yet a  further  60
         days' leave to the appellant.  The focus in the appeal  now  should
         be on the question of fairness.  The focus should now be upon:  (i)
         on the appellant's conduct following the successful  appeal  before
         Judge Walker and (ii) his conduct after 10 September 2014 when  the
         email was sent by the  respondent  to  the  appellant's  solicitors
         indicating that a 60 day period had been granted to  the  appellant
         but not taken up by him.  I am aware  that  the  appellant  made  a
         further application for leave outside the Rules, but it is  unclear
         why he appears to have made no attempt whatever  to  obtain  a  new
         sponsor/CAS when he was aware (certainly from September 2014)  that
         he needed to do so in order to remain legitimately  in  the  United
         Kingdom as a student.  The Upper Tribunal expects  the  parties  to
         address these issues (by filing and serving  further  evidence,  if
         necessary) at the resumed hearing.

 2. At the resumed hearing on 12 July 2017, Mr Jarvis, for the  respondent,
    applied to the Tribunal to withdraw the original  decision  upon  which
    this appeal had been founded and which is dated 15 June 2015.  He  told
    me, that having withdrawn the decision, the Secretary of State intended
    to issue 60 days further leave to remain to the appellant to enable him
    to find a new educational sponsor.  Mr Butterworth, for the  appellant,
    agreed with that course of action.  Accordingly, I grant permission for
    the decision to be withdrawn.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's decision withdrawn.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 12 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane













