
                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal

 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal number: IA/24076/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On September 30, 2016                 |On October 05, 2016             |
|                                      |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE alis


                                   Between

                             MISS ANTELLE MADUGU
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Salam (Legal Representative)
Respondent  Mr Bates (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, citizen of Nigeria, applied  on  January  21,  2013  for
    leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
    Migrant. The respondent refused her application on  June  8,  2015  and
    took a decision to remove her  under  section  47  of  the  Immigration
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


 2. The appellant appealed on June 22, 2015  under  section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3.  The  appeal  was  heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Cox
    (hereinafter referred to as "the Judge") on December 10, 2015 and in  a
    decision promulgated on December 30, 2015 he refused her  appeal  under
    both the Immigration Rules and ECHR.


 4. The appellant appealed that decision on the ground the Judge  erred  in
    his approach to both paragraph 322(1A) HC 395 and ECHR.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Osborne on  June
    10, 2016.

 5. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make no order now.

    SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR IN LAW


 6. Mr Salam submitted that the Judge erred in applying  paragraph  322(1A)
    HC 395. Mr Salam referred to  the  respondent's  own  guidance  and  AA
    (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA  Civ
    773 and submitted that unless the appellant was  shown  to  have  acted
    dishonestly the Judge should not have  refused  the  application  under
    this Rule. Additionally, the Judge's approach to paragraph  276ADE  and
    article 8 ECHR was flawed because  he  assessed  risk  on  return  with
    reference only to employment as against the general  risk  on  risk  on
    return.


 7. Mr  Bates  submitted  that  the  Rule  and  the  Tribunal  in  AA  were
    consistent. The Rule and the Tribunal made clear that the submission of
    a false documents, regardless of whether the appellant  knew,  meant  a
    mandatory refusal under the Rules. As regards the issue of  safety  the
    Judge noted the appellant had concerns over  her  safety  in  paragraph
    [38] of his decision but was aware she had family members and access to
    funds. She had never raised a protection claim and the Judge  correctly
    dealt with the appellant's claims in paragraph [42] of his decision.


 8. I reserved my decision.


    DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS


 9. At the original hearing  the  respondent  raised  a  preliminary  issue
    namely the use of a false document. Although  the  Judge  accepted  the
    false document had not been submitted by or with the knowledge  of  the
    appellant he nevertheless found that he had to refuse  her  application
    under paragraph 322(1A) HC 395.


10. Both representatives referred me to the Rule itself, the  guidance  and
    the Tribunal decision of AA.


11. Paragraph 322(1A) HC 395 makes clear  that  leave  to  remain  must  be
    refused "where false representations have been made or false  documents
    or information have been submitted (whether  or  not  material  to  the
    application, and whether or  not  to  the  applicant's  knowledge),  or
    material  facts  have  not  been  disclosed,   in   relation   to   the
    application."

12.  The  Rule  and  the  respondent's  guidance  make  it  clear  that  an
    application must be  refused  where  false  documents  have  been  used
    whether or not to the applicant's knowledge.


13. Mr Salem  emphasised  that  the  document  was  not  submitted  by  the
    appellant but by an agent who had been paid to submit the application.


14. However, this approach was rejected  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  AA
    because it found that even  where  the  appellant  was  not  guilty  of
    dishonesty the appellant would be caught  by  the  words  of  Paragraph
    32(1A) which made it clear that the dishonesty could be with or without
    the Appellant's knowledge.


15. Subsequent to the hearing  I  received  further  submissions  from  the
    appellant's representative. The argument advanced in that  letter  were
    similar to those advanced  before  me.  A  further  decision  of  Ahmed
    (general grounds of refusal - material non-disclosure) Pakistan  [2011]
    UKUT 00351 (IAC) was submitted. However, this is a false representation
    case whereas the Judge in this appeal was dealing with a false document
    case. The fact the document is false is the important point in  such  a
    case. This is emphasised in the relevant IDI and Rix LJ made  clear  in
    AA that the mere fact that a dishonest document has  been  used  in  an
    application is sufficient for  there  to  be  mandatory  refusal  under
    322(1A). This is consistent with the ratio in AA that 'false'  requires
    dishonesty. As  Rix  LJ  made  clear,  the  false  document  itself  is
    dishonest. A  false  document  is  therefore  different  from  a  false
    representation. A false representation may simply be a mistake and does
    not tell a lie about itself in the way that a false document  does.  It
    follows in accordance with this analysis that it is not necessary to go
    further and  determine  whether  or  not  a  document  accepted  to  be
    dishonest in itself, was used dishonestly or innocently.


16. I therefore reject Mr Salem's submission on this point.


17. The second part of Mr Salem's submission  related  to  the  appellant's
    approach to the safety of the appellant if she were returned.


18. In his submission he raised issues  under  both  paragraph  276ADE  and
    article 8 ECHR.


19. The appellant's claim had to be brought under paragraph  276(vi)ADE  HC
    395 because the appellant was over the age of  eighteen  and  had  been
    here for less than  twenty  years.  The  appellant  had  to  show  very
    significant obstacles to her reintegration to Nigeria. This is a higher
    test to meet than a claim under article 8 but ultimately the Judge  had
    to consider the  same  factors  with  the  only  difference  being  the
    appellant had to meet a higher test under the Rules.


20. The Judge considered the issues from  paragraph  [33]  onwards  of  his
    decision.


21. Mr Salem submitted that the Judge failed to give  enough  consideration
    to conditions the appellant would face on return.


22. I have reviewed the bundle  of  documents  submitted  to  the  Tribunal
    including the appellant's witness statement. No concerns were raised in
    the statement and no documents suggesting the appellant  would  not  be
    safe was submitted in the bundle.


23. The appellant must have mentioned some concerns over her safety because
    the Judge makes reference in paragraph [38] to the appellant's  concern
    that it would not be safe for  her  to  return  to  her  home  area  in
    Northern Nigeria but she submitted no evidence to support such a claim.
    The fact she stated she felt it would not be safe  does  not  mean  the
    Judge has  to  accept  her  claim  especially  where  no  evidence  was
    submitted.


24. The appellant had to demonstrate  that  there  were  "very  significant
    obstacles" to her return and she failed to produce  any  evidence  that
    would back up this claim and the Judge was therefore entitled to reject
    the appellant's claim that she satisfied this part of  the  Immigration
    Rule.


25. The Judge considered article 8 and whilst the grounds of appeal and  Mr
    Salem raise issues over the Judge's approach to  safety,  the  decision
    must be looked at on the  evidence  submitted,  The  appellant  clearly
    raised issues over her ability to work and to live in an area where she
    had no connections but the Judge noted that she had access to funds and
    this would enable her to look for work.


26. The grounds of appeal argue the Judge should considered further  safety
    issues but in the absence of evidence to suggest she would not be  safe
    I find it would be wrong to criticise the  Judge.  Mr  Salem  submitted
    that troubles were well known but the Judge would be criticised  if  he
    went on a trawl of the internet to look for evidence and if  course  if
    he did then no doubt one or other party would  have  taken  issue  with
    such an exercise.


27. I therefore find there was no evidence to support Mr Salem's submission
    that the Judge failed to consider the issue of safety  for  the  simple
    reasons that no such evidence was presented save  for  the  appellant's
    own claim she would  not  be  safe  in  her  area.  The  Judge  clearly
    considered a return to the  city  and  those  concerns  would  have  no
    relevance.

    DECISION


28. There was no material error. I uphold the Judge's original decision  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal under both  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    article 8 ECHR.


Signed:                                            Dated: October 05, 2016

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

The appeal was dismissed and no fee award was made.


Signed                                       Dated: October 05, 2016

 [pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
