
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/25167/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 18 August 2015                    |On 21 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                             NNEAMAKA ORIE AWAH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss K Dingwall, of Ethnic Minorities Law Centre,
Glasgow
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 22 January 1988.  Having
    been in the UK with leave as a student and later in  the  Tier  1  Post
    Study category, she applied on 14 March 2014 for settlement outwith the
    Immigration Rules.  The respondent refused that application for reasons
    explained in a letter dated 3 June 2014.  The respondent noted that the
    appellant had made several trips back to Nigeria; had been  here  in  a
    category not leading to settlement; even if she had  no  living  family
    members in Nigeria, she was a 26 year  old  woman  and  an  independent
    adult; she could maintain relationships with extended family members in
    the UK "through modern means  of  communication  and  visits,  as  many
    families around the world do"; there was no evidence  of  relationships
    going beyond the normal ties; and it was reasonable to  expect  her  to
    continue her private life in her country of origin.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In her grounds  she
    said that Nigeria was an unsafe environment because of  ongoing  crises
    and that there were insurmountable  obstacles  to  prevent  her  living
    safely there.  In her statement of additional grounds she said, "Whilst
    acknowledging that I am a grown adult capable of taking care of myself,
    it is quite important for the Home  Office  to  recognise  that  it  is
    unsafe for me to go back to Nigeria especially being a lady, given  the
    Boko Haram crisis going on in the country".

 3. The appellant did not seek an oral hearing.  First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Somal dealt with the case "on the papers" and dismissed the  appeal  by
    determination promulgated on 11 August 2014.  In considering family and
    private life, the Judge said there was an absence even of letters  from
    extended family members in the UK to establish "any family in the UK to
    speak of".

 4. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    contending that a bundle of documents posted to the First-tier Tribunal
    had not been considered when making her decision.

 5. Reference having made to materials on  the  tribunal  file,  Mr  Mullen
    acknowledged that certain documents had been forwarded  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in good time but had not been  considered  by  the  Judge
    (most probably, due to not having been placed promptly on the file).

 6. Those materials are copied at pages 21 to  22  and  63  to  65  of  the
    appellant's bundle produced by representatives now  instructed  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 7. The first item is a letter from the appellant dated  27  July  2014  in
    which she explains that she has strong family  connections  in  the  UK
    including her "legal guardian appointed by her mother", and repeats the
    grounds above mentioned.

 8. At page 63 onwards there is evidence of the death  of  the  appellant's
    mother in Nigeria on 5 November 2011.

 9. In a letter dated 30 July 2014 the appellant's aunt, living in  London,
    states that she is the appellant's "appointed legal guardian in the UK"
    and describes the  appellant's  educational  achievements  and  further
    educational hopes.

10. In a letter dated 10 December 2014 another aunt of the appellant states
    that she is residing in Scotland  and  that  the  appellant's  brother,
    currently undertaking a Masters Degree in the University  of  Aberdeen,
    resides with her.

11. The appellant presently resides in Glasgow.

12. Ms Dingwall submitted that there had been  procedural  errors  of  such
    significance that  the  determination  should  be  set  aside  and  the
    decision remade.  The case was put not on protection but on family  and
    private life grounds.  On the basis of the appellant having  no  family
    ties in Nigeria and close family ties with two aunts and her brother in
    the UK, the appeal should be allowed under Article 8.  She referred  to
    Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 630 at paragraph 24 to  support  the  proposition
    that family life should be found to exist in this case.   She  accepted
    that notwithstanding the terminology used  by  the  appellant  and  her
    aunt, there could be no question of legal guardianship in UK  law,  the
    appellant being an adult.  The appellant had a family  network  in  the
    United Kingdom but not in Nigeria and it would be  disproportionate  to
    interfere with her family and private life here.

13. Mr Mullen submitted that the  procedural  mishap  was  immaterial,  the
    further material not being enough to call for a further  determination.
     The evidence demonstrated no more than the normal emotional ties among
    adult relatives.  It was doubtful  whether  the  respondent's  decision
    even  amounted  to  interference  but  if  there  were  any,   it   was
    proportionate.   The  effect  of  the  decision  was  simply  that  the
    appellant would be separated by thousands rather than  by  hundreds  of
    miles from her relatives.  Her brother was in the UK as a student.   He
    appeared to be a citizen of Nigeria and not of the UK.  The presumption
    to be made was that  his  residence  was  for  short  term  educational
    purposes, not permanent.  If there were to  be  a  fresh  decision,  it
    should again be against the appellant.

14. I reserved my determination.

15. It is agreed that there has been a procedural mishap in this  case,  in
    all probability through no fault of the Judge, but in principle capable
    of being treated as a legal error  and  displacing  the  determination.
    Not all  procedural  mishaps  must  have  that  result;  but  as  these
    materials went to the heart of the appellant's case, even if it was not
    a particularly strong one, I think it is preferable  to  make  a  fresh
    decision, taking account of the further evidence.

16. It was correctly acknowledged that the case does not amount to  a  need
    for international protection.   Whether  the  appellant's  relationship
    with her aunts amounts to  family  life  in  the  Article  8  sense  is
    doubtful, but her relationships with them  require  to  be  taken  into
    account in any event.  The presence in the  UK  of  her  brother  as  a
    student  is  of  no  great  significance  (and  his  emergence   rather
    contradicts her evidence of having had no living relatives in Nigeria).
     The respondent's decision does interfere to some  extent  with  family
    and private life relations which the appellant has in the UK but she is
    an independent adult with no realistic claim to remain  here  on  human
    rights grounds, outside the  immigration  rules.   The  effect  of  the
    decision is plainly proportionate.

17. The determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.    The
    following decision is substituted:  the appeal, as brought to the First-
    tier Tribunal, is dismissed.

18. No anonymity order has been requested or made.




           [pic]


           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
           19 August 2015
