

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25241/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 23 June 2014                                 |On 28 July 2014            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                               mr Javed Anwar
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Ahmed, Counsel, instructed by 12 Bridge
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the decision  by  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to issue him with  a  permanent  residence
    card as confirmation of his right to reside on a permanent basis in the
    United Kingdom as the  spouse  of  an  EEA  national.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal did not make an anonymity order, and I do  not  consider  that
    such an order is warranted for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, whose  date  of  birth  is  11
    February 1976.  He first entered the United Kingdom on 7 June 2003 on a
    24 hour transit visa.  On 2 December 2003 he married his EEA  national
    sponsor, and on 22 December 2003 the appellant applied for a  residence
    document.  On 25 March 2004 he was served with  an  ISI15A  notice  for
    using a false identity in order to work.  The appellant posed as  Tariq
    Malik, a Belgian national born on 25 October 1975.  On 2 April 2004 his
    application for a residence document was refused, in the light  of  the
    IS15A notice and "concerns over the genuineness"  of  his  relationship
    with his EEA national sponsor.

 3. On 5 January 2006 the appellant applied  for  a  residence  card  as  a
    spouse of an EEA  national  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom, but the application was  withdrawn  on  6  July  2006.   On  5
    September 2007 he applied again for a residence card as a spouse of  an
    EEA national exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom, and a card
    was issued to him on 15 December 2007.  The residence  card  was  valid
    for five years until 15 December 2012.

 4. On 16 November 2012 the appellant applied  for  a  permanent  residence
    card.  On 6 June 2013 the Secretary of  State  gave  her  reasons  for
    refusing the application. She advanced two reasons.  The first was that
    he had not shown that his EEA sponsor had been exercising treaty rights
    in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of five  years.   In  his
    application he said that his EEA national sponsor took a  gap  year  to
    reconsider her career and study options.  This was between August  2008
    and August 2009.  During this time he said that she  was  supported  by
    him.  He also stated that his EEA national sponsor  was  studying  from
    7 September 2009 to 11 June 2010.  In order  for  the  sponsor  to  be
    exercising treaty rights as a self-sufficient person, she had  to  have
    had comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the United Kingdom.  This
    was also a requirement to be exercising treaty rights as a student.  He
    did not provide any evidence that his EEA national sponsor had obtained
    comprehensive medical insurance during these periods.

 5. The second reason was  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  sufficient
    evidence to believe that the marriage undertaken on 2 December 2003  to
    Andeia Paris Goncalves, a Portuguese national, was one  of  convenience
    for the sole purpose of him remaining here in the United  Kingdom.   So
    it had also been decided to refuse the issue the confirmation which  he
    sought  with  reference  to  Regulation  2  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.

 6. In support of the marriage of  convenience  allegation  the  respondent
    relied on an immigration offender's report dated 25 March 2004  and  an
    Immigration Officer report dated 14 May 2013.

 7. The March 2004 report recorded that the appellant, who had two aliases,
    had been encountered working at an establishment in Aldershot  using  a
    counterfeit Belgian passport.  He had made an application to remain  as
    the spouse of Ms Goncalves.  However he could not tell the officer  her
    nationality, or what language she spoke, her full name  or  where  they
    were married.  He also could not tell the officer the address they  had
    shared since December 2003.  At the  time  of  arrest  he  advised  the
    officer that Ms Goncalves was on holiday.  But he could  not  tell  the
    officer where she was,  nor  how  to  get  hold  of  her.   The  report
    continued:

         Checks revealed someone using this identity had married  before,  a
         man named Joga Singh.  They  subsequently  divorced  following  the
         grant of his leave to remain for five years on the  basis  of  that
         marriage.  Mr Joga Singh has since  applied  to  register  his  new
         marriage four months after the decree absolute.   The  Home  Office
         will be withdrawing Mr Joga Singh's leave to remain on the basis of
         his marriage to Ms Goncalves.  Ms Goncalves failed to record on her
         marriage  certificate  that  she  was  divorced.  She  advised  the
         registrar that she was a spinster.

         I obviously have grave doubts that the marriage is genuine.

 8. The May 2013 report related to a visit on 14 May 2013 by the UKBA  west
    London arrest team to the address given by the  appellant  in  his  EEA
    application.  This is an address  in  Greenford.   On  arrival  at  the
    address at 6:45 in the morning, the officer knocked on the  front  door
    which was answered by a male who gave his  name  as  Zahid  Khan.   The
    officer knew him to be Zahid Anwar, an Afghan male who had lived  there
    with his wife and child, but who changed his name by deed poll to Zahid
    Khan.  He asked if he could speak to the appellant, and  Mr  Khan  said
    that he had gone out earlier.  He asked Mr Khan if he  could  show  him
    the appellant's room.  Mr Khan brought him into the  hall,  and  showed
    him the room which he said was locked.  He asked if Ms Goncalves  lived
    at this address.  He said that she had just gone out.  It was clear  to
    the officer that there was no evidence of either the appellant  or  his
    spouse living at the address.  When he asked Mr Khan details as to when
    they moved in and how long they had been  at  the  address,  he  became
    agitated and then angry.  He asked Mr Khan if he could  make  a  formal
    statement stating that both the appellant and Ms Goncalves lived at the
    address.  He refused and said he  did  not  want  to  answer  any  more
    questions.  The bathroom had only enough products and toothbrushes  for
    the family.  Mr Khan became  increasingly  animated  when  the  officer
    asked him again to make a declaration stating that both  the  appellant
    and Ms Goncalves lived at the address.  It  was  therefore  decided  to
    leave the premises.

 9. The officer was certain that the applicants did not live at the address
    and that Mr Khan was attempting to give the impression they  did.   His
    explanations were contradictory.  He first stated they  had  left  that
    morning.  But when he informed him that they had been outside for  some
    time, he changed it to a few days ago.  The officer  observed  that  Mr
    Khan's  original  name  was  the  same  as  the  appellant's,  and   he
    conjectured that Mr Khan might be a family member of the appellant.

10. He knocked on the door of another address  in  the  street,  the  house
    directly below that of Mr Khan's.  He asked the occupant, a middle aged
    British male, whether he had ever seen the appellant at the address  or
    Ms Goncalves. He said he knew that Mr Khan lived at  the  address  with
    his wife and children, and  there  was  another  female  who  was  also
    Pakistani.  He showed him the photograph of the  appellant,  and  asked
    him to look and to be sure.  He looked for some time and  said  he  had
    never seen the appellant at the address.  He said the other female  was
    a sister of Mr Khan's wife, and she was an Urdu speaker.

11. Ms Goncalves was  previously  married  to  Mr  Joga  Singh.   This  was
    considered to be a  marriage  of  convenience  at  the  time,  and  she
    divorced Mr Joga Singh in 2002.  It was strongly  believed  that  there
    was not a genuine relationship between the appellant and Ms  Goncalves.



The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

12. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Fox sitting in the  First-tier
    Tribunal at Hatton Cross on 19 December  2013.   Mr  Ahmed  of  Counsel
    appeared on  behalf  of  the  appellant,  and  Mr  Singh,  Home  Office
    Presenting  Officer,  appeared  on  behalf  of  the  respondent.    The
    appellant relied on a bundle of documents running to  288  pages  which
    was only served on the day of the hearing.  The judge adjourned  so  as
    to give Mr Singh time to consider the contents of the bundle.  When the
    hearing resumed, Mr Singh confirmed that the  Immigration  Officer  who
    had made the recent report was absent from duties due to sickness.

13. The judge received oral evidence from the appellant, the  sponsor,  and
    three supporting witnesses.  The supporting witnesses were Mr Khan (the
    landlord), Mr Jamal and Mr Latif.  In his subsequent determination, the
    judge records that  during  the  cross-examination  of  Mr  Latif,  the
    appellant was observed to gesture with his hands and head, nodding  and
    shaking his head subtly and raising his fingers whilst maintaining  his
    hands' position on his lap.  As a result of  this,  the  appellant  was
    asked to leave the room.

14.  The  appellant  adopted  as  his  evidence-in-chief  a  short  witness
    statement in the appellant's bundle.  From October  2008  to  September
    2009, his wife was looking for work.  He had submitted evidence of this
    with the witness statement.  From September 2009 to June 2010, his wife
    was studying at West Thames College.  From June 2010 onwards  his  wife
    had been working for Supreme Staff Limited.

15. With regard to their marriage, he had submitted  supporting  statements
    from  friends  confirming  that  they  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    marriage.  He knew that his wife was married before,  but  it  did  not
    last and they divorced.

16. With regard to his arrest in 2004, he had never used the name and false
    identity of Tariq Malik.  In any event, he had returned to Pakistan and
    applied for a family permit, and no issue had been taken regarding  the
    bona fides of his marriage.  He had also  successfully  applied  for  a
    five year residence permit, and again no issue had been taken then with
    the bona fides of his marriage.

17. When the Immigration Officers visited his home on 14 May 2013 he was at
    work.  He had submitted his duty summary to confirm that he was working
    from 10 p.m. on 13 May to 7:30 a.m. on 14 May.  He occasionally had to
    work at night, and his wife  preferred  to  stay  with  her  mother  in
    Chiswick when he was working at night.  He confirmed that his wife  was
    at her mother's house on 14 May 2013.  He had provided evidence (in the
    bundle) they had been living together since November/December 2007. The
    evidence was in the form of utility bills and bank statements.

18. In his subsequent determination, the judge set out at some  length  the
    evidence which he had received from the witnesses in paragraphs  10  to
    53.  He set out the submissions of the representatives at paragraphs 54
    to 61.  Mr Singh for  the  respondent  submitted  there  were  numerous
    discrepancies in the evidence of the appellant and  the  sponsor.   The
    consistent evidence was the result  of  coaching  and  rehearsal.   The
    evidence of the Immigration Officer was reliable when considered in the
    round.  Mr Khan did not  initially  refute  the  Immigration  Officer's
    account of the events relating to the appellant's  departure  from  the
    home address.  Mr Khan was an unreliable witness.  The other  witnesses
    had provided self-serving evidence.  Mr Latif had no knowledge  of  the
    sponsor's religious beliefs.

19. In reply, Mr Ahmed for the appellant submitted that the factual dispute
    in respect of the matters reported by the Immigration Officer  fell  in
    favour of the appellant as there was no  opportunity  to  cross-examine
    the Immigration Officer.  There was no evidence that Mr Khan  had  used
    an alias.  The allegation was speculative, and  designed  to  insinuate
    that Mr Khan had permitted the appellant to use his  home  address  for
    the purpose of a marriage of convenience.

20. The evidence at page 229 of the  appellant's  bundle  (the  appellant's
    shift pattern for 1  to  31  May  2013)  corroborated  the  appellant's
    account.  The neighbour was unidentified, and no weight could be placed
    on the report.

21. Inconsistencies in evidence could be plausible.  If  the  evidence  was
    rehearsed,  it  would  have  focused  on  the  engagement.   Consistent
    evidence had been provided on the topic of religion and  there  was  no
    motive for the witnesses to lie.  Mr Latif did not  interact  with  the
    sponsor, and the issue of religion was a private matter.

22. The appellant had returned to Pakistan in 2004 to  apply  for  the  EEA
    family permit.  The appellant had satisfied the respondent  on  several
    occasions.  When the inconsistencies and consistencies were  considered
    in the round, the conclusion fell in favour of the appellant.

23. The judge set out his findings in paragraphs 62 to 80.  At paragraph 79
    he held:

         The evidence of Mr Khan, Mr Jamal and Mr Latif ('witnesses') is  of
         no probative value.  When the evidence is considered in  the  round
         it is more likely than  not  that  the  witnesses  have  agreed  to
         provide supporting evidence exclusively  to  assist  the  appellant
         when no merit exists.  I do  not  accept  Mr  Latif's  inconsistent
         evidence that the sponsor celebrated Eid  with  the  appellant  and
         others, but in ten years Mr Latif  and  the  appellant  have  never
         discussed the sponsor's religious identity.  In  any  event  it  is
         unusual at best that Mr Latif should have little contact  with  the
         sponsor if his evidence of regular visits to the home address is to
         be accepted.

24. The judge concluded in paragraph 80 that upon the available evidence he
    was satisfied beyond the civil standard  that  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor were dishonest individuals who  had  conspired  to  defeat  the
    respondent.  The judge dismissed the appeal under the Regulations  2006
    and also under Article 8 ECHR.

The Initial Refusal of Permission

25. On 24  January  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes  refused  the
    appellant permission to appeal.  The reasoning was as follows:

         3.   The grounds argue that the judge erred in failing to apply the
             correct burden of proof in genuine marriage cases and  focused
             on relatively minor parts of the evidence and  overlooked  the
             bulk of consistent and lengthy  evidence  in  support  of  the
             appeal.

         4.    At  the  start  of  the  determination  the  judge  correctly
             identified that the burden in the appeal was on the  Secretary
             of State and  referred  again  to  the  burden  being  on  the
             respondent in paragraph 62  at  the  start  of  the  findings.
             Discussion in that section followed  a  full  account  of  the
             evidence that had been given to the Tribunal.  The judge noted
             divergences in the evidence in cross-examination and  went  on
             to find that the appellant and  the  sponsor  had  dishonestly
             sought to defeat the respondent.

         5.   The determination shows that the judge properly considered all
             of the evidence in the context of the correct burden of  proof
             and applied that to the decision reached.  The grounds  amount
             to a disagreement of the findings properly made  and  open  to
             the judge on the evidence presented.  The grounds disclose  no
             arguable errors of law and permission to appeal is refused.

The Eventual Grant of Permission

26. On a  renewed  application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley granted  permission  to  appeal
    for the following reasons:

         Many of the challenges contained in the  application  are  entirely
         without merit and fail to identify any properly arguable  error  of
         law but I am concerned that the judge may have erred by failing  to
         adequately  reason  his  findings  in  paragraph  79.   I  am  also
         concerned that he does not demonstrate that he has  considered  the
         large bundle of evidence submitted on behalf of the appellant.  All
         challenges may be argued.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

27. At the hearing before me, Mr Ahmed developed the  arguments  raised  by
    him in the grounds of  appeal.   He  referred  me  to  Papajorgji  (EEA
    spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 38 (IAC)  and  to
    various passages within this authority upon which he relied.

28. In reply, Mr Wilding stood by the Rule 24 response dated 29 April 2014.
    The judge was entitled to find the evidence between the  appellant  and
    the  sponsor  was  rehearsed  as  stated  at  paragraph   77   of   his
    determination.  At paragraph 79 it was clear that the judge found  that
    the evidence of the supporting witnesses could not be  relied  on,  and
    the judge gave adequate reasons for that finding.

Discussion

29. In Papajorgji, the Tribunal held that there was no burden at the outset
    of an application on a claimant to demonstrate that a  marriage  to  an
    EEA national was not one of convenience.  IS (marriages of convenience)
    Serbia [2008] UKAIT 31 established only that  there  is  an  evidential
    burden on  the  claimant  to  address  evidence  justifying  reasonable
    suspicion that the marriage is entered into for the predominant purpose
    of securing residence rights.

30. At paragraph 62 of his determination, the judge held as follows:

         The respondent has satisfied the burden  upon  her.   The  historic
         evidence of immigration abuse and the failure to  provide  reliable
         evidence of cohabitation upon the investigation of the  Immigration
         Officer make it reasonable to conclude the respondent was  entitled
         to arrive at her decision.  Whilst it is possible that the evidence
         of cohabitation may have been behind a locked door, the  respondent
         was reasonably entitled to arrive at her conclusion based upon  the
         available evidence.

Whether there was evidence justifying reasonable suspicion

31. Mr Ahmed submits that the judge failed "to pay heed" to  Papajorgji  in
    this paragraph, and that he was wrong to find that the  respondent  had
    discharged  the  burden  of  proving  that  there  were  factors  which
    supported suspicion for believing the marriage was one of  convenience:
    see paragraph 19 of Papajorgji.  The evidential onus for  showing  that
    there were reasonable grounds to suspect a marriage of convenience  lay
    on the respondent, and  Mr  Ahmed  submits  that  on  analysis  of  the
    evidence the respondent had not discharged this burden.

32. Mr Ahmed's reasoning is twofold.  Firstly, he points to the  fact  that
    the  appellant  returned  to  Pakistan  following  his  arrest  as   an
    immigration offender, and successfully re-entered  the  country  on  17
    October 2006 in possession of an EEA family permit visa.  He then  made
    a successful in country application for a five year residence  card  as
    an EEA family member.

33. Secondly, Mr Ahmed submits that the judge ought  to  have  treated  the
    oral evidence of Mr Khan, which was corroborated by the contents of the
    documents in the appellant's bundle (in particular  the  shift  pattern
    document at page 229), as neutralising the evidence of the  Immigration
    Officer, whose evidence had not been tested in cross-examination.

34. I do not consider that the judge misdirected himself in law in  finding
    that the respondent had discharged the evidential onus of  establishing
    that there were reasonable grounds for suspecting that the marriage was
    one of convenience.  I accept that the corollary of  the  respondent's
    reliance on historic matters giving rise to the suspicion is  that  the
    concern over whether the marriage was  one  of  convenience  could  and
    should have been raised in 2006 when the appellant was seeking  to  re-
    enter the country as the family member of an EEA national.  A fortiori,
    the allegation that the appellant's marriage to Ms Goncalves is one  of
    convenience could and should  have  been  raised  in  response  to  his
    application for a five year residence card  in  2007.   But  I  do  not
    consider that the Secretary of State is thereby estopped  from  raising
    it now, or from relying on historic matters in order to  discharge  the
    evidential onus on  her.   The  principle  that  "fraud  unravels  all"
    applies in public law, as well as in private law.  If  the  enforcement
    visit in 2013 had allayed concerns over whether this was a marriage  of
    convenience, it would have been unreasonable for the respondent to rely
    solely on historic matters to  assert  the  suspicion  that  it  was  a
    marriage of convenience.  But, far from  allaying  such  concerns,  the
    outcome of the enforcement visit in 2013  was  calculated  to  compound
    them.

35. With regard to Mr Ahmed's second submission, the judge was not bound to
    give more weight to the oral evidence of the witnesses before him, than
    to the written evidence of the Immigration Officer.

36. The documentary evidence provided by the appellant showed that he had a
    good excuse for not being present at the property in the early hours of
    the morning.  But it did not prove the converse, which was that he  and
    his wife  would  have  been  there,  if  he  had  not  been  working  a
    nightshift.

37. Accordingly, it was open to the judge to find, as he did  at  paragraph
    63, that the burden now shifted to the appellant  to  demonstrate  that
    his marriage was not one of convenience.

The oral evidence of the appellant and the sponsor

38. The judge acknowledged that the appellant and the sponsor had  provided
    consistent evidence of their alleged  relationship  "in  some  regard."
    But he found that the appellant and the sponsor began  to  depart  from
    their respective accounts  when  cross-examined  "on  less  predictable
    themes".

39. The judge then went on to set out in considerable detail  the  respects
    in which he found their accounts to be divergent.  At paragraph 75, the
    judge held the sponsor was vague in relation to the visit made  by  the
    Immigration Officer.  He found it was significant that she  was  unable
    to recall with any accuracy the timing of the visit.  He consdired that
    this would be a significant event for the sponsor  and  the  appellant,
    and that she should be able to recall this event with more clarity.  He
    found it unusual that the sponsor  should  not  challenge  Mr  Khan  in
    relation to alleged statements which he  had  made  which  damaged  the
    appellant's position.

40. At paragraph 76, the judge  observed  that  it  was  unusual  that  the
    sponsor was unaware of  the  appellant's  motivation  for  keeping  his
    toiletries in the bedroom.  It was reasonable to expect  that  had  the
    interference with his toiletries occurred as claimed, this  fact  would
    have been communicated to the sponsor.

41. At paragraph 77 the judge held that the sponsor's lack of awareness  of
    this  alleged  event  (Mr  Khan's  daughter  placing  the   appellant's
    toothbrush in the tub) and a failure to identify any meaningful  reason
    for her decision to keep her toiletries in the bedroom, led him to  the
    reasonable conclusion that the appellant and the sponsor had  rehearsed
    and improvised their evidence in a transparent  attempt  to  facilitate
    the appellant's residence in the UK.

42. When the evidence was considered in the round, it was more likely  than
    not that the sponsor was not connected to the home address as  claimed.
    He was satisfied to a high degree of probability that the  sponsor  had
    conspired with the appellant to create the appearance of marriage  with
    the exclusive purpose of facilitating his residence in the UK.





The bundle of documents

43. It is convenient  at  this  juncture  to  consider  the  error  of  law
    challenge that the judge failed to take account of the contents of  the
    appellant's bundle.  As indicated  by  the  appellant  in  his  witness
    statement,  the  contents  of  the  bundle  were  consistent  with  the
    appellant  living  at  the  same   address   as   the   sponsor   since
    November/December 2007.  But the ultimate issue which the judge had  to
    decide was whether the appellant had rebutted the suspicion that he had
    entered into a marriage of convenience with the sponsor.  Even if  they
    had been living under the same roof, and indeed in the  same  room,  it
    did  not  necessarily  follow  that  the  marriage  was  not   one   of
    convenience.  Moreover, the allegation of the respondent was  that  the
    appellant and the  sponsor  had  gone  to  the  trouble  of  presenting
    themselves in official documents (such as bank statements) as living at
    the same address, when this did not reflect the underlying reality (see
    page 2 of the Reasons for Refusal Letter).  Given  the  nature  of  the
    case against the appellant, the judge reasonably gave great  weight  to
    the performance of the appellant and the sponsor in  cross-examination,
    and it was  open  to  him  to  reach  the  conclusions  which  he  did,
    notwithstanding the documentary evidence of long cohabitation contained
    in the appellant's bundle.

The supporting witnesses

44. Turning to paragraph 79, it was also part of the respondent's  case  in
    the  refusal  decision  that  Mr  Khan  was  a  co-conspirator  in  the
    maintenance  of  the  deception.   The  judge  had   earlier   in   his
    determination set out the evidence given by Mr Khan and the  other  two
    supporting witnesses.  So it is reasonably to be inferred that he  took
    their evidence into account before reaching the conclusion at paragraph
    78 that the sponsor had conspired with  the  appellant  to  create  the
    appearance of marriage for the exclusive purpose  of  facilitating  his
    residency in the UK.

45. Mr Ahmed accepts that the judge gave adequate reasons for rejecting the
    evidence of Mr Latif, but submits that his rejection of the evidence of
    Mr Khan and Mr Jamal is not adequately reasoned.

46. I consider that it was open to the judge  to  find  that  it  was  more
    likely than  not  that  all  three  witnesses  had  agreed  to  provide
    supporting evidence exclusively to assist the appellant "where no merit
    exists".  Mr Jamal was a friend of the appellant, and he was not giving
    evidence on oath.  Mr Khan was also not giving evidence  on  oath,  and
    there was a direct conflict of evidence between the  account  which  he
    gave in cross-examination of the visit by the Immigration  Officer  and
    the account given by the Immigration Officer in  the  report.   It  was
    open to the judge to prefer the evidence of  the  Immigration  Officer,
    and to find that it was more likely than  not  that  Mr  Khan  was  not
    telling the truth.

Continuous exercise of treaty rights

47.  The  Presenting  Officer  accepted  that  the  sponsor  was  currently
    exercising treaty rights as a worker, but the evidence put  forward  by
    the appellant did not establish that she  had  been  exercising  treaty
    rights for a continuous five year period.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing  the  appeal  under  the
Regulations 2006 did not contain an error of law, and the  decision  stands.
This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity


The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

