
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Appeal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber    Appeal Numbers: IA/25646/2015
                                                               Ia/25647/2015
                                                               Ia/25648/2015
                                                               IA/25649/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 22nd of March 2017           |On 8th June 2017                |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                 Mr yakDEHIgE Prasanna chAMINDA Fernando (1)
               Mrs nadeesha prabhani sabaragamu koralalage (2)
                                  [Y Y] (3)
                                  [Y S] (4)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Nazim of counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. In this decision, I will continue to refer  to  the  parties  by  their
    designations before the First-Tier Tribunal (FTT).


 2. In addition to the main appellant (the first appellant) there are three
    other  appellants  listed  above.  The  other  listed  appellants,  his
    dependants, are as follows:

        . NADEESHA DOB 11 March 1982 - his wife;


        . [YY] DOB [ ] 2007 - his son;


        . [YS] DOB [ ] 2013 - his daughter.


3.    This is an appeal by the above  respondent  against  the  decision  of
    First--Tier Tribunal Judge Telford (Judge Telford)  promulgated  on  29
    September 2016. The respondent alleges that in the Judge Telford failed
    adequately to assess the evidence in relation to the proportionality of
    the decision to remove the appellants from the UK, having regard to the
    requirements of section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).

Background

4.    The first appellant, who was born on 6 July 1973, is a citizen of  Sri
    Lanka. He claims to have entered the UK illegally on 3 March  2007.  He
    used agents to travel to the UK with the  assistance  of  a  false  Sri
    Lankan passport in the name of AJITH PEREIRA.


5.    The first appellant applied for asylum on 6 March 2007, the first  day
    that he was served with illegal entrant papers. Shortly after  that  he
    submitted an asylum claim, on  30  March  2007  his  asylum  claim  was
    refused. His appeal against the asylum refusal was dismissed on 14 June
    2007. On 21 June 2007, his appeal rights were exhausted. The  appellant
    then remained in the UK. He later applied for further leave  to  remain
    based on his family/private life (10 years), which was refused with  no
    right of appeal on 22nd of January 2015.

The appeal proceedings.

6.    The appeal to the FTT was dated 9 July 2015. In his grounds the  first
    appellant claims that the rights of "the child of  the  family"  ([YY])
    would be breached  if  the  family  were  returned  to  Sri  Lanka.  In
    particular, under the provisions of paragraph 276 ADE (IV) it would  be
    a "clear breach of their human rights"  to  remove  the  2nd  appellant
    ([YY]) because he had been born in the UK on 18 September 2007. He also
    claimed that the best interests of "the child" - a reference to  master
    [YY] - were best advanced by continuing to allow him to reside  in  the
    UK and it was necessary for the respondent to allow him  to  do  so  to
    secure his best interests in accordance with section 55 of the Borders,
    Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  (the  2009  Act).  The  first
    appellant and his spouse also claimed to fall within "exception one" of
    appendix FM as they were the parents of [YY], a child who was under the
    age of 18 years and who had lived in the UK  since  birth.  They  claim
    that he had lived in the UK  continuously  for  at  least  seven  years
    immediately preceding  the  application  and  to  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship  with  that  child.  Accordingly,  the
    child, and consequently his parents, could not be removed to Sri Lanka.
    The appellants claimed that they ought to be granted leave to remain in
    the UK on the grounds that [YY] had established  a  private  or  family
    life here, having been born in the UK. The first appellant claimed that
    by virtue of the fact that [YY] had been born in the UK and  have  been
    here for more  than  8  years  it  was  an  unlawful  and  unreasonable
    interruption to his family life to be compelled  to  leave  the  UK  to
    return to Sri Lanka.

7.    Judge Telford considered that section 85 (5) of the 2002  Act  allowed
    him to consider not only the circumstances pertaining at  the  date  of
    the decision but also, as this was any 'in  country'  application,  any
    matters relevant at the date of the hearing. Judge Telford  found  that
    the first appellant had established that he qualified  under  paragraph
    276 ADE of the Immigration Rules. Further, or alternatively, the  first
    appellant fell within article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights (ECHR) and it would be a breach of those rights  to  remove  him
    and his family.

The hearing

8.    At the hearing the appellant was represented by Mr Nazim, a member  of
    bar. The respondent  was  represented  by  Ms  Holmes,  a  Home  Office
    presenting officer.

9.    Ms Holmes submitted the judge did not deal correctly the  case  of  MA
    Pakistan [2016] EWCA Civ 705. In that case, the Court of Appeal had  to
    consider the reasonableness of the requirements placed on applicants by
    the new Immigration Rules in the  context  of  paragraph  276  ADE  and
    section 117E (6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
    ("the 2002 Act'). She said that the  appellants  had  come  to  the  UK
    illegally in 2007. The third appellant had been  born  in  the  UK  but
    there were no obvious difficulties in  the  family  relocating  to  Sri
    Lanka. The third appellant would continue to have loving  parents,  who
    would continue to nurture him for his  remaining  years  of  childhood.
    This is not a case where there would be an excessive interference  with
    the child's upbringing. There was no adequate explanation given by  the
    Immigration Judge as to why the  merits  of  this  case  fulfilled  the
    requirements of article 8 of the ECHR. I was particularly  referred  to
    paragraph 46 of MA where reference is made to  the  extent  of  social,
    cultural and  education  links  formed  by  the  child  of  an  illegal
    immigrant. Whilst significant weight would always attach to the child's
    interests it does not follow that leave to remain must be  granted.  Ms
    Holmes also submitted that it was not unreasonable,  having  regard  to
    the case of EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874, to attach significant
    weight to the need for proper immigration control. Ms Holmes went on to
    point out that the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) considered the case
    of Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74. In that case, the Supreme Court decided that
    no consideration should be treated as inherently more significant  than
    another. While judges may approach the question of  proportionality  in
    different ways and it  is  always  important  to  understand  what  the
    child's  best  interests  are,  there  is  no  substitute  for  careful
    consideration and examination of all relevant factors.  The  first  and
    second appellant's children are not to be blamed  for  the  conduct  of
    their parents, but that did  not  mean  that  the  public  interest  in
    enforcing immigration control was of no weight.

10.   Mr Nazim referred me to his  instructing  solicitor's  response  under
    rule 24 of the Upper Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2008.  It  had  been
    pointed out in that document that:

   a) That the immigration judge directed himself properly having regard  to
      the fact that the third appellant (YAKDEHIGA) was  aged  9  �,  having
      been in the UK since he was born on the 18 September 2007;


   b) The Immigration Judge accepted this evidence, as he was  entitled  to.
      He concluded that the appellants had formed a family life in the UK;


11.   Paragraph 276 ADE (iv) of the Immigration Rules  clearly  gave  effect
    to the principle that a child who has been continuously in the  UK  for
    at least 7 years would be entitled to leave to  remain  on  the  ground
    that he has established a private life in the UK. This would be because
    such a person would have established ties and there were no would be no
    proper  grounds   for   removing   him.   This   would   constitute   a
    disproportionate interference with family life. It  was  accepted  that
    the 7- year  period  was  the  starting  point  but  it  would  not  be
    appropriate to treat a child  is  having  a  precarious  status  merely
    because that was the case  in  relation  to  his  parents'  immigration
    status. Later in his submissions Mr Nazim  made  the  additional  point
    that it was only a matter of months before the third appellant would be
    eligible to apply for British citizenship (this arises after 10 years).
    There was uncertainty at the hearing as to the extent  to  which  delay
    was relevant. I pointed out that based on the Home Office refusal there
    appeared to be delay between 2007 when the asylum  claim  was  rejected
    and subsequent appeal, which failed, and the  application  for  further
    leave to remain in 2014. Subsequent investigations revealed that  there
    was an attempt in 2010 to treat this case as a 'legacy case'.  However,
    that the application  did  not  get  anywhere.  In  summary,  Mr  Nazim
    asserted that the judge was entirely entitled to conclude the interests
    of the third appellant outweighed other considerations having regard to
    the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE (1). The appellant had  lived  in
    the UK for more than 7 years. I was referred to the case law, including
    the decision by the President in PD (Sri Lanka) [2016] UKUT  00108.  It
    was asserted that the facts in PD Sri Lanka were very similar to  those
    in this case.

12.   The respondent briefly replied to assert that Judge  Telford  had  not
    given proper weight to the public interest, barely mentioning it in her
    decision. I was referred to paragraph 41 and  paragraph  42  of  MA.  A
    child was not to be held responsible for  the  moral  failings  of  his
    parent but the public interest in effective immigration control  was  a
    proper matter to put in the balance. Furthermore,  the  fact  that  the
    welfare of a child was one of the balancing factors, it did not  lessen
    the importance  of  immigration  control.  I  would  also  referred  to
    paragraph 47 in that case. The best interests of the child are a  well-
    established concept but could not be divorced entirely from the conduct
    and immigration history of the parents in the sense that having made  a
    careful analysis of the nature and  links  to  the  UK  child  and  the
    country to which the child  is  to  return  forms  part  of  the   best
    interests' assessment. The fact  that  the  child's  welfare  would  be
    better advanced  in  the  UK  does  not  automatically  result  in  the
    reasonableness question being answered in favour of the  child,  having
    regard to the need to balance the need proper immigration against that.
    Paragraph 54 of that decision was also referred to.  There  is  nothing
    illogical in  the  notion  that  the  child's  best  interests  do  not
    necessarily mean it is unreasonable for him  to  the  returned  to  his
    parents' home country.

13.   At the end of the hearing I decided that  it  was  necessary  to  take
    more time to consider the matter before deciding whether  there  was  a
    material error of law in the decision of the FTT. Both sides agreed  if
    I did find a material error of law I could go on to decide the case  on
    the evidence before the FTT. Mr Nazim said that this was subject to  my
    consideration of a supplemental bundle, which was received  during  the
    hearing. If I did that, I would, he  acknowledged,  have  all  relevant
    matters before me.

Discussion

14.   The first appellant has now been in the UK for approximately 10  years
    during which time two of his children have been born,  [YY]  and  [YS].
    The present application is on the basis that the appellants have formed
    a private or family life here. They did not seek to maintain that  they
    qualified  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and,  in  particular,  under
    paragraph 76 A D E of those rules. However, they  maintained  that  the
    respondent should allow their application under of the ECHR. On 26 June
    2015 the respondent rejected that application for reasons given in  the
    refusal letter. However, the appeal to the FTT was successful.

15.   The reasons given by Judge Telford for deciding that  the  appellants'
    appeals should be allowed under the Immigration Rules or  "under  human
    rights" are somewhat sparse. It seems the Judge Telford  was  satisfied
    that it would be "unreasonable" to return the whole  family  given  the
    fact that the third appellant had lived in the UK  continuously  for  a
    period of 7 years. Accordingly, Judge Telford considered  that  section
    117 B (6) of the 2002 Act applied in that it would be  unreasonable  to
    return the third appellant  to  Sri  Lanka  and  "therefore  the  whole
    family" ought to be allowed to stay here. She was  not  satisfied  that
    this was a case where the economic interests UK, in the enforcement  of
    proper immigration controls, justified the interference with the  third
    appellant's private or family life.

16.   It is important to note that section 117 A of the 2002 Act requires  a
    tribunal to "have regard" to the "public  interest  considerations"  in
    section 117 B of that Act. Section 117 D (6) provides an  exception  to
    the usual requirement that it is in the  public  interest  and  in  the
    economic interests of the UK that  a  person  who  is  not  financially
    independent, for example, should be  required to be leave the UK.  That
    sub-section provides:


    "(6)     In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
    public interest does not require the person's removal where-

      (a)     the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
      with a qualifying child, and
      (b)     it would not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the
           United Kingdom.]"


      A "qualifying child" is defined by section 117 D as "a person  who  is
          under the age of 18 and who...


          (b) has lived in the UK for a continuous period of seven years or
              more".


17.   Judge Telford, having referred  to  the  relevant  legislation  and  a
    number of the important cases, including Razgar, nevertheless failed to
    apply the most recent case law, including MA. In that  case,  which  in
    fact involved a number of different appeals,  Elias  LJ  said  that  an
    interference with private or family life would only be justified  in  a
    case to which section 117 B (6) applied where there  are  "sufficiently
    strong countervailing public interest" factors such  as  to  place  the
    case within article 8 (2). However, he went on to consider the question
    of reasonableness. In particular, the court rejected  the  notion  that
    once it is established that it is in the "best interests" of the  child
    to remain UK it must necessarily be unreasonable to remove  that  child
    from this country. The fact that the child has been in the UK for seven
    years is a factor which is required to  be  given  significant  weight.
    However, this does not mean  it  outweighs  other  considerations.  The
    public interest in immigration control may override the best  interests
    of the child. The only other point that must be borne in mind is that a
    child will not be blamed moral failings of his parent. But that too did
    not mean that the immigration  history  was  irrelevant.  Overall,  the
    court thought that "even if the child is best interests are to stay, it
    may still be not unreasonable to require the child to leave. This  will
    depend on a careful analysis of the nature and extent of the  links  in
    the UK  and  the  country  where  it  is  proposed  he  should  return"
    (paragraph 47).

 18.  Judge Telford described the respondent's duty as  being  the  "onerous
    and to some unpopular but respected duty of upholding the law in  terms
    of immigration". However, Judge Telford failed to consider  whether  in
    fact the public interest  in  the  enforcement  of  proper  immigration
    controls was a consideration of great importance  in  the  case  before
    him. It was, I find, a material error of law not  to  embark  upon  the
    "careful analysis of the nature and extent of the links in the  UK  and
    the country where it is proposed he should return" before the  tribunal
    concluded  that  the  respondent   had   breached   her   international
    obligations under the ECHR. Accordingly, the decision of the  FTT  must
    be set aside.

19.   On proper analysis, the FTT ought to  have  found  that  even  if  the
    third  appellant  had  established  the  requisite  period   continuous
    residence he formed part of the family unit  which  together  would  be
    returning to Sri Lanka. As  the  respondent  says  in  her  grounds  of
    appeal, the fact that the child appellant was born in the  UK  and  had
    lived here for more than 7 years was one important factor, but  it  had
    to be put  into  the  balance.  An  assertion  had  been  made  in  the
    application that the third appellant only spoke English, but  it  seems
    likely that the two adult appellants both spoke Sinhalese (their native
    tongue) at home and at least probable that the two children would  have
    picked up some of their parents mother tongue. In any  event,  children
    quickly absorb the language and culture into which they  are  immersed.
    As the third appellant is presently aged 9, and  the  fourth  appellant
    only aged 3, it seems likely that they will quickly absorb the language
    and culture of their parents' native country, which  is  now  at  peace
    after years of civil war. There  is  nothing  in  the  family's  likely
    circumstances in Sri Lanka that I have  seen  which  would  render  its
    return to Sri Lanka unduly harsh or difficult for the family. There are
    obvious disparities between the UK  and  Sri  Lanka,  which  have  been
    pointed  to  by  the  appellants,  but  Sri  Lanka  has  a  functioning
    educational and healthcare system which would  be  able  to  provide  a
    reasonable level of care for the whole family. In  addition  there  are
    other family members to whom the family could turn for support.

20.   In my judgment, the first appellants' poor immigration history,  abuse
    of the immigration system and the lack of any real  difficulty  in  all
    the appellants relocating as a family unit  to  Sri  Lanka,  constitute
    factors which render the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  leave  to
    remain  reasonable.  The  need  for  effective   immigration   control,
    including the need to give proper weight  to  the  public  interest  in
    balanced affordable immigration, does appear to constitute a factor  of
    overriding importance. It is not the will of Parliament as expressed in
    the Immigration Rules to permit uncontrolled immigration by  those  who
    do not qualify under those rules.

Conclusion

21.   The decision of the FTT contains a material error of law such that  it
    is necessary for that decision to be set aside. I have gone on  to  re-
    make the decision. This has been based on the evidence presented to the
    FTT, as requested by the parties, as supplemented by  the  most  recent
    bundle.

Decision

22.   The respondent's appeal to the UT is allowed. The decision of the  FTT
    is set aside. The following decision is substituted:

   1) The appellant's appeal to the FTT is dismissed under  the  Immigration
      Rules;


   2) The respondent the appellant's appeal to the FTT is dismissed on human
      rights grounds.

23.   No anonymity direction is made.


Signature

Signed      W.E.HANBURY


Date             22nd May 2017





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury






Fee Award

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signature              William Hanbury

Dated                  22nd May 2017





