
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/25111/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 25 September 2015                |On: 19 October 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                   mr roo
                          (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesurum, counsel instructed by DF Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Callow (FTTJ) dismissing the appellant's appeal against the refusal  of
    his claim for leave to remain under  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 2. Permission was granted, and an error of law subsequently found  on  the
    basis  that  the  FTTJ  had  failed  to  consider  the  effect  of  the
    appellant's removal on a qualifying  child,  that  is  the  appellant's
    British stepchild.  The reasons are annexed to this decision.

 3. The matter came before me for a  rehearing  to  re-make  the  decision,
    taking into account all the evidence and submissions before me as  well
    as that before the FTTJ.

    The Hearing

 4. Shortly before the hearing commenced, a skeleton argument was served on
    behalf of  the  respondent  in  which,  contrary  to  the  respondent's
    previous position, it was accepted that the appellant could  argue  his
    case with reference  to  the  parent  route  in  Appendix  FM  (R-LTRP)
    provided that he  can  show  that  he  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with the child and the child's biological father plays  no
    role in the child's  life.   However,  it  was  also  argued  that  the
    appellant could not benefit from Appendix FM because he  fell  foul  of
    the suitability provisions, with specific reference to S-LTR 1.6.

 5. Mr Jesurum was taken by surprise by these submissions and sought a  not
    insubstantial  quantity  of  additional   time   in   order   to   take
    instructions, consider the respondent's arguments and the  accompanying
    case law.

 6. The issues before me were whether the appellant's continued presence in
    the United Kingdom was not conducive to the public good and whether  it
    was reasonable to expect the child of the appellant's  partner,  L,  to
    leave the United Kingdom. The nature of  the  appellant's  relationship
    with his partner and of his meaningful role in the life of her child is
    not in issue and forms part of the preserved findings of FTTJ Callow.

 7. I heard oral evidence from the appellant and his  partner,  Ms  OK,  as
    well as submissions from both representatives. I also had regard to  Mr
    Jarvis' skeleton  argument,  the  appellant's  bundles  of  documentary
    evidence submitted previously and currently and case  law  provided  on
    behalf of the respondent.

 8. In examination-in-chief, the appellant explained that  his  mother  had
    died in Nigeria in April 2005.  The  appellant  had  continued  living,
    alone, in the rented home he shared with his mother for a further three
    months until the rent  was  due.  At  this  point  his  maternal  uncle
    collected him and applied for a  visit  visa  for  the  appellant.  The
    appellant recalls signing a visa application form for this purpose.  He
    left Nigeria in October 2005. Upon arriving in the United  Kingdom  the
    same month, the appellant was taken to the home of his maternal aunt, a
    British citizen, who fairly swiftly enrolled  him  at  Newham  College.
    This aunt  provided  the  college  with  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    relationship to her and informed them she was his guardian.

 9. The appellant was able to progress to study for a science degree at the
    University of East London  and  graduated  in  2011.  He  was  able  to
    commence that course because he had resided in the United  Kingdom  for
    three years prior to the commencement of the degree  course.  His  aunt
    had paid the fees on his behalf, at the home student rate.

10. The appellant told me that he has  had  no  further  contact  with  his
    maternal uncle, but heard from extended family  in  America,  that  his
    uncle had been seen there. The appellant does not have the passport  he
    used to enter the United Kingdom, which he maintains was  in  his  true
    identity, because his uncle retained it. The  appellant  last  saw  his
    father in Nigeria a few days  after  the  funeral  of  the  appellant's
    mother. He did not hear from  him  thereafter.  The  appellant's  half-
    brother lives in America and he does not believe he currently  has  any
    relatives in Nigeria.

11. The appellant also gave evidence regarding his involvement in L's life,
    which included routine tasks such as making breakfast,  collecting  the
    child after school and supervising her homework. The appellant did  not
    know when L had last seen her father, but believed that this was before
    he was on the scene, as he put it.

12. Ms OK gave evidence regarding her domestic life with the appellant  and
    L in similar  terms  to  that  of  the  appellant.  She  also  gave  an
    indication of their social life which mainly involved going  out  as  a
    family unit and occasionally going out as a couple. She told me that L,
    who is aged 7, last saw her father when  she  was  aged  around  3  and
    approximately 2 years ago, the child's father had telephoned Ms OK. L's
    father had never financially supported her. Ms OK's mother and siblings
    reside in the United Kingdom. Her mother is a higher education teacher.
    She does not have a relationship with her father. She has a  number  of
    uncles and aunts in Nigeria but does not have a  personal  relationship
    with them, in that she sees only some of them if they visit her  mother
    in the United Kingdom. L has just started junior school, in that she is
    in year 3.

13. Mr Jarvis, relied on his  skeleton  argument  and  submitted  that  the
    appellant could not get to EX.1 of Appendix FM owing to the prohibition
    in R-LTRP.1.1(d)(i). He relied on the cases of ZS (Jamaica)  &  Anor  v
    SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1639 and R v Bennabas [2005] EWCA Crim 2113,  with
    regard to unlawful residence and use of false documents  for  procuring
    entry into the United Kingdom.  However, if I was not with him on that,
    he accepted that it would not be reasonable to expect L  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom. With regard to the appellant's case outside, the  Rules
    he referred to the test in SS (Congo) and argued that this had not been
    met. Furthermore, he submitted that the Article  8  assessment  outside
    the Rules is broader than the restricted questions posed  in  EX.1  and
    therefore even if it was unreasonable to expect the child to leave  the
    United  Kingdom  this  was  not  determinative  of  the   question   of
    proportionality in the appellant's case.

14. Mr Jesurum argued that the appellant met the requirements of the Rules.
    He accepted that he would be in difficulty arguing that the appellant's
    removal was disproportionate were I to find against him as to the  case
    under the Rules.

15. At the end of the hearing I reserved my determination.

    Consideration and findings

16. There was little disagreement over the vast majority of facts  of  this
    case. The appellant's genuine and subsisting relationship with L is not
    in dispute, as is the fact that L has no contact  with  her  biological
    father, whom she has not seen for 4 years and  who  last  telephoned  2
    years ago. I am satisfied that L's father plays no role in her life.

17. The appellant admits his unlawful residence in the United Kingdom  from
    some point in 2006 onwards. He believes that he had a valid visa in his
    own genuine passport. Mr Jarvis disputes that, but  conceded  that  the
    respondent's records of entry to the United Kingdom are not infallible.
    I found the appellant's description of how the  visa  application  form
    was completed, signed and submitted to be plausible.   I  am  therefore
    prepared to accept that he entered as a visitor in 2005. Given that the
    appellant's understanding was that he was sent to  the  United  Kingdom
    for a fresh start, it could be said that he entered illegally  in  this
    regard. However, in view of the fact that the appellant had  only  just
    reached the age of majority and was being guided by his close relatives
    at a time when he was grieving, I am not prepared to find  that  he  is
    wholly responsible for the manner of his entry to  the  United  Kingdom
    and the regularisation of  his  status  in  the  early  period  of  his
    arrival. The appellant is,  however,  responsible  for  his  protracted
    failure to attempt to regularise his immigration thereafter.

18. Under Section 117B Article 8 public interest considerations applicable
    in all cases, under Part 5A of the Immigration Act 2014 it states:

         (1)      The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
             the public interest.

         (2)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)      Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)       Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.

         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom.

19. 117B considerations were recently considered by the Upper  Tribunal  in
    AM    (Section 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 where the  Upper  Tribunal
    held that an appellant can obtain no positive right to a grant of leave
    to remain from either Sections 117B(2) or (3), whatever the  degree  of
    his fluency in English to the strength of his financial  resources.  So
    far as Section 117B(6) is concerned, the question  must  be  posed  and
    answered in the proper context of whether it was reasonable  to  expect
    the child to  follow  its  parents  to  their  country  of  origin  (EV
    (Philippines)).

20. In this case, therefore, although it is said  that  the  appellant  can
    speak English and has not been a burden on the  state,  he  derives  no
    credit for that in relation to Section 117B.

21. It is equally clear that the appellant has spent a  substantial  amount
    of time in the UK unlawfully and accordingly little  weight  should  be
    given to a relationship formed with a qualifying partner.

22. The crux of this case therefore is  the  position  of  the  appellant's
    British stepchild.

23. Mr Jarvis relied upon S-LTR.1.6 of Appendix FM  on  the  basis  of  the
    appellant's  unlawful  entry  and  unlawful  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom. That provision,  if  proved  would  result  in  the  mandatory
    refusal of the appellant's claim.  It states as follows;

         "The presence of the applicant in the UK is not  conducive  to  the
         public good because their conduct (including convictions  which  do
         not fall with paragraph S-LTR.1.3-1.5), character, associations, or
         other reason, make it undesirable to allow them to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom."

24. I have carefully considered what was said at [41] in  the  judgment  in
    Benabbas relied on by Mr Jarvis, however there is no evidence before me
    which satisfies me that the appellant fraudulently used a  passport  in
    order to gain entry or support his residence  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    like the claimant in that case.

25. Mr Jarvis argues, with reference to  [27]  of  ZS  (Jamaica)  that  the
    appellant's overstaying and unlawful residence in  the  United  Kingdom
    renders his presence not conducive to the public good. While  I  accept
    that these are serious matters, they are mitigated to  some  extent  by
    his age, his state of mind following losing his  mother  and  the  fact
    that the appellant was not responsible for his arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The appellant's  aunt  was  acting  in  loco  parentis  and  I
    consider that she must share the  responsibility  for  the  appellant's
    unlawful status at the outset.

26. While the appellant's failure to regularise his presence  earlier  than
    2013 is a  serious  countervailing  matter  as  far  as  the  balancing
    exercise under Article 8 outside the Rules in concerned, I do not  find
    that this  alone  renders  his  presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  not
    conducive to the public good in terms of suitability under the Rules.

27. I now turn to the issue as to the  reasonableness  of  expecting  L  to
    leave the United Kingdom in order that family life between her and  the
    appellant can continue in Nigeria.

28. In EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 875 the Court  of
    Appeal  considered  Section  55  of  the   Borders,   Citizenship   and
    Immigration Act 2009 and adopted the formulation of  Lady  Hale  in  ZH
    (Tanzania) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 4.

29. At paragraph 30 she said:

         "30.     Although nationality is  not  a  "trump  card"  it  is  of
         particular importance in assessing the best interests of any child.
         The UNCRC recognises the right of every child to be registered  and
         acquire a nationality (Article 7) and  to  preserve  her  identity,
         including her nationality (Article 8). In Wan, the Federal Court of
         Australia, pointed out  at  para  30  that,  when  considering  the
         possibility of the children accompanying their father to China, the
         tribunal had not considered any of the following matters, which the
         Court clearly regarded as important:

             (a) the fact that the  children,  as  citizens  of  Australia,
             would be deprived of  the  country  of  their  own  and  their
             mother's citizenship,  and  of  its  protection  and  support,
             socially, culturally and medically, and  in  many  other  ways
             evoked  by,  but  not  confined  to,  the  broad  concept   of
             lifestyle'

             (b) the resultant social and linguistic  disruption  of  their
             childhood as well as the loss of their homeland;

             (c) the loss of educational  opportunities  available  to  the
             children in Australia; and

             (d) their resultant isolation  from  the  normal  contacts  of
             children with their mother and their mother's family."

30. In EV (Philippines), at paragraph 35 Christopher Clarke LJ said:

         "A decision as to what is in the best interests  of  children  will
         depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age, (b) the length
         of time they have been  here,  (c)  how  long  they  have  been  in
         education, (d) what stage their education has reached (e)  to  what
         extent they have become distanced from the country to which  it  is
         proposed that they return (f) how renewable their  connection  with
         it may be, (g) to what extent they will have linguistic medical  or
         other difficulties in adapting to that country, and (h) the  extent
         to which the course proposed will interfere with their family  life
         or other rights (if they have any) as British citizens."

    Lewison LJ said at paragraph 51:

         "To attempt to answer this question is it necessary to revisit  the
         well-known case of ZH (Tanzania)  v  SSHD  [2011]  UKSC  4.  It  is
         necessary to put  that  decision  into  its  factual  context.  The
         Appellant was the mother who is a national of Tanzania. She had two
         children who were aged 12 and 9  respectively.  They  were  British
         citizens. Importantly so was their father. Accordingly there was no
         question of removing the father. Nor did  the  Secretary  of  State
         have any power to remove the children. The only power the Secretary
         of State had was that of removing the mother  alone.  If  therefore
         the children were to stay in the UK they would  be  separated  from
         their mother. On the other hand if they followed  her  to  Tanzania
         they would be separated from their  father,  and  deprived  of  the
         opportunity to grow up in the country of which they were  citizens.
         That was the context in which the issues were discussed."

    And at paragraph 58:

         "In my judgement therefore the assessment of the best interests  of
         the children must be made on the basis that the facts are  as  they
         are in the real world. If one parent has no right  to  remain,  but
         the other parent does, that is the  background  against  which  the
         assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the right to  remain
         then that  is  the  background  against  which  the  assessment  is
         conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable  to
         expect the child to follow the parent with no right  to  remain  to
         the country of origin?"

31. In EV (Philippines) none of the family was a British citizen  and  none
    had the right to remain in the UK and the court concluded that  it  was
    entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with their parents.

32. In this case the child in question is British as well as aged  over  7,
    having resided in the United Kingdom since birth. In  addition  to  her
    relationship with her mother and the appellant, she  has  relationships
    with her maternal grandmother, uncles and aunts in the United  Kingdom.
    She is beginning to develop a private life of her own in terms  of  her
    schooling and interests, which include ballet.

33. The appellant has a poor immigration history in  that  he  has  clearly
    overstayed his visa and shown scant  regard  for  the  requirements  of
    immigration control, shown by his failure to  seek  to  regularise  his
    status until 2013. These factors are mitigated by his fairly young  age
    when he arrived in the United Kingdom and the fact that  he  was  being
    guided by close family members whom I consider share the responsibility
    for his unlawful status in this country.

34. However if L, as in ZH (Tanzania), followed the  appellant  to  Nigeria
    she would be deprived of the right to grow up in the country  of  which
    she is a citizen. She would also be deprived of the benefits of  living
    in the United Kingdom and this is particularly relevant in relation  to
    her education.  There was no evidence before me of  a  family  home  in
    Nigeria on either the appellant or Ms OK's side of the family. Ms OK is
    currently between jobs and the appellant also lacks financial means.  I
    do not consider that it  is  reasonable,  in  these  circumstances,  to
    expect L to leave her country, her family home,  maternal  grandmother,
    aunts and uncles, school, friends  and  activities  for  a  potentially
    indefinite period of time, possibly until she is old enough  to  return
    to the United Kingdom independently.

35. In these circumstances the appellant meets the requirement of paragraph
    EX1(a) in that he has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
    qualifying child and it would not be reasonable to expect her to  leave
    the UK.

    Notice of Decision

36. The appellant's appeal is allowed.


Signed      Date: 26 September 2015

Deputy Upper Judge Tribunal Kamara



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  an  award  of
the full fee which has been paid.


Signed      Date: 26 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/25111/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Date Sent                            |
|On 14 August 2015                    |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                   MR ROO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesurum, counsel instructed by DF Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. This is an appeal against a decision of FTTJ Callow, promulgated on  31
    March 2015, in which he dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  a
    decision to refuse to grant him leave to remain on human rights grounds
    and to remove him from the United Kingdom.

    Background


 2. The appellant claimed to have  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  9
    October  2005,  at  the  age  of  18,  accompanied  by  an  uncle.  His
    application for leave to remain was based  on  a  relationship  with  a
    partner and her child, now aged 7, from a previous  relationship.  That
    application was refused on  25  April  2014.  The  Secretary  of  State
    commented that the appellant was not married to his sponsor; there  was
    no evidence at all of  cohabitation;  it  was  not  accepted  that  the
    appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with the  sponsor's
    child and the appellant could not  meet  any  of  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE of the Rules. In particular, the respondent noted that
    the appellant had spent his first 18 years in his home country  and  it
    was not accepted that he had "lost ties" to Nigeria. Reference was made
    to section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009,
    however no objective evidence  had  been  presented  of  the  child  in
    question or of the appellant's relationship with  her.  The  respondent
    noted that the appellant had submitted a letter from  a  doctor,  which
    identified him as the son of a named person whose medical  issues  were
    described. Reference was also made to the  appellant's  claim  that  he
    supported a named aunt who was his former guardian, both physically and
    emotionally. The respondent had regard to  records  showing  that  this
    aunt was married; that the appellant only visited at weekends and  that
    the aunt's needs were adequately supplied  by  her  husband  and  other
    support workers. There were said to be  no  compelling  or  exceptional
    circumstances to merit the exercise of discretion outside the Rules.

 3. In his grounds of appeal, the appellant argued  that  the  respondent's
    decision failed to take into account his right to a  family  life  with
    his partner and "children" and the best interests of those children.

    The hearing before the FTTJ

 4. The appellant and his partner gave evidence  before  FTTJ  Callow,  who
    heard the appeal on 17 March 2015. The FTTJ accepted that  the  parties
    lived together in  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship.  He  also
    accepted  that  the  appellant  played  a  "meaningful"  role  in   the
    upbringing of his partner's daughter. Nonetheless, the FTTJ found there
    to be no insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside the
    United Kingdom. With regard to Article 8, outside the Rules,  the  FTTJ
    found that the sponsor's child was not a qualifying child under section
    117D(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as amended
    and that the appellant's family life was outweighed by public  interest
    considerations.

    Error of law


 5. The grounds of appeal argue that the FTTJ erred  in  finding  that  the
    British child in question was not a qualifying child and  his  decision
    might have been different if this error had not been made; it  followed
    that the FTTJ failed to consider section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act;  that
    the FTTJ failed to consider the effect of the  appellant's  removal  on
    the child and failed to consider the best interests of the child.

 6. FTTJ Frankish granted permission, finding there to be an arguable error
    of law for the FTTJ to find that the British child was not a qualifying
    child.

 7. The Secretary of State's response  of  9  June  2015  stated  that  the
    respondent did not oppose the appellant's application and  invited  the
    Tribunal to determine the appeal following a fresh oral hearing.

    The hearing


 8. It was common ground between the parties that the FTTJ  had  materially
    erred in  finding  that  the  sponsor's  British  daughter  was  not  a
    qualifying child as defined in section 117D(1)  of  the  2002  Act  and
    thereby failing to  have  regard  to  section  117B(6).  I  accordingly
    decided that the FTTJ had made a material error of law.

 9. There was some discussion  as  to  the  parameters  and  venue  of  the
    rehearing of this appeal. Ultimately I decided that the findings of the
    FTTJ as to the relationship between the appellant and sponsor  and  the
    sponsor's child ought to be preserved given that the error of  law  did
    not undermine those findings in view of the judgment in DK  (Serbia)  &
    Ors [2006] EWCA Civ 1747, at [25];

         "Accordingly, as far as the scope of reconsideration is  concerned,
         the Tribunal is entitled to approach it,  and  to  give  directions
         accordingly, on the  basis  that  the  reconsideration  will  first
         determine whether or not there are any identifiable errors  of  law
         and will then consider the effect of any such error  or  errors  on
         the original decision. That  assessment  should  prima  facie  take
         place on the basis of the findings of fact and the  conclusions  of
         the original Tribunal, save  and  in  so  far  as  they  have  been
         infected by the identified error or errors of law. If they have not
         been infected by any error or errors of law,  the  Tribunal  should
         only re-visit them if there  is  new  evidence  or  material  which
         should be received in the  interest  of  justice  and  which  could
         affect those  findings  and  conclusions  or  if  there  are  other
         exceptional circumstances, which justify reopening them."

10. In terms of the venue of any future hearing, I bore in mind  paragraphs
    3.1 and 3.4 of the Tribunal's Practice Directions. Given that  findings
    of fact were  required  only  in  relation  to  the  issue  as  to  the
    reasonableness of requiring the child in question to leave  the  United
    Kingdom, I was of the view that the  most  appropriate  venue  for  the
    remainder of the hearing would be the Upper  Tribunal.  However  I  was
    unable  to  proceed  to  hear  the  appeal  and  remake  the   decision
    immediately because I was informed by Mr Jesurum, of the non-attendance
    of the sponsor's partner  as  a  result  of  suspected  food  poisoning
    following a restaurant meal the evening before. Mr Jesurum  advised  me
    that his instructing solicitors would be providing  supporting  medical
    evidence once that was available. I accepted that the sponsor  was  the
    person best placed to give evidence regarding the child in question and
    I accordingly adjourned the matter until 25 September 2015 when I would
    be sitting again.  Neither  representative  had  any  objection  to  my
    retaining conduct of the appeal.

11. In these circumstances I am satisfied that there are errors of law such
    that the decision be set aside to be re-made. The  FTTJ's  findings  of
    fact with regard to the relationship between the appellant and  sponsor
    and that between the appellant and her child are to stand.

12. Further directions are to follow.

Conclusion

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision to be re-made.

Directions


This appeal is remitted to be heard afresh at a hearing at Field House on
25 September 2015 with a time estimate of 2 hours.

No anonymity direction was made by the FTTJ, however one has now been
sought in order to protect the best interest of the child and I therefore
make the following direction:

         "Pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the
         Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise,  no  report  of  these
         proceedings or any form of publication thereof  shall  directly  or
         indirectly identify the original  appellant,  his  partner  or  the
         child of the family. This direction applies to, amongst others, all
         parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise
         to contempt of court proceedings. "


Signed      Date: 16 August 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara.
