
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25820/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |                 Decision & Reasons      |
|                                       |Promulgated                              |
|On 16th September 2015                 |                 On 22nd December 2015   |
|                                       |                                         |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr Xijin Zhang
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For  the  Appellant:      Ms  A  Fijiwala  (Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Price (Counsel)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   It will be convenient to refer to the  parties  as  follows:  Mr  Xijin
    Zhang is the appellant (as he was before the First-tier  Tribunal)  and
    the appellant in the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of  State.   In  a
    decision promulgated on 10th  March  2015,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Blake ("the judge") allowed the appellant's appeal against  a  decision
    to remove him from the United Kingdom.  That decision followed  refusal
    of an application for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  in  which
    the appellant relied on private and family life ties established in the
    United Kingdom since his arrival here in September 2003 with leave as a
    student.

2.   The judge heard evidence from the  appellant  and  from  his  wife  and
    found that the couple had used their best endeavours to comply with the
    Immigration Rules ("the rules") and the law.  The  appellant's  studies
    had come to an end due to his ill-health but the judge  found  that  he
    would be able to gain employment in the future and would not  prove  to
    be a burden on the state.  He found the marriage between the  appellant
    and his wife to be genuine and subsisting and  accepted  that  she  had
    never been to China and did not speak the language there.  He took into
    account the possibility that an application for entry clearance abroad,
    should the appellant return to China for this  purpose,  might  not  be
    successful under the rules.  He found as  a  fact  that  the  appellant
    could not bring himself within the rules in Appendix  FM  or  paragraph
    276ADE.

3.   The judge went on to make an Article 8 assessment  outside  the  rules,
    finding that the application for leave to remain  "did  not  take  into
    account  the   exceptional   circumstances"   of   the   case.    These
    circumstances included the appellant's presence in the  United  Kingdom
    since 2003, his studies, the genuine and subsisting  relationship  with
    his British citizen wife, the fact that his  wife  had  never  been  to
    China and did not speak the language and that when  their  relationship
    began, the appellant had leave to remain, albeit  limited  leave  as  a
    student.  He found  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the
    appellant's wife to accompany him to  China,  referred  to  authorities
    which included Hayat [2011] UKUT 00444 and Chikwamba  [2008]  UKHL  40,
    directing himself that if the only factor weighing on the Secretary  of
    State's side of the balance was the policy of requiring an  application
    to be made from abroad, that objective might be outweighed  by  factors
    on the appellant's side of the balance.

4.   Overall, the judge concluded that there were exceptional  circumstances
    and that the appellant's case was not fully catered for under the rules
    and that if he were required to leave the United Kingdom and return  to
    China, the appellant would be unlikely to be able to return as a spouse
    as a result of the financial requirements of the rules.   It  would  be
    unduly harsh to expect his wife to give up  her  rights  as  a  British
    citizen and travel to a country she had never been to and where she did
    not speak the language.  He allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

5.   The Secretary of State sought permission  to  appeal,  contending  that
    the judge erred in law in his approach to Appendix FM of the rules.  In
    particular, the judge made no assessment regarding EX.1 and EX.2 of the
    rules and did not resolve whether there were  insurmountable  obstacles
    to family life  continuing  outside  the  United  Kingdom,  within  the
    meaning of the latter paragraph.  The judge could only properly make an
    Article 8 assessment outside the rules  having  first  found  that  the
    appellant could not  meet  the  requirements  of  EX.1.   Secondly,  in
    finding that it would be unduly  harsh  for  the  appellant's  wife  to
    accompany him to China,  the  judge  did  not  take  into  account  the
    particular meaning of EX.2 and did not explain why there would be  very
    significant obstacles to family life continuing, other than  mentioning
    that the appellant's wife did not speak the language and had  lived  in
    the United Kingdom all her life.  There were no other findings relevant
    to the assessment.

6.   Moreover, even if the judge  had  properly  considered  the  matter  in
    relation to EX.1 and EX.2 and was able to make  an  assessment  outside
    the rules, he erred in this context too.  He was required as  a  matter
    of law to  take  the  failure  under  the  rules  into  the  Article  8
    assessment.  Instead, the judge identified factors in  the  appellant's
    favour which were already dealt with in EX.1.  In giving  weight  to  a
    possible failure in a future entry  clearance  application,  the  judge
    acted inconsistently with guidance from  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SB
    (Bangladesh) [2007] EWCA Civ 28.  Finally, the judge erred  in  failing
    to apply the mandatory requirements in section 117B of the 2002 Act.

7.   Permission was granted  on  1st  May  2015.   In  a  rule  24  response
    prepared on behalf of  the  appellant,  it  was  contended  first  that
    permission was limited to the section 117B ground,  it  being  accepted
    that the judge did not expressly apply the provision.  Nonetheless,  he
    dealt with the issues adequately, in the light of Dube [2015]  UKUT  90
    and gave proper weight to the maintenance of immigration control and to
    the financial position of the appellant and his  wife.   The  appellant
    was able to show an ability to speak English.  The judge  was  entitled
    to take into account that the appellant conducted  himself  responsibly
    at all times.  Overall, the judge properly applied the provision and if
    there were an error, it was not material.

Submissions on Error of Law

8.   Ms Fijiwala said that the grant of permission to  appeal  was  not,  in
    fact, confined to the section 117B point.  There were four errors.  The
    first was in relation to EX.1.  The  judge  made  a  finding  that  the
    financial requirements of the  rules  were  not  met  but  should  have
    considered  EX.1.   The  IDIs  gave  guidance  to  caseworkers  on  the
    "insurmountable  obstacles"  test.    This   was   different   from   a
    "reasonableness" test, as confirmed by the Court of Appeal  in  Agyarko
    [2015] EWCA Civ 440, at paragraph 21.  Although  the  judge  considered
    several aspects of the case outside the  rules,  at  no  point  did  he
    consider EX.1.  The lack of knowledge of the language in China  on  the
    part of the appellant's wife was not an insurmountable obstacle but the
    judge gave this factor substantial weight in his assessment outside the
    rules.  He failed to take into account the nature  of  the  failure  to
    comply with the rules or the public interest.

9.   The second error concerned  the  judge's  approach  to  the  assessment
    outside the rules.  Again, it was clear from Agyarko  that  in  a  case
    involving precarious family life, as here, it  would  be  necessary  to
    establish that there were  exceptional  circumstances  requiring  leave
    outside  the  rules.   The  judge  failed   to   identify   exceptional
    circumstances, referring instead  to  factors  which  were  simply  not
    exceptional.  Completion of his studies by  the  appellant  and  future
    prospects of employment and the  circumstances  of  his  wife  did  not
    remotely amount to exceptional circumstances.  In any event, the  judge
    ought first to have considered EX.1 in the light of EX.2 and,  perhaps,
    to have had regard to the Secretary of State's guidance  in  the  IDIs.
    He ought to have stayed within the rules.

10.  If the judge were able to go outside the rules, then  paragraph  44  of
    the judgment in SS (Congo) [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  showed  the  correct
    approach.  The first step was to consider  and  apply  the  substantive
    content of the relevant rules, which he failed  to  do  in  this  case,
    having paid  no  regard  to  EX.1.   He  ought  to  have  assessed  and
    identified the public interest as expressed in the  rules  but,  again,
    failed to do so.  Secondly, if the requirements of the rules  were  not
    met substantively, and if there were a reasonably arguable  case  under
    Article 8, not  sufficiently  dealt  with  by  the  rules,  the  proper
    approach required the individual interests of  the  appellant  and  his
    wife to be balanced against the public interest, including as expressed
    in the rules.  Again, the judge failed to take into account the  public
    interest properly.  This approach was also emphasised in  paragraph  24
    of the judgment in Agyarko.

11.  Thirdly, the judge erred in relation to the guidance  he  derived  from
    Chikwamba.  The proper approach required consideration of  EX.1  rather
    than that case but, in any event, important guidance was given in  Chen
    [2015] UKUT  00189,  at  paragraph  39.   If  it  were  shown  that  an
    application for entry clearance would be granted and that  there  would
    be significant interference with family life by temporary removal, this
    might reduce the weight to  be  given  to  the  formal  requirement  of
    applying  from  abroad.   The  judge  was  required   to   assess   the
    proportionality of a temporary separation and whether this would amount
    to  such  a  significant  interference  with  family  life  as  to   be
    disproportionate.  Applying guidance from Chen to the present case,  it
    simply could not be said that  an  entry  clearance  application  would
    succeed, on the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, as  the  judge
    himself made clear.  In any event, the evidence did  not  show  that  a
    temporary removal would cause any significant interference with  family
    life.  Reverting  to  Agyarko,  it  was  clear  that  family  life  was
    precarious, as it began when the appellant had  student  leave.   There
    were no exceptional circumstances identified by the  judge,  justifying
    the grant of leave,.

12.  Finally, the judge erred in relation to section 117B of the  2002  Act.
    There was no express mention of it and although the judge  referred  to
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, he simply did not apply the statutory provision.
     It was clear from his findings of fact that the appellant's  financial
    circumstances were unclear and his wife relied on benefits.  There  was
    no financial independence shown by the evidence, which was  a  relevant
    factor.  Similarly, the judge took into account private life  ties  but
    section 117B required little weight to be given to them  as  they  were
    established while the appellant was present here precariously.

13.  Ms Price relied on the rule 24 response and developed  the  appellant's
    case.  She said that there  was  no  material  error  of  law  and  the
    Secretary of State's  grounds  amounted  to  a  disagreement  with  the
    judge's findings.  In any event, the judge could not be criticised  for
    failing to take into account some of the authorities as  he  heard  the
    case in February 2015.

14.  Turning to the Secretary of State's IDIs,  guidance  on  insurmountable
    obstacles referred to very significant difficulties  and  very  serious
    hardships.  The decision showed that the judge  had  these  factors  in
    mind.  He focussed on several features: the appellant's wife had  never
    been to China, did not speak the language and had spent her whole  life
    in the United Kingdom.  In addition, she was over the  age  of  40  and
    things might have been different if she were younger.  The Secretary of
    State had wrongly concluded that the relationship began at a time  when
    the appellant had no leave, whereas in fact it began when he  was  here
    lawfully as a student.

15.  It was open to the judge to find that it would be unduly harsh for  the
    appellant's wife to accompany him to China.

16.  The judge made a clear finding that the requirements of the rules  were
    not met and went on to  allow  the  appeal  outside  the  rules,  under
    Article 8.  So far as section 117B was concerned, it was clear from the
    judge's findings that the appellant was able to speak English, had been
    able to work lawfully for a long period of time, ceasing  only  because
    he had no leave to remain, that he was not a burden on  the  state  and
    was able to integrate.  Even if the judge had expressly considered  the
    statutory provision, the result would  have  been  the  same.   He  was
    entitled to take into account that the appellant had been present  here
    for eleven and a half years.

17.  Ms Fijiwala had nothing to add to her submissions.

18.  In a brief discussion regarding the venue for  remaking  the  decision,
    if an error of law were found, Ms Fijiwala  suggested  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal was the appropriate venue, Ms Price submitting that  paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's  practice  statement  suggested  that  it
    ought to be the First-tier Tribunal, so that an  up-to-date  assessment
    could be made.

Conclusion on Error of Law

19.  The decision has been prepared by  a  very  experienced  judge  and  Ms
    Price is right to say that when he heard the case, the judgments in  SS
    (Congo)  and  Agyarko  were  not  available.   They  are,  nonetheless,
    relevant authorities to be taken into account  in  considering  whether
    the judge erred in law.

20.   EX.1  and  EX.2  of  the  rules,  containing  exceptions  to   certain
    eligibility requirements for leave to remain as a partner were, on  the
    other hand, present and in force.  So too was section 117B of the  2002
    Act.

21.  The decision has the virtues of concision and economy of style and  the
    judge has clearly  set  out  the  findings  of  fact  relevant  to  his
    assessment.  There is no express mention of section 117B  and  although
    he clearly has considered the substance of part of that  provision,  Ms
    Fijiwala is right to point to material factors not taken into  account.
    These include the clear statement that  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls is  in  the  public  interest  and,  additionally,
    financial independence as a factor tending to show that a  claimant  is
    not a burden on taxpayers and is better able to integrate into society.
     In this context, the finding that the appellant might gain  employment
    in the future, in the light of his successful studies, does  not  fully
    resolve the issue.  It is also clear, for example from paragraph 90  of
    the decision, that the judge gave weight to the period  of  years  that
    the appellant has been present here but section 117B(5)  requires  that
    little weight should be given to a private life established at  a  time
    when a person's immigration status is precarious.  As a person  present
    here with student leave, which in due course expired,  the  appellant's
    immigration status was indeed precarious, the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in AM (Malawi) [2015] UKUT 260 giving guidance on this  point.
    Again, however, the judge cannot be faulted for failing  to  take  this
    decision into account as it was not available in February 2015.

22.  Overall, the Secretary of State has shown a material error  of  law  in
    the judge's failure to apply section 117B of the 2002 Act in substance.
     The decision in Dube certainly bears  on  his  assessment  but  cannot
    rescue it as relevant factors were omitted.

23.  There is also real force in Ms Fijiwala's  submissions  regarding  EX.1
    and EX.2.  Having carefully read the grant of permission to  appeal,  I
    find that it does not confine the Secretary of State  to  arguing  only
    the section 117B point.  The decision shows that the judge moved from a
    finding that the requirements of the rules were not met to an Article 8
    assessment outside them, without taking with him on  that  journey  the
    nature of the failure  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  rules,  as
    expressing or illustrating the public interest,  and  without  engaging
    with EX.1 and EX.2 at all.  His finding that expecting the  appellant's
    wife to accompany him to China would be unduly  harsh  falls  a  little
    short of engaging with the Secretary of State's case  that  there  were
    "insurmountable obstacles" to family life continuing  in  China.   With
    great respect to the judge, the circumstances he  identified  regarding
    the appellant's wife, including the fact that she  has  never  been  to
    China, are of themselves insufficient to show exceptional circumstances
    or very significant difficulties which could not be overcome  or  which
    would entail very serious hardship.

24.  In addition, it is clear from SS (Congo) and Agyarko that  there  is  a
    need to identify compelling  reasons,  showing  why  an  arguable  case
    exists that leave should be granted outside  the  rules.   The  judge's
    finding at paragraph 75 of the decision that "a straight application of
    the Immigration  Rules  did  not  take  into  account  the  exceptional
    circumstances"   required   identification   of    those    exceptional
    circumstances.  Again, the findings of fact fall  short  here  as  they
    relate to factors engaged directly by the application of the rules.  If
    the judge were to conclude otherwise, reasons were required.

25.  Finally, I accept the Secretary of State's written ground regarding  SB
    (Bangladesh) and Ms Fijiwala's submission regarding Chen.  It  is  very
    difficult to reconcile the judge's finding that weight should be  given
    to the likelihood that a future application for entry  clearance  would
    fail with the judgment in SB (Bangladesh).   So  far  as  Chikwamba  is
    concerned, the landscape changed substantially  with  the  coming  into
    force of what are often described as "the new rules" in July  2012  and
    July 2014.  No doubt in the light  of  his  assumption  that  a  future
    application would fail, the judge did not consider the  proportionality
    of a temporary separation between the appellant and his wife,  for  the
    purpose of making an entry clearance application  from  abroad.    Chen
    shows that this is the correct approach.

26.  For all these reasons,  and  again  with  very  great  respect  to  the
    experienced judge, I conclude  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal contains material errors of law and  must  be  set  aside  and
    remade.

27.  Although the judge did make some clear findings of  fact,  taking  into
    account the passage of time and the need  to  engage  with  the  rules,
    including EX.1 and EX.2, I agree with Ms  Price  that  the  appropriate
    venue for remaking the decision is the First-tier  Tribunal  at  Taylor
    House.  There will be a need for substantial fact-finding and paragraph
    7.2 of the practice statement made by  the  Senior  President  in  2012
    suggests that remittal to the First-tier Tribunal is appropriate.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and shall be remade  in
the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House, before a judge  other  than  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Blake.

ANONYMITY

There  has  been  no  application  for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.



Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


