
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/25249/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons  Promulgated |
|On 21 November 2017                      |On 08 January 2018                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                             MRS FATEMA NASREEN
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kannangara
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born  in  1983.   She  appeals
    against a decision made on 27 June 2015 to refuse her application for a
    residence card as a confirmation of a right to reside in the  UK.   She
    had applied as the non-EEA national  family  member  spouse  of  Pietro
    Russo, an Italian national exercising treaty rights in the UK.

 2. The application was refused because it was considered that  the  couple
    did not seem comfortable with each other in their wedding  photographs.
    These did not illustrate a couple  in  a  genuine  relationship.   Also
    there appeared to be a cultural difference between herself and her  EEA
    sponsor.  Further she held no valid leave to remain and  other  than  a
    tenancy agreement there was little evidence to suggest that  they  knew
    each other prior to the wedding.  It was considered  that  the  tenancy
    agreement, a typed up document, could have been easily fabricated.


 3. In addition it was noted that in  the  application  form  she  and  her
    sponsor were residing at an address in Village Road,  Enfield,  London.
    However, an immigration visit  to  that  address  on  25  October  2014
    suggested that they were not living there.  A letter  was  received  by
    the Home Office on 30  October  2014  stating  that  they  had  changed
    address to Hamilton Crescent, Palmers Green, London.    An  immigration
    visit in April 2015 to that  address  indicated  they  were  not  known
    there.


 4. The respondent concluded that the marriage was one of convenience.


 5. She appealed.


    First tier hearing


 6. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 20 October  2016  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Grant dismissed the appeal.  Her findings are  at  paragraph
    [6] to [17].  She noted the various  addresses:  Village  Road  on  the
    marriage certificate with the sponsor's address given as Croyland Road,
    Edmonton, London; then Hamilton  Crescent;  finally  by  December  2014
    River Bank, Winchmore Hill, London where they remained.  She found that
    they were both indeed living  there  but  the  issue  was  whether  the
    marriage is genuine and subsisting.


 7. In that regard noting  the  respondent's  concern  that  there  was  no
    evidence that the appellant and sponsor had known one another prior  to
    the wedding, the judge did not believe the sponsor's answer in evidence
    that he had been living at that time with his mother in Croyland  Road.
    She found that he was living at Hamilton Crescent.  She concluded  that
    they had had no form of courtship prior to the wedding [11].


 8. The judge accepted that the changes of address had  been  intimated  to
    the respondent every time she moved but found it  significant  that  on
    the visit to Village Road in October 2014 "no one at the  property  was
    aware of someone Italian living there" [12].


 9. Having noted that the sponsor's mother did not appear  in  the  wedding
    photographs nor had she supplied any evidence in support of the appeal,
    the judge found (at [13]) that  following  the  wedding  ceremony  "the
    parties went their separate ways" until the appellant became aware that
    the immigration authorities were checking on  the  genuineness  of  the
    marriage whereupon they  have  "genuinely  moved  in  together  at  the
    current address".  However, she did not  accept  that  they  are  in  a
    genuine and subsisting marriage [13].  She added  (at  [14])  that  the
    sponsor is a vulnerable man who  suffers  from  epilepsy  and  has  had
    surgery on his foot.  He also earns a low income and is in debt.


10. The appellant sought leave to appeal which was granted on 6 June 2017.


    Error of law hearing


11. At the error of law hearing before me on 25 July 2017 it was agreed  by
    both parties that the  decision  showed  material  error  of  law.   It
    suffices to note two matters.  First, despite having been  referred  to
    Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience)  Greece  [2012]  UKUT
    00038 and that the burden of proof for proving whether a marriage is  a
    sham for immigration purposes rests with the  Home  Office,  the  judge
    made no mention of Papajorgji which was confirmed in Rosa  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 14, and appeared  to  consider  that  the  burden  rests  with  the
    appellant.  Second, the judge's findings  were  inadequately  reasoned.
    For example, no reason was given at [11] for the finding that when they
    first met the sponsor was not living with his mother at  Croyland  Road
    which was his  address  given  in  the  marriage  application,  but  at
    Hamilton Crescent.  Further, no basis was given  for  the  finding  (at
    [13]) that the parties went their separate ways following the  marriage
    ceremony.


12. I set aside the decision for the case to be reheard before myself.   It
    was indicated that oral evidence would be led.  It was not possible  to
    hear that on the day.  Thus the matter came before me  at  the  resumed
    hearing on 21 November 2017.


    Resumed hearing


13. I heard evidence in English  from  the  appellant  and  Mr  Russo.   In
    summary,  the  appellant  adopted  her   original   and   supplementary
    statements.


14. In cross-examination she said they had first  met  in  2013  and  first
    discussed marriage after two or three months.  They moved  in  together
    to Village Road on 30 June 2014 the day of the marriage.  Prior to that
    she had lived at another address in Enfield.   Her  husband  had  lived
    with his mother at Croyland Road.  In October 2014 they moved  together
    to Hamilton Crescent, then in  December  2014  to  River  Bank.   Since
    moving in to Village Road they had always lived together.


15. Asked why having moved to Hamilton Crescent in October 2014  there  was
    no knowledge of them when the authorities called  in  April  2015,  she
    said they had not had a good relationship with the landlady.  That  was
    also the reason why although documents showed her at  the  address  her
    husband held back from transferring his details to that  address.   She
    accepted that even after they moved to River Bank in December 2014  her
    husband's payslips were still stating his  address  as  Croyland  Road.
    She said it had not  been  thought  important  to  change  the  payslip
    details.  It had been that address for his work  purposes  for  a  long
    time and it is his mother's permanent address.


16. Asked who had attended the wedding she said  her  family  had  but  his
    family had not because his mother was unwell.  Friends from both  sides
    had gone.  Asked why such friends had not attended the current  hearing
    she said they are working.  They had attended  the  hearing  at  Hatton
    Cross and provided letters of support.  Asked if her parents were  here
    she said they had gone back home.


17. Mr Russo also adopted his statements.  He said they first met in  2013,
    first discussed marriage four or five months later and had  started  to
    live together after their marriage at Village Road.  Prior to  that  he
    had been living with his mother and his wife had been living at Village
    Road.  They had then moved together to Hamilton  Crescent  followed  in
    December 2014 to their  present  address.   Since  marriage  they  have
    always lived together.  He  also  said  that  he  had  not  thought  of
    changing the address of his payslips from his mother's address.


18. Asked why there had apparently been  no  knowledge  of  them  when  the
    authorities made the immigration visit to  Hamilton  Crescent  he  said
    they had not got on with the landlady.


19. In brief submissions Ms Aboni submitted that  concerns  remained  about
    the genuineness of the marriage, in particular,  that  no  satisfactory
    response had been given about why they had not been known of  when  the
    authorities called.  Also, it was unclear whether  they  had  moved  to
    Village Road together or whether the appellant had  been  there  first.
    Further, while there was documentation showing  the  appellant  at  the
    various addresses such was limited in respect of the sponsor,  much  of
    the items for him at Hamilton Crescent being marketing  materials.   It
    was, in addition, curious that his  payslips  were  still  showing  his
    mother's address two years after he left there.  There was  no  obvious
    reason why he would not have told his employer that he  had  moved  on.
    Whilst it was evident that there is some link at the  present  address,
    Ms Aboni questioned whether he is living with his wife.


20. Finally, Ms Aboni said it was significant that none of  the  family  or
    friends who had attended their  wedding  had  given  oral  evidence  at
    Hatton Cross or had attended the resumed hearing.


21. In reply, Mr Kannangara submitted that the appellant  and  her  husband
    had given consistent evidence.   It  was  hardly  surprising  that  the
    authorities got little information when they visited the two addresses.
     The couple had moved out.  The Home Office had been informed.  It  was
    noteworthy that they had never been  interviewed,  nor  had  they  been
    visited at River Bank.  As for any lack of documents they had only been
    briefly and unhappily at  Hamilton  Crescent.   There  were  plenty  of
    documents linking them both to Village Road and to River  Bank.   There
    was no reason to doubt his explanation  that  he  had  simply  not  got
    around to changing the address for his payslips.  His mother's  address
    was permanent.  It was significant  that it was he who had produced the
    payslips for  the First-Tier hearing.  Such indicated they have nothing
    to hide.  It was clear from the recent bank statements that his  salary
    is ongoing.


22. As for the lack of evidence from witnesses it was clear his mother  had
    ill health, indeed the marriage date had been delayed because of  that.
    There is clear evidence of support from friends and indeed  from  their
    current landlord.


    Consideration


23. In considering this matter as the Supreme Court stated in Sadovska  and
    Another v SSHD (Scotland) [2017]  UKSC  54  the  burden  of  proof  for
    establishing that the marriage is  one  of  convenience  falls  on  the
    Secretary of State (see [28]).


24. In my judgement in this case she fails to do  so.   The  appellant  and
    sponsor attended on each occasion before me  as  they  had  before  the
    First tier. Both speak good English. On the issue of having  no  leave,
    the appellant claims she had valid leave until February  2015  and  the
    application was made in August 2014. Ms Aboni did not address me on the
    matter and I was referred to nothing in the papers to support the claim
    that leave was curtailed in June 2014. On the information before  me  I
    prefer the evidence of the appellant. In any event,  I  found  them  in
    their evidence before me to be credible and largely consistent in their
    detailed accounts.  Indeed,  they  came  across  as  patently  truthful
    leading me to the conclusion that this is from its inception a  genuine
    and  lasting  relationship.  I  see  no  reason  to  doubt  that  their
    relationship developed when he worked at a take-away restaurant and she
    was a customer and that despite their different backgrounds they  found
    they had a lot in common and as a result the relationship developed.  I
    do not find persuasive the respondent's claim against  them  that  they
    looked uncomfortable in the wedding photos. I believed the  explanation
    that out of respect to her  strict  religious  background  and  to  her
    parents a measure of formality was appropriate.


25. There was uncertainty as to whether the appellant started living at the
    address in Village Road before the wedding in 2014 as the sponsor said,
    or as she said, immediately  after  when  the  sponsor  started  living
    there. Noting documents lodged by the appellant which indicate that she
    was at that address prior to the wedding rather  than  at  a  different
    address in Enfield, I conclude that the sponsor was correct. However, I
    do not find it to be significant. It is understandable that for  events
    more than three years ago recollection may be confused.


26. I find no significance in the fact that two visits by  the  immigration
    authorities in October 2014 to  Village  Road  and  in  April  2015  to
    Hamilton Crescent did not find them.  They had moved  on  and  on  each
    occasion  had  intimated  such  to  the  respondent.  I  did  not  find
    significant the claimed lack of knowledge of the sponsor and  his  wife
    on the visit in  April  2015.   It  had  been  months  since  they  had
    intimated their move from there.  I  find  no  reason  to  doubt  their
    evidence that their relationship with the landlady at Hamilton Crescent
    had been poor.  It is clear that they remained there only briefly, some
    two months. I find it credible that those spoken to were not  able  to,
    or did not wish to, remember them.


27. As for documentation there is ample placing the  appellant  at  Village
    Road, Hamilton Crescent and latterly at River Bank.  These include bank
    statements, utility bills, HMRC  letters.  There  is  also  documentary
    evidence placing the sponsor at Village Road  and  River  Bank.   These
    include bank statements and letters.  I do not find significant a  lack
    of items from the sponsor in respect of  Hamilton  Crescent.   I  again
    find credible his evidence that it was such an unhappy and  brief  stay
    there that he did not find it necessary to intimate change of address.


28. As for his payslips still showing the Croyland Road  address,  this  is
    his mother's address where he had lived before marriage and  where  she
    continues to live. I find plausible his claim that he never  found  the
    need to update that matter.  I note that  it  was  he  who  lodged  the
    payslips which supports his claim that he has nothing to hide.   It  is
    clear from bank statements that he continues in that  employment.   The
    fact that there is relevant joint documentation  with  the  River  Bank
    address, including an account with the Halifax  in  joint  names  gives
    support to their claim as to the genuineness of the relationship.


29. Nor do I find merit in the claim that there is an absence  of  evidence
    in support from friends and family.  I accept  his  evidence  that  his
    mother was unable to attend the wedding because she  was  ill.  Medical
    evidence was lodged in support of the claim that she suffers long  term
    medical issues.  There were letters of support from friends before  the
    First-tier tribunal.  It was not challenged that they had attended that
    hearing.  I accept that work commitments made this difficult  for  them
    at the resumed hearing.


30. In summary for the reasons stated in  light  of  the  totality  of  the
    information before me I am not satisfied that it is more probable  than
    not this was a marriage of convenience.


31. The appeal succeeds.


Notice of Decision


The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal showed the making  of  an  error  of
law.  It is set aside and remade as follows:-

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity order made.


Signed                                             Date 04 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

