
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/25434/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 September 2016                 |On 30 September 2016                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                 ms xuan wu
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Aujla
    promulgated on 24 January 2016.  The appellant has represented  herself
    during the course of the appeal and  has  had  a  Mandarin  interpreter
    present with her.  I should  make  the  primary  observation  that  her
    English  is  good  and  fluent  and  there  were  no  difficulties   in
    communicating. The appellant is self-evidently  an  intelligent  woman,
    well able to understand immigration process and procedures, and she has
    undertaken a considerable amount of legal research in order to  present
    her case in an articulate and thorough manner.

2.   The immigration history dates  from  a  period  when  she  had  various
    student and post-study work visas. However, the particular  issue  with
    which I am concerned is an application  for  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant made under the points
    based system.  That application was refused for the  reasons  appearing
    in a Home Office refusal letter dated 10 June 2014. Removal  directions
    have been made the  implementation  of  which  is  stayed  pending  the
    resolution of this appeal.

3.   When the matter first came before the First-tier Tribunal, the  hearing
    was adjourned because  the  appellant  stated  she  needed  a  Mandarin
    interpreter, she was confused about the law, had not brought  documents
    with her, and she needed legal advice.  At the  adjourned  hearing  the
    appellant stated that she was not a travel agent (as the respondent had
    determined her occupation to be) and that in order to explain that  she
    wished to adduce evidence from a witness, possibly an  expert  witness,
    who was unable to attend on that occasion.  At the appellant's  request
    there was a second adjournment.

4.    When  the  matter  next  came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,   an
    interpreter was present and there were various  loose  and  unpaginated
    documents before the Tribunal which the judge marked as  AB1,  AB2  and
    AB3.  The judge records the following at paragraph 12:

         "Although  the  appellant  had   submitted   numerous   loose   and
         unpaginated documents, there was no witness statement from  her  or
         from any witness who she proposed to call.  She stated  that  there
         was no witness to give evidence."

    The appellant choose not to give evidence herself although she asserted
    before me that she felt in some way coerced by the judge into so doing.
     There is nothing in the  judgment  that  hints  of  coercion.  On  the
    contrary it strikes me as indicative of  scrupulous  fairness  with  an
    experienced judge providing every possible accommodation for a litigant
    in person.

5.   The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  examines  the  points-based
    system relevant for a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant and makes  specific
    findings in relation to the appellant's occupation.   In  paragraph  28
    the judge says as follows:

         "The Appellant had to  demonstrate  that  she  was  working  in  an
         occupation skilled to National  Qualification  Framework  level  4.
         The contract the Appellant provided was clearly  headed  'Ticketing
         Services Contract' and the substance of the document clearly stated
         that it was a travel agency undertaking."

    The judge consequently concluded in accordance with the codes  provided
    that the appellant's work was in respect of a travel agency  which  was
    at level 3.

6.   In paragraph 29 the judge records attempts by the  appellant  to  argue
    that her business activity was at level 4. The judge took into  account
    matters contained in  a  skeleton  argument  which  the  appellant  had
    produced but rejected those assertions.  The judge was of the view that
    the nature of the business and the core  services  which  the  business
    provided were those of a travel agency.

7.   When  granting  permission  to  appeal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kebede
    indicated that there was arguable merit in the first ground advanced by
    the appellant in relation to documentation allegedly before  the  judge
    which was not referred to. It was suggested  that  there  was  material
    evidence which the judge failed to take into account.

8.   In responding to the appeal Mr Kandola stated that  under  Section  85A
    of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  a  judge  is
    precluded when determining an appeal from looking at material which was
    not submitted with the application other than  in  circumstances  where
    the veracity of that material falls for determination.  That  provision
    he indicates, and I accept, was in force when  this  matter  was  being
    determined, the refusal  letter  being  dated  10  June  2014.  It  was
    therefore not open to  the  appellant  to  adduce  additional  material
    whether in one of the numbered bundles or otherwise.

9.   The appellant makes the point that although she may not have wished  to
    adduce fresh documentary evidence, it was the oral testimony of her so-
    called expert witness upon which she had wished to place reliance.  The
    difficulty with this, however, is that the  appellant  elected  not  to
    call  that  witness  notwithstanding  that  the  proceedings  had  been
    adjourned expressly so that he could be called to  give  oral  evidence
    and  to  explain,  if  necessary,  the  nature   of   the   contractual
    arrangement.

10.  The appellant tells me that the letter from Mr David Slocombe dated  17
    January 2016 was intended to stand either as a witness statement or  as
    an expert report.  It did not comply with the  legal  requirements  for
    either but, in any event, the appellant choose not to call  him.   This
    is clearly evident from the  extract  at  paragraph  12  which  I  have
    already recited.

11.  It therefore follows that from the manner in which the appellant  chose
    to conduct matters before the First-tier Tribunal,  there  was  nothing
    before the judge that might have assisted in  coming  to  a  conclusion
    other than that at paragraph 28.  I can see no reason  for  considering
    this conclusion to have been reached by error of law  or  misdirection.
    Making every possible allowance for the fact that the appellant was not
    legally represented at the time, it was nonetheless a  conclusion  open
    to the judge on the material before her.

12.  A final matter which has  been  referred  to  in  the  course  of  oral
    argument from the appellant is that she now believes  herself  to  have
    achieved a right of residence through long residency and she  seeks  to
    add as part of her appeal the additional ground of this long  residence
    entitlement.  She concedes that this point was not raised in the First-
    tier Tribunal and that it could not have been so raised because at  the
    time of the First-tier Tribunal consideration the qualifying period had
    not yet been reached.

13.  This argument, however, is not open to the appellant.  The  only  power
    the Upper Tribunal has is to consider whether or not there was an error
    of law on the part of the First-tier Tribunal.  I have  concluded  that
    there was no such error.  Had I found an error, the decision would have
    had to have been remade and it is conceivable that long  residence  may
    have been raised at that  stage  but  as  I  have  not  set  aside  the
    decision, it does not arise.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill     Date 30 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
