
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25095/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8th May 2014                               |On 12th June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                               Harpreet singh

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Rea, Solicitor of Maguire Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr R Mullen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of India  born  on  5th  August  1983.   The
    appellant first came to the United Kingdom on 11th April 2010 on a Tier
    4 (General) Student visa which expired on 22nd October 2012.   He  made
    an application for further leave to remain on 1st October 2012  on  the
    basis of his relationship with Hayley McCormack.  That application  was
    refused by the respondent on 5th June 2013 on the basis that he did not
    meet the Immigration Rules.  A decision to  remove  the  appellant  was
    also made on the same occasion.

2.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Scobey  on  10th  February  2014.
    The Judge did not find that there was a good arguable case to  consider
    the appeal of the  appellant  outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    accordingly the appeal was dismissed.

3.   Grounds of appeal were submitted against that  decision  on  the  basis
    that, although the appellant was not married when the  application  was
    submitted, he was married  at  the  time  of  the  hearing.   In  those
    circumstances he met the requirements of EX.1 and  accordingly  it  was
    perverse of the Judge to hold in effect  that  there  was  not  a  good
    arguable case.  Leave to appeal was granted on that basis and thus  the
    matter comes before me in pursuance of that grant.

4.   Mr Rea  who  represented  the  appellant  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    represents him also before me.

5.   He submits that at the time of the hearing the appellant  met  all  the
    requirements as set out in EX.1 of the Immigration  Rules.   There  are
    two requirements  set  out  under  EX.1.   The  first  being  that  the
    appellant is in a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  a
    child under 18 in the United Kingdom.  The child is a  British  citizen
    of at least 7 years and that it would not be reasonable to expect  that
    child to leave the United Kingdom.  Mr Rea submits that  the  appellant
    is in such a parental relationship with the son of his wife.

6.   It was clearly the case, as recognised by the  Judge  at  the  hearing,
    that it would not be reasonable to expect Hayley McCormack, or her  son
    or her nephew to relocate to India.  Mr Rea accepts, however,  that  he
    did not argue the parental relationship at that first hearing.

7.   The second requirement is that  the  appellant  is  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a partner who is in the United Kingdom and
    is British citizen settled in the United Kingdom  and  that  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to family life with  that  partner  continuing
    outside the United Kingdom.

8.   At the time of the application the appellant had not lived with  Hayley
    McCormack for the requisite period of time nor was he married  to  her.
    However that situation changed and he was married to her prior  to  the
    hearing on 10th February  2014.   Given  that  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of EX.1 it was quite wrong of the Judge to have found that
    there was not a good arguable case to consider the matter  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

9.   Mr Rea relies heavily upon the case of MS setting  the  parameters  for
    such a consideration.  In particular he relies upon paragraph 30 of the
    judgment which reads as follows:-

         "In summary, therefore, we are of opinion that in all  cases  where
         the right to private and family life under article 8 is invoked the
         first stage must be to consider the application of the  Immigration
         Rules.  The new rules are designed to cover the considerations that
         are relevant to  an  article 8  claim  in  a  normal  case.    The
         fundamental issue raised by article 8 is an assessment  of  on  one
         hand the requirements of an effective immigration policy, including
         the enforcement of that policy by removal from the United  Kingdom,
         and on the other hand the right  of  the  individual  concerned  to
         private or family life.  That exercise involves  an  assessment  of
         proportionality.  In most cases, the new  rules  will  ensure  that
         assessment is properly carried out.  In some  cases,  however,  the
         rules will not produce a fair result that accords with  article  8.
         In those cases  the  Home  Secretary,  acting  through  immigration
         officials, will need to consider whether leave  should  be  granted
         outside the rules.  That will require an assessment of the  precise
         circumstances of the individual case, taking account of all factors
         that  are  relevant.  These  will  include  factors  mentioned   in
         paragraph 3.2.7d of the Home Secretary's instructions and also any
         other factors that may be relevant to the particular assessment  of
         proportionality that is being  undertaken.   The  relevant  factors
         will also include those mentioned in the rules themselves,  notably
         in rules 276ADE-276DH, and in appendix FM, including section EX of
         that appendix.  The purpose of those provisions is to set  out  the
         factors that normally apply to the assessment of article 8  rights
         in an immigration context; consequently both  the  terms  of  those
         provisions and the underlying policy that  can  be  discerned  from
         those terms are of importance. They must,  of  course,  be  weighed
         against  the  other  special  considerations  that  apply  in   the
         particular case.  Before it is necessary to embark on that  second-
         stage exercise, however, the application  for  leave  to  enter  or
         remain must demonstrate a good arguable case that leave  should  be
         granted  outside  the  rules;  that  a   distinct   assessment   of
         proportionality should be made to determine whether  removal  would
         infringe  the  applicant's  article 8  rights.   If  that  is  not
         demonstrated, it can be assumed  that  the  applicant's  article 8
         rights will be adequately dealt with by  applying  the  new  rules.
         Finally, the test of exceptionality should not be used any  longer;
         instead, decision-makers should focus on the  question  of  whether
         the applicant has shown a  good  arguable  case  that  his  or  her
         application should be dealt with outside the rules."

10.  It is common ground in this case that the appellant still  cannot  meet
    the Immigration  Rules.   EX.1  is  not  freestanding  from  the  other
    elements set out in paragraph 276ADE.  In particular he cannot meet the
    financial requirements specified in the Rules.

11.  Mr  Rea  submits  that  the  Rules  should  not  however  constitute  a
    straightjacket preventing a Judge in the appropriate circumstances  for
    granting relief albeit that the strict  terms  of  the  Rules  are  not
    satisfied.  This,  he  submits,  is  precisely  this  case,  given  the
    acceptance by the Judge that the appellant's wife, son and nephew could
    not be expected as UK citizens to go to India.  The appellant's wife is
    working in the United Kingdom, her son  is  at  school  in  the  United
    Kingdom and her nephew is studying.

12.  Mr Rea submits that the Judge, in considering whether or not there  was
    a good arguable case, altogether ignored  the  best  interests  of  the
    other parties affected by the decision, in particular Hayley  McCormack
    and her son.  There was an emotional dependency such that  the  removal
    of the appellant would be detrimental to the wellbeing of both his wife
    and his children and to a lesser extent his nephew.

13.  Mr Mullen, who represents the respondent, invited me to find  that  the
    Judge carefully considered all the ingredients in the case in coming to
    a decision as to whether there was indeed a  good  arguable  case.   He
    submits that in effect the grounds are seeking to  reargue  the  merits
    rather than identify an error of law.  He invited me to find  that  the
    Judge specifically considered the children in  the  remarks  that  were
    made.  He further submits that there is no evidence  of  dependency  in
    this relationship.

14.  He invites me to find that what  is  effectively  being  sought  is  to
    circumvent the Rules by the use  of  Article  8  so  as  to  in  effect
    separate EX.1 from the Rules and treat it as a freestanding  provision.
    He invites my attention to the decision of the Supreme Court  in  Patel
    [2013] UKSC 72 which made it very clear that Article 8 was  not  to  be
    used to circumvent the application of the Rules without more.

15.  The nature and scope of the relationship is set out  by  the  Judge  in
    the determination.  Although the relationship developed as from January
    2011 it was not until the date of the marriage in August 2013 that  the
    appellant and Hayley started to live together.

16.   In  the  household  is  the  appellant's  wife's  son   by   a   prior
    relationship.  He is aged 8 and  sees  his  natural  father  every  two
    weeks.  The sponsor's nephew also lives at home and the sponsor  has  a
    guardianship order so far as he is concerned.   He  was  born  on  12th
    August 1996 and is approaching therefore his majority.

17.  My attention was drawn to statements which they had written, which  are
    enclosed with the bundle of documents that was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  At page 19 of one such bundle is  the  statement  of  Kalvin
    McCabe who is the nephew.  He has been living with  his  aunt  for  the
    past five years, and says essentially that he likes the  appellant  who
    is very nice to him.  They shall acquire for him a job  in  the  summer
    holidays.  He is pleased that his aunt is married and  says  that  they
    are clearly happy together.

18.  As a matter of common  sense  the  nephew  will  shortly  be  going  to
    college and within a few years will  be  living  an  independent  life.
    There was no indication that there is any emotional dependency upon the
    appellant so far as he is concerned.   There  is  a  somewhat  indirect
    statement  from  the  son  at  page  24.   Seemingly  his  grandparents
    encouraged him as part of a pretend game to write things he liked about
    the appellant and  how  he  would  feel  if  he  went  to  India.   The
    description of the appellant set out is that he is  strong  and  funny.
    The witness enjoys wrestling with the appellant and playing  with  him.
    He says that the appellant is kind to him and to  his  mother.   It  is
    said that the witness would miss the appellant  because  the  appellant
    told him that he is  his  best  friend  and  his  brother.   The  son's
    feelings towards the appellant are understandable but fall far short of
    any indication of emotional independency.  The long term figure in  the
    son's life is not only his mother but also his natural father.

19.  There is also the statement of  Hayley  McCormack  dated  4th  February
    2014.  In that statement  she  describes  how  she  came  to  meet  the
    appellant and how she has found him to be a caring and trusting person.
     She speaks of her  son  having  an  excellent  relationship  with  the
    appellant, he having taught the son aspects of life  of  which  he  was
    previously unaware.  She speaks of the need to  provide  stability  and
    support for her son and for her nephew.

20.  Once again that is thoroughly understandable and to be  expected  in  a
    developing relationship.  The reality, however, as  recognised  by  the
    Judge in the determination, is that the appellant  has  developed  this
    relationship with Hayley and with the children relatively recently.

21.  In particular it was recognised at paragraph  29  that  the  nephew  is
    nearly an adult.  Although the Judge accepts that they may have a bond,
    there is little doubt that the nephew would cope without the appellant.
     Similarly the  appellant  has  only  come  into  Hayley's  son's  life
    recently.  The Judge has recognised that removal may have  more  of  an
    effect on him.  However the appellant is not his father.

22.  A significant factor considered by the Judge is that the  marriage  was
    undertaken in August 2013 following  the  refusal  of  5th  June  2013.
    Therefore a decision was taken, both to marry and to live together,  at
    a time when it would be apparent to both the  appellant  and  his  wife
    that his right to remain in the United Kingdom was precarious.

23.  Mr Rea relies  upon  certain  remarks  made  in  paragraph  22  of  the
    determination as being indicative of bias  towards  the  appellant  and
    tainting therefore  of  the  proportionality  exercise.   He  says  for
    example that the Judge was unfair to criticise the  appellant  and  his
    wife for having "an indifferent regard for  the  Immigration  Rules  of
    this country".  They were entitled to marry  so  as  to  express  their
    relationship.  He submits that it was therefore  unduly  harsh  of  the
    Judge to criticise them in that way.

24.  I accept that it may perhaps have been a strong statement to have  been
    made  in  the  circumstances.   However  the  comment   made   of   the
    relationship being entered into at a time when the  appellant's  status
    and position was precarious is one which I find was properly open to be
    made.  I did not find that there is  any  indication  of  bias  in  the
    determination.  The Judge has sought  to  analyse  the  nature  of  the
    relationship, the extent of that relationship and more particularly how
    long that relationship has been developed.

25.  The Immigration Rules relating to the requirement of maintenance  to  a
    stated figure have been criticized from a number of  sources  as  being
    possibly an unduly high figure to reach.  It is as I  understand  it  a
    matter currently under challenge but it remains part of the Immigration
    Rules.

26.  The relationship between  maintenance  of  the  other  aspects  of  the
    Immigration Rules was considered by the Tribunal in the case of Gulshan
    (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach)  Pakistan  [2013]  UKUT  640
    (IAC).  It was a case in which an elderly wife was seeking to  come  to
    the United Kingdom to be with her husband who was  a  British  citizen.
    It was argued that it was unreasonable to employ the Immigration  Rules
    and particularly the requirement of maintenance to  hit  a  barrier  to
    what undoubtedly was a  longstanding  marriage,  there  having  been  a
    number of children in that relationship.  The Tribunal  looked  at  the
    practicalities of  "insurmountable  obstacles"  and  embarked  upon  an
    analysis of the case law that existed at the time of the hearing.

27.  It found at paragraph 27 of  the  judgment  that  a  Judge  should  not
    embark upon a freewheeling  Article  8  analysis  unencumbered  by  the
    Rules.  The Judge should have paid attention to the  guidelines.   Only
    if they were arguable good grounds for granting leave to remain outside
    the Rules was it necessary for the Judge to go on to  consider  whether
    there were compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised  under
    the Rules.

28.  The Tribunal in paragraph 28 of the judgment considered the  particular
    circumstances of the appellant and sponsor and in  that  case  did  not
    find there to be insurmountable obstacles to family life in Pakistan or
    unjustifiably harsh results.

29.  The Tribunal in that case noted that the  maintenance  requirement  was
    in the Rules in order to safeguard bank finances  and  to  ensure  that
    other persons were not a burden unnecessarily to the state.  The  Rules
    as drafted represent the will of parliament and generally set out where
    the public interest lies.

30.  Even were the appellant, and it may well be  the  case  that  he  does,
    meet the requirements set out in EX.1 that is not sufficient  according
    to the Rules unless he also  satisfies the financial  requirements.   I
    have indicated that juxtaposition has been the subject of challenge but
    at present remains good law.  What in  effect  Mr  Rea  is  seeking  to
    persuade the First-tier Tribunal Judge to do was to use Article 8 as  a
    means of separating EX.1 from the other requirements.  That is  clearly
    on the authority of Patel something that Article 8 should not  be  used
    for.

31.  However in certain circumstances it is recognised  that  the  personal,
    private or family circumstances of individuals are so compelling as  to
    demand a different result.

32.  In this case the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  found  that  no  such
    factors existed.  There was no undue emotional dependency so far as the
    children are concerned and the sponsor entered in the marriage  in  the
    knowledge  of  the  precarious  nature  of  the  relationship.   As  MS
    indicated there needs to be a  consideration  as  in  deciding  whether
    there  is  a  good  arguable  case  and  whether  any   other   special
    considerations would apply in this particular case.  There  would  seem
    to be none.  None were found by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

33.  I find no error in the approach taken by the Judge to the evidence  nor
    in consideration of that evidence.  Findings were properly open be made
    and were not perverse in all the circumstances.

34.  Accordingly this appeal before the Upper Tribunal  is  dismissed.   The
    original decision shall stand namely that the appeal  is  dismissed  in
    respect of the Immigration Rules and also in respect of  Article  8  of
    the ECHR.







Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

