
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number:    IA/25140/2015
                                                               IA/27922/2015
                                                               IA/27923/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 September 2016                |On 17 November 2016           |
|Prepared on 11 November 2016        |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between
                                    M. A.
                                    S. A.
                                    F. A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O'Callaghan, Counsel, instructed by Sheirs
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellants are citizens of Pakistan. A1 and A 2 are  the
           parents of A3, and they also have  four  other  children  of
           which the Tribunal is aware, two of whom are now adults. One
           of those adults, H, now lives in the UK with the benefit  of
           a grant of ILR to which I will return.  The  other  spent  a
           number of years living in the UK, but for  whatever  reason,
           has decided to make his life in Pakistan and  has  left  the
           UK. The two younger children live in the UK where they  have
           no immigration status.
        2. The immigration history for the family commences  with  A1's
           lawful entry to the UK on 9 June 2004 with  the  benefit  of
           leave to enter as a highly skilled migrant  until  15  March
           2005. His leave was subsequently extended  twice  so  as  to
           expire on 15 March 2011. In consequence of A1's  status,  A2
           was granted leave to enter as his dependent on 25  September
           2004  until  15  March  2005,  and  her   leave   was   then
           subsequently extended twice so that it  too  expired  on  15
           March 2011. A3 was born in Pakistan on 8 August 2005, and so
           A2 must have returned there for that  event  at  least.  How
           long she did so is not clear. In consequence of A1's status,
           A3 was granted leave to enter as his dependent  child  on  7
           June 2006 until 6 October 2006, and her leave was then  also
           subsequently extended twice so that it  too  expired  on  15
           March 2011.
        3. On 15  January  2010  the  Appellants,  together  with  their
           children H and W, applied for ILR, which was refused  by  the
           Respondent on 14 March 2012 together with decisions to remove
           the  Appellants  pursuant  to  s47  of  the  2006  Act.   The
           Respondent  refused  the   applications   by   reference   to
           paragraphs  322(1A),  322(2),  135G(iii)  and  135H  of   the
           Immigration Rules. The application made by A1 was refused for
           a number of reasons.
                 First, it was said that he had failed to  disclose  his
           conviction at Bradford  Crown  Cout  on  8  April  2008  and
           sentence  to  nine  months  imprisonment  when  making   his
           application for ILR, and the Respondent  concluded  that  he
           had done so deliberately and dishonestly.
                 Second, despite the information provided in support  of
           his application for ILR as to his earnings between May  2007
           and January 2010, his tax records showed no PAYE  employment
           during the tax years 2007/ 2008, 2008/2009 or 2009/2010, and
           no self assessment tax return submitted  by  him.  Thus  the
           Respondent  concluded   that   he   had   deliberately   and
           dishonestly  made  false  representations  and/or  submitted
           false documents in support of his application.
                 Third. A1 had obtained his previous grant of  leave  to
           remain  (made  on  26  April   2008)   on   the   basis   of
           representations made about his earnings from 2 April 2007 to
           February 2008. The tax information now available showed that
           there had been no PAYE employment during this period, and no
           self assessment tax return had  been  submitted  by  him  in
           relation to it. Thus the Respondent concluded  that  he  had
           deliberately  and  dishonestly  made  false  representations
           and/or  submitted  false  documents  in  support   of   that
           application too.
                 Fourth, the information available showed  that  A1  was
           not lawfully economically active in the  United  Kingdom  in
           either employment, or self employment, or a  combination  of
           them, and as a result he did not meet  the  requirements  of
           the HSMP category.
        4. Since the application by A1 was  refused,  so  too  were  the
           applications of the other family  members  since  they  could
           only succeed as his dependents.
        5. Each member of the family then lodged an appeal against  both
           the decisions to refuse to vary leave, and, to remove them to
           the First Tier Tribunal, and their  appeals  were  heard  and
           dismissed in a Determination promulgated on 31  May  2012  by
           First Tier Tribunal Judge Birkby.
        6. In the course of his decision Judge Birkby made the following
           adverse  findings  of  fact  that   were   not   subsequently
           challenged by any member of the family in the course  of  the
           appeals they  pursued  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  against  his
           decision;
                  i) A1 had been convicted at Bradford Crown Cout  on  8
                     April  2008  of  an  offence   of   possessing   or
                     controlling in the  course  of  business  goods  or
                     packaging that was identical to, or was  likely  to
                     be mistaken for a registered trademark in order  to
                     sell or let for hire.  He  was  sentenced  to  nine
                     months imprisonment
                 ii)  When  making  his  application  for  ILR  A1   had
                     deliberately    and    dishonestly    made    false
                     representations   about   whether   he   had    any
                     convictions. He did not genuinely  believe  (as  he
                     claimed) that his conviction was spent and not  one
                     he needed to disclose.
                iii) The tax records of A1 showed (as he admitted)  that
                     no PAYE or NIC had been paid  in  relation  to  any
                     employment he had held during the tax  years  2007/
                     2008, 2008/2009 2009/2010,  or  2010/2011,  and  no
                     self assessment tax return had  been  submitted  by
                     him.
                 iv) The information provided by A1 as  to  his  several
                     employments during these tax years as  the  finance
                     director of a number of different companies was not
                     consistent,   and   his   explanation   for    that
                     inconsistency was rejected.
                  v) A1's claim that he was unaware that no PAYE or  NOC
                     had been paid by his various employers during these
                     tax years was rejected as untrue.
                 vi) A1 was not  lawfully  economically  active  in  the
                     United  Kingdom  in  either  employment,  or   self
                     employment, or a combination  of  them,  and  as  a
                     result he did not meet the requirements of the HSMP
                     category.
                vii) The application for ILR made  by  A1  was  properly
                     refused by  reference  to  paragraphs  322(1A)  and
                     322(2).
        7. The family were however  granted  permission  to  appeal  by
           Upper Tribunal Spencer  on  26  September  2012  on  limited
           grounds relating to the failure to  make  s47  decisions  in
           accordance with the law, which aspect of the appeal he  also
           allowed. H and W alone were granted permission to appeal  on
           a wider basis, in relation to the refusal to grant leave  to
           remain in the following terms;
                  "it is arguable the Judge made  an  error  of  law  by
                 failing to take into account the  question  of  whether
                 they had a claim to remain in the United Kingdom  under
                 the Immigration Rules as students and if so what public
                 interest was served by their removal, given  that  they
                 were not to be  held  responsible  for  their  father's
                 dishonesty."
        8. The appeals of H and W came before me in the Upper  Tribunal
           on 26 June 2013. Those appeals were dismissed on  the  basis
           that H and W had failed to  establish  that  Judge  Birkby's
           approach to the evidence disclosed any error of  law,  in  a
           decision promulgated on 8 July 2013,  a  copy  of  which  is
           Appendix 1 to this decision.
        9. Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb refused permission to  appeal  to
           the Court of Appeal in a decision of  13  August  2013,  and
           their appeal rights were exhausted.
       10. The family had thus become overstayers on 15 March 2011, and
           they were served by the Respondent  with  notice  that  they
           were to be treated as such on 10 July 2012.
       11. On 5 August 2013 the Appellants (but neither H nor  W)  made
           an application on human rights grounds for leave to  remain,
           which was refused by the Respondent on 24 June  2015.  Their
           applications were made  expressly  on  the  basis  that  the
           applications of A1 and A2 were contingent upon  the  success
           of the application made by A3. In turn A3's application  was
           made on the basis that as a child who had lived  in  the  UK
           for more than 7 years at the date of the application it  was
           unreasonable to expect her to relocate to Pakistan,  and  it
           was in her best interests to grow up in the UK  rather  than
           Pakistan.
       12. I was informed by Counsel that W left  the  UK  to  live  in
           Pakistan in 2015. I was also informed by Counsel that as  an
           adult, H had at some point, made  her  own  application  for
           leave to remain on the basis of paragraph 276ADE, which  had
           been granted to her on 5 January 2016.
       13. The appeals of the Appellants against  the  decision  of  24
           June 2015 were heard on  23  December  2015  by  First  tier
           Tribunal Judge Saffer, and they were  each  dismissed  in  a
           decision promulgated on 4 January 2016. At the date of  that
           hearing H had not been granted leave to remain,  and  it  is
           not  suggested  that  Judge  Saffer  was  informed  by   the
           Appellants prior to the promulgation of  his  decision  that
           this event had occurred. He  was  however  informed  at  the
           hearing that W had left the UK to live in Pakistan. Thus  it
           was never suggested to Judge Saffer at any stage that H  was
           in a position to care for A3 in the UK, or that  she  wished
           to do so.
       14. The Appellants' application to the First Tier  Tribunal  for
           permission to appeal was refused by Judge Parkes on  2  June
           2016, but it was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce on 28
           June 2016 on only one ground;  The  entire  case  turned  on
           whether A3 qualified for leave  to  remain  under  paragraph
           276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules. It is arguable  that
           in approaching that question the Tribunal may have conflated
           the   test   of   "reasonableness"    therein    with    the
           proportionality balancing exercise  required  by  Article  8
           outside of the Rules; PD and Others (Article 8  -  conjoined
           family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 108.
       15. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice on  26  July  2016  in
           which  she  argued  simply  that  the  Judge  had   properly
           considered the test of "reasonableness", and had set out  in
           full the reasons why A3 could  properly  and  reasonably  be
           expected to return to Pakistan with her parents.
       16. Thus the matter comes before me.


      Recusal
       17. No application was made by either party  for  me  to  recuse
           myself in the light of my decision of 8 July 2013  upon  the
           appeals of H and W in the Upper  Tribunal  appended  hereto.
           Both parties  had  the  benefit  of  experienced  specialist
           representatives, both were fully aware of my  decision,  and
           both were clearly content for me to hear these appeals.
       18. Having considered the matter  separately  for  myself  I  am
           satisfied that the content of the decision of  8  July  2013
           offers no arguable basis for suspicion of bias on  the  part
           of the informed observer in relation to the approach I might
           take to these appeals. I also note that no  such  suggestion
           has been advanced either at the hearing,  or  subsequent  to
           it.


      Post hearing submissions
       19. On 14 September 2016 by email Mr O'Callaghan  on  behalf  of
           the Appellants offered further submissions in the  light  of
           the Court of Appeal decision in MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA
           Civ 705, to which neither  he  nor  Ms  Petterson  had  made
           reference  during  the  course   of   the   hearing.   Those
           submissions were copied to the Respondent,  but  no  further
           submissions  have  been  advanced  by  the   Respondent   in
           response. Neither party has  invited  me  to  reconvene  the
           hearing of the appeals for further argument, and  I  am  not
           satisfied that there is any need to do so for the parties to
           have enjoyed a fair hearing of the appeals.
       20. I am satisfied however that I can,  and  should,  take  into
           account Mr O'Callaghan's further  submissions,  and  I  have
           done so, since they address the very  issue  that  I  raised
           with him in the course of his original submissions.


      The limited grant of permission
       21. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  in  limited  terms,  as
           follows;
           The entire case turned on whether A3 qualified for leave  to
           remain under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the  Immigration
           Rules. It is arguable that in approaching that question  the
           Tribunal may have conflated  the  test  of  "reasonableness"
           therein with the proportionality balancing exercise required
           by Article 8 outside of the Rules; PD and Others (Article  8
           - conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 108.
       22. This was however an appeal against a decision  to  refuse  a
           human rights  application,  and  since  the  decision  under
           appeal was made on 24 June 2015 the only  ground  of  appeal
           open to the Appellants lay  upon  Article  8  grounds.  That
           certainly appears to have been the approach taken  by  Judge
           Saffer in the course of his decision, and it was not  argued
           before me that he was wrong to do so.
       23. I note that before Judge Saffer it was conceded  by  Counsel
           on behalf of A1 and A2 that were it not for the fact that A3
           had lived in the UK for more than 7 years at the date of the
           application that was made on 5 August 2013, there  would  be
           no merit in the applications that they had each  made.  They
           did not qualify for leave in their own  right  independently
           of their status as the parents of A3.
       24. Equally it was  conceded  by  the  Respondent  before  Judge
           Saffer that A3's length of residence in the  UK  had  passed
           the 7 year milestone by the date upon which  the  Appellants
           had made their applications, and it was not disputed that A1
           and A2 had a genuine parental relationship  with  A3.  Thus,
           although  Judge  Saffer's  decision  does  not  specifically
           address the issue, it is plain that the Respondent's  stance
           meant that it was not in dispute before him that at the date
           of the hearing A3 was a "qualifying  child"  as  defined  in
           S117D of the 2002 Act.
       25. Mr O'Callaghan made  it  clear  during  the  course  of  the
           hearing  that  he  advanced  solely  the  ground  for  which
           permission had been granted to the Appellants. That  stance,
           whilst undoubtedly correct, has the following consequences.
       26. First, the findings of fact made in the 2013  appeal  remain
           unchallenged.
       27. Second, it is no  longer  disputed  that  Judge  Saffer  did
           specifically address the issue of where the  best  interests
           of A3 lay. He concluded that they lay in  growing  up  as  a
           member of  a  family  unit  with  her  parents  and  younger
           siblings. That conclusion was open to him on  the  evidence,
           and was properly reasoned, after  taking  into  account  the
           applicable jurisprudence.
       28. Third, it is no  longer  disputed  that  Judge  Saffer  also
           specifically addressed the issue of the immigration  history
           of both A1 and A2. He was right  to  do  so,  and  he  quite
           properly recognised the  strong  public  interest  in  their
           removal. No relevant evidence was left  out  of  account  in
           that review, and  no  irrelevant  evidence  was  taken  into
           account. The Judge was correct to note the  public  services
           that the family had enjoyed access to in  the  UK,  and  the
           inability of A2 to speak English fluently.
       29. Fourth, the finding that the Appellants have social cultural
           and family ties in  Pakistan  is  no  longer  disputed.  The
           conclusion that they do is  not  only  consistent  with  the
           content of the 2013 decision, which noted  the  presence  in
           Pakistan then of A3s grandmother (whether the mother  of  A1
           or A2 was not clear), but also the return of W  to  live  in
           Pakistan since the 2013 decision. The conclusion reached was
           not only well open to the Judge  on  the  evidence  but  was
           properly reasoned.
       30. Fifth, it is no longer disputed that the Judge  was  correct
           to view the Article 8 appeal through the lens  or  prism  of
           the inability of the Appellants to meet the requirements  of
           the Immigration Rules, and the reasons why they did  not  do
           so. His primary conclusion was however that  there  were  no
           compelling circumstances outside the rules that meant he was
           obliged to consider Article 8, and this too is unchallenged.
           It  was  only  by  way  of  secondary  conclusion,  in   the
           alternative, that he went on to consider proportionality and
           to conclude that it was proportionate to expect  the  family
           to leave the UK and return to Pakistan.
       31. As  the  Court  of  Appeal  resolved  in  MA  the  issue  of
           reasonableness that arises in both paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv),
           and in s117B(6) of the 2002 Act, raises the  same  range  of
           issues for consideration by the Tribunal. The decision in MA
           is enough therefore  in  my  judgement  to  dispose  of  the
           limited grant of permission. The premise  to  the  grant  of
           permission was that it was arguable that the  reasonableness
           tests were different, because only then could it  be  argued
           that they had been wrongly conflated. The basis of the grant
           falls  away  entirely  once  it  is  recognised   that   the
           reasonableness tests were the same - there was  nothing  for
           the  Judge  to  conflate.  The  Appellants  did   not   have
           permission to argue that the Judge left out of account  some
           material  matter,  or  took  into  account  some  irrelevant
           matter, when considering the issue  of  reasonableness,  and
           specifically confirmed before me that they did not  seek  to
           go beyond the terms of the grant of permission.


      Conclusion
       32. In the circumstances and notwithstanding the terms in  which
           permission to appeal was granted there is therefore no error
           of law that requires  the  decision  to  be  set  aside  and
           remade.

















   DECISION


      The decision of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 4
      January 2016 contains no error of law in the decision  to  dismiss
      the Appellants' appeals which requires that  decision  to  be  set
      aside and remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.





   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 11 November 2016


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal directs  otherwise  the  Appellants
      are granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No  report  of
      these proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  them  in
      the interests of the children  involved.  This  direction  applies
      both to the Appellants and to the Respondent.  Failure  to  comply
      with this direction could lead to proceedings  being  brought  for
      contempt of court.

   Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 11 November 2016

                                 APPENDIX 1

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                  |                        |
|On 26 June 2013                         |                        |
|Prepared on 27 June 2013                |                        |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                               M. A. & Others

                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                         Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr I Macdonald QC, instructed by A1 Immigration
                       Services
For the Respondent:    Mr D Johnson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The First and Second Appellants  are  husband  and  wife,  and  the
         Third, Fourth and Fifth Appellants  are  their  children.  All  are
         citizens of Pakistan.
     2. The First Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 9 June 2004  with
        entry  clearance  under  the  Highly  Skilled   Migrant   Programme
        ["HSMP"], issued on 15 March 2004 and which  expired  on  15  March
        2005. A grant of leave to remain  as  such  was  subsequently  made
        until 15 March 2008, and then made again (on 26 April  2008)  until
        15 March 2011.
     3. The Second, Third and Fourth Appellants entered the United  Kingdom
        on 25 September 2004, with  a  grant  of  entry  clearance  as  the
        dependents of the First  Appellant,  and  they  were  duly  granted
        further leave to remain as such. The Fifth Appellant  was  born  in
        Pakistan on 8 August 2005, and entered the United Kingdom on 7 June
        2006, with a grant of entry  clearance  as  the  First  Appellant's
        dependent, and was duly granted further leave to remain as such.
     4. On 15 January 2010 the First Appellant applied for  ILR  under  the
        HSMP, and the other Appellants applied for ILR as  his  dependents.
        All of those applications were refused. Notices of refusal to  vary
        leave to remain were prepared dated 12 July 2010. It is  not  clear
        why, although it may be  that  they  were  never  served,  but  the
        decisions were reissued on 14 March 2012 together with decisions to
        remove the Appellants pursuant to s47 of the 2006 Act.
     5. The Respondent refused the applications by reference to  paragraphs
        322(1A), 322(2), 135G(iii) and 135H of the Immigration  Rules.  The
        application made by the First Appellant was refused for a number of
        reasons.
     6. First, it was said that he had failed to disclose his conviction at
        Bradford Crown Cout on 8 April 2008 and  sentence  to  nine  months
        imprisonment  when  making  his  application  for  ILR,   and   the
        Respondent  concluded  that  he  had  done  so   deliberately   and
        dishonestly.
     7.  Second,  despite  the  information  provided  in  support  of  his
        application for ILR as to his earnings between May 2007 and January
        2010, his tax records showed no  PAYE  employment  during  the  tax
        years 2007/ 2008, 2008/2009 or 2009/2010, and  no  self  assessment
        tax return submitted by him. Thus the Respondent concluded that  he
        had deliberately and dishonestly made false representations  and/or
        submitted false documents in support of his application.
     8. Third. The First Appellant had obtained his previous grant of leave
        to remain (made on 26 April 2008) on the basis  of  representations
        made about his earnings from 2 April 2007 to February 2008. The tax
        information now available  showed  that  there  had  been  no  PAYE
        employment during this period, and no self  assessment  tax  return
        had been submitted by him in relation to it.  Thus  the  Respondent
        concluded that he  had  deliberately  and  dishonestly  made  false
        representations and/or submitted false documents in support of that
        application too.
     9. Fourth, the information available showed that the  First  Appellant
        was not lawfully economically  active  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
        either employment, or self employment, or a  combination  of  them,
        and as a result he did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the  HSMP
        category.
    10. Since his application was refused, so too were the applications  of
        the  other  Appellants  since  they  could  only  succeed  as   his
        dependents.
    11. Each of the Appellants duly appealed both the decisions  to  refuse
        to vary leave and to remove them to the First  Tier  Tribunal,  and
        their  appeals  were  heard  and  dismissed  in   a   Determination
        promulgated on 31 May 2012 by First Tier Tribunal Judge Birkby.
    12. In the course of his  decision  Judge  Birkby  made  the  following
        adverse findings of fact that are not  challenged  by  any  of  the
        Appellants;
                  i) The First Appellant had  been  convicted  at  Bradford
                     Crown Cout on 8 April 2008 of an offence of possessing
                     or controlling in the  course  of  business  goods  or
                     packaging that was identical to, or was likely  to  be
                     mistaken for a registered trademark in order  to  sell
                     or let for hire.  He  was  sentenced  to  nine  months
                     imprisonment
                 ii)  When  making  his  application  for  ILR  the   First
                     Appellant had deliberately and dishonestly made  false
                     representations about whether he had any  convictions.
                     He did not genuinely believe (as he claimed) that  his
                     conviction  was  spent  and  not  one  he  needed   to
                     disclose.
                iii) The tax records of the First Appellant showed  (as  he
                     admitted) that  no  PAYE  or  NIC  had  been  paid  in
                     relation to any employment he had held during the  tax
                     years 2007/ 2008, 2008/2009 2009/2010,  or  2010/2011,
                     and no self assessment tax return had  been  submitted
                     by him.
                 iv) The information provided by the First Appellant as  to
                     his several employments during these tax years as  the
                     finance director of a number  of  different  companies
                     was not  consistent,  and  his  explanation  for  that
                     inconsistency was rejected.
                  v) The First Appellant's claim that he was  unaware  that
                     no PAYE or NOC had been paid by his various  employers
                     during these tax years was rejected as untrue.
                 vi) The First  Appellant  was  not  lawfully  economically
                     active in the United Kingdom in either employment,  or
                     self employment, or a combination of them,  and  as  a
                     result he did not meet the requirements  of  the  HSMP
                     category.
                vii) The application for ILR made by  the  First  Appellant
                     was  properly  refused  by  reference  to   paragraphs
                     322(1A) and 322(2).
    13. Designated Judge Peart refused the Appellants permission to  appeal
        that decision, although he did extend time to allow the out of time
        application for permission to appeal to be made, on 17 July 2012.
    14. The Appellants renewed their applications for permission to  appeal
        to the Upper Tribunal. Notwithstanding the various submissions made
        to me on the matter by the parties,  I  am  satisfied  that  on  26
        September 2012 Upper Tribunal Judge Spencer noted  the  failure  of
        Judge Birkby to give effect to his decision contained in  the  text
        of the Determination that  the  s47  decisions  were  not  made  in
        accordance with the law. Accordingly he granted permission  to  all
        of the Appellants against the s47 decisions, and then  allowed  all
        of the appeals against those decisions on the  limited  basis  that
        the s47 decisions were not made in accordance with the law.
    15. As to the appeals against the decisions to refuse  to  vary  leave,
        Upper Tribunal Judge Spencer refused permission to  appeal  to  the
        First, Second and  Fifth  Appellants,  but  granted  permission  to
        appeal to the Third and Fourth Appellants in the  following  terms;
        "it is arguable the Judge made an error of law by failing  to  take
        into account the question of whether they had a claim to remain  in
        the United Kingdom under the Immigration Rules as students  and  if
        so what public interest was served by  their  removal,  given  that
        they  were  not  to  be  held  responsible   for   their   father's
        dishonesty."
    16.  The  First  Second  and  Fifth  Appellants  did  not  renew  their
        applications for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  within
        the time allowed under Rule 21 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
        Tribunal) Rules 2008.
    17. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice on 10 October 2012  asserting
        that Judge Birkby had directed himself appropriately, and that  the
        conclusions on Article 8 were sustainable. It was asserted that  he
        had considered all of the facts of the  case  including  the  point
        that the Third and Fourth Appellants were not responsible  for  any
        wrong doing by their father, and he had given adequate reasons  for
        finding that the Respondent's decision was proportionate.
    18. Thus the matter came before me on 1 March 2013.  At  that  hearing,
        although none of the Appellants had previously taken  any  step  to
        respond to, to challenge, or to seek the review of, the decision of
        the Upper Tribunal of 26 September 2012, Mr  Macdonald  QC  made  a
        series of applications which had not been reduced  to  writing,  or
        served  upon  the  Respondent.  The  matter  was   adjourned   upon
        Directions in order that; (i) those applications could be  properly
        reduced to writing, (ii) be served upon the Respondent, and,  (iii)
        the basis for them and their merits could be set out in a  Skeleton
        Argument.  Thus  the  Respondent  might  have  the  opportunity  to
        consider and respond to them.


   The applications
    19.   The Third and Fourth Appellants apply (out of time)  pursuant  to
        paragraph 21A, to  amend  the  grounds  of  their  application  for
        permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.
    20. The First, Second and Fifth Appellants  apply  (out  of  time)  for
        permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on grounds that were not
        advanced in the applications made on their behalf to the First Tier
        Tribunal, or in the renewed application to the Upper Tribunal.
    21. In addition the Appellants seek pursuant  to  paragraph  15(2A)  to
        rely upon further evidence that  was  not  before  the  First  Tier
        Tribunal, but which relates to evidence that was,  namely  to  show
        the further educational progression of the Third Fourth  and  Fifth
        Appellants.
    22. The explanation offered for the Appellants' failure to  make  these
        applications in time is that until Mr Macdonald QC  was  instructed
        on the evening of 28 February 2013 the points raised had simply not
        occurred to those who had previously advised the Appellants.
    23. The Respondent opposes all of the applications, and  contends  that
        there is no good reason to extend time in relation to any of them.


   The legitimate expectation argument
    24. It is submitted on behalf of all of the Appellants  that  once  the
        First Appellant took up the opportunity  extended  to  him  by  the
        grant of entry clearance under the  HSMP  there  was  a  legitimate
        expectation on the part of all of the Appellants that they would be
        able to make the United Kingdom their home, and that their  futures
        would lie in this country. That is said to be based upon the unique
        nature of the HSMP which required the First Appellant to have given
        an undertaking to the Respondent that he would make his home in the
        United Kingdom as part of his application for entry clearance. That
        being so, it is argued, that the dishonesty of the First  Appellant
        is insufficient to defeat the legitimate expectations  of  any  the
        rest of the members of the family (even if - which is not  conceded
        - it  is  sufficient  to  defeat  the  expectations  of  the  First
        Appellant).
    25.  It is however conceded by Mr Macdonald QC that circumstances could
        arise which would permit the lawful removal  of  a  member  of  the
        family. It is conceded  that  conduct  which  would  justify  their
        extradition or their deportation would do so, and  would  permit  a
        lawful decision to remove to be  made.  In  those  circumstances  I
        sought to ascertain where it was suggested the line could  properly
        be drawn between conduct which did  permit  such  a  decision,  and
        conduct which did not. The Appellants' position  appeared  then  to
        shift away to focus upon the absence of  a  decision  to  make  any
        deportation order in relation to the First Appellant,  rather  than
        to focus upon the nature of the conduct itself.
    26. This does not seem to me to be the correct approach. There seems to
        me to be no  obvious  public  interest  in  distinguishing  between
        different circumstances on the simple basis of  whether  or  not  a
        decision to make deportation order has been made. If, as here,  the
        nature and culpability  of  the  dishonest  conduct  of  the  First
        Appellant led to a conviction, and a sentence of imprisonment,  and
        the nature of the criminal conduct could have justified a  decision
        by the Respondent to make a deportation order - why then should the
        public interest in his removal  be  any  less  simply  because  the
        Respondent elected only to refuse to vary his leave to remain?
    27. Indeed in my judgement Mr Macdonald QC  tacitly  conceded  as  much
        when arguing that "absent circumstances which permit the Respondent
        to make a lawful decision to make a deportation order  in  relation
        to any member of the family, the unique nature of the  HSMP,  means
        that each member of the family are entitled to a grant of ILR which
        the Respondent is not entitled to refuse". The difficulty with this
        argument is of course that in my judgement  such  circumstances  do
        apply. Because  of  the  dishonesty  of  the  First  Appellant  the
        Respondent could have made a lawful decision to make a  deportation
        order with respect to him. That dishonesty was rehearsed  by  Judge
        Birkby in his Determination, and no challenge has been made to  his
        findings.


   The Third and Fourth Appellants - Immigration Rules
    28. It is not suggested that there is any material  difference  between
        the situations of the Third and  Fourth  Appellants.  Both  parties
        tacitly concede that their appeals stand and fall together.
    29. The Third Appellant has just completed the second year of  a  three
        year degree course in law at Sunderland University that should,  if
        successfully completed, lead to the award of an LLb.
    30. The Fourth Appellant has just completed the first year of  a  three
        year degree course in Biomedical Sciences at Northumbria University
        that should, if successfully completed, lead to the award of a BSc.
    31. As such both the Third and  Fourth  Appellants  have  continued  to
        progress along the educational path that  Judge  Birkby  was  fully
        aware of, and anticipated, in his Determination  at  paragraphs  45
        and 68.
    32. It is accepted by Mr Macdonald QC on behalf of the Third and Fourth
        Appellants that they only ever had leave to remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom as the dependents of their father, the First Appellant, who
        in turn had been granted leave to  remain  pursuant  to  the  HSMP.
        Accordingly if their father's application  to  vary  his  leave  to
        remain failed, then so too their own applications as his dependents
        would fail under the Immigration Rules.
    33. It is also accepted on behalf of the Third  and  Fourth  Appellants
        that they do not qualify for a grant of leave to remain pursuant to
        paragraph 276ADE, or Appendix FM.
    34. Accordingly it is accepted that the  Third  and  Fourth  Appellants
        cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules following any in country
        application for leave to remain. It is accepted  that  pursuant  to
        the Immigration Rules they cannot simply "switch"  categories,  and
        thus they cannot make an in country application for a variation  of
        their leave to remain, so as to obtain a grant of leave  to  remain
        as a Tier 4 (General) student.


   The Third and Fourth Appellants - Article 8
    35. I allow the applications of the  Third  and  Fourth  Appellants  to
        amend the grounds of their applications for permission to appeal to
        the Upper Tribunal. Although made out of time, the facts upon which
        their argument is based were never in  dispute,  and  there  is  no
        injustice in the Upper Tribunal considering the  new  argument,  or
        the  additional  evidence  now.  The  additional  evidence   simply
        confirms that they have made the progress that was anticipated, and
        thus adds little in any event.
    36. Thus I turn to consider the issue of whether there was any error of
        law in the Judge's dismissal of the Article 8 appeals of the  Third
        and Fourth Appellants, requiring those decisions to be  set  aside,
        and remade, within the context of not only the terms of  the  grant
        of permission to appeal made by Judge Spencer, but also the grounds
        as varied today.
    37. I accept that when the First Appellant originally applied for entry
        clearance  under  the  HSMP  he  was  required  to  demonstrate  an
        intention that he would make the  United  Kingdom  his  main  home;
        paragraph 135A(ii), and that he did so to the satisfaction  of  the
        ECO who considered his application. I assume (although it is not in
        evidence) that he either gave a written Undertaking, or would  then
        have given one, if asked to do so, that he would  make  the  United
        Kingdom his main home.
    38. The grant of entry clearance under  the  HSMP  made  to  the  First
        Appellant was prior to 7 November 2006, so the  subsequent  changes
        to the programme effected from 5 December 2006  did  not  apply  to
        him; R (HSMP Forum Ltd) v SSHD [2008] EWHC 664.
    39. I accept that the subsequent applications for entry clearance  made
        by the Third and Fourth Appellants as his dependents were  made  on
        the basis of the  grant  of  leave  to  enter  made  to  the  First
        Appellant under the HSMP.
    40. If they were older I would have been more likely to infer that  the
        Third and Fourth Appellants  were  party  to  the  decision  making
        process that led to the decision that the family would  migrate  to
        the United Kingdom, rather than concluding it was one  made  solely
        by their parents. They were however then  only  twelve  and  eleven
        years old, and so I do not draw that inference.
    41. I do accept however that the Third and Fourth Appellants would have
        understood that they were  emigrating  to  the  United  Kingdom  in
        September 2004.  They  would  not  however  have  done  so  in  the
        expectation or understanding that they neither  could,  nor  would,
        ever return to Pakistan. I can see no basis for example for drawing
        the inference that they would expect that they would  never  return
        for any visit of any length at all. So much is  borne  out  by  the
        fact that the Second Appellant (at least)  must  have  returned  to
        Pakistan at some stage after entry on 25 September 2004,  in  order
        for the Fifth Appellant to be born in Pakistan on 8 August 2005.
    42. Mr Macdonald QC argued that HSMP  [#52-57]  demonstrated  that  the
        HSMP was a unique programme for permanent settlement, and that once
        they had embarked upon it the Respondent was not able  to  lawfully
        refuse the Third and Fourth Appellants ILR. As set out above he was
        however obliged to concede during  argument  that  the  Appellants'
        case could not be put on the basis that  no  situation  could  ever
        arise which would permit the  Respondent  to  lawfully  remove  any
        member of the family from the United Kingdom. Notwithstanding their
        entry under the HSMP, he accepted that there could be circumstances
        that would justify the  lawful  extradition  or  deportation  of  a
        member of the family, and thus require the  other  members  of  the
        family to choose whether or not to return to Pakistan so that  they
        might continue to live together as a family unit.  That  concession
        must be correct.
    43. Absent such circumstances, and a lawful decision to make either  an
        Extradition Order or Deportation Order, in relation to  any  member
        of the family, the argument is however that  the  Respondent  could
        not  lawfully  refuse  to  grant  ILR  to  the  Third  and   Fourth
        Appellants. In my judgement this is a step too far. Entry under the
        HSMP may be a  factor  to  take  into  account  in  the  Article  8
        balancing exercise of proportionality, but it cannot be  the  trump
        card that is now contended for.
    44. It is accepted on behalf of the Third and  Fourth  Appellants  that
        the only route open to them to regularise their immigration  status
        in the United Kingdom so as to permit them to  lawfully  live  here
        and continue to pursue their studies pursuant  to  the  Immigration
        Rules as they stand, requires the following;
              (a) that they should leave the United Kingdom and make an out
                 of country application for entry clearance,
              (b) that they should have each obtained a valid CAS, and,
              (c) that they should each meet the maintenance requirements.
    45. It is accepted on behalf of the Third and  Fourth  Appellants  that
        neither has ever sought or obtained a valid CAS. Nor has either  of
        them submitted to the Respondent a completed application for  leave
        to remain as a student of the form and style that they  would  have
        had to do had they been making an out of  country  application  for
        entry clearance. Nor  have  they  submitted  the  other  supporting
        evidence that they would be obliged to provide in support  of  such
        an application if it were to be successful. Nor have they  tendered
        payment of the fee that they would have been obliged to  pay.  Thus
        the Appellants have not sought to  demonstrate  to  the  Respondent
        that they were willing or able to meet all the requirements of  the
        out of country application process, save of course  for  physically
        leaving the United Kingdom to make the application from out of  the
        country.
    46. Mr Macdonald QC argued that the  case  for  the  Third  and  Fourth
        Appellants was that if they were required to make an out of country
        application for entry clearance, then absent perversity on the part
        of the decision maker, those applications would "almost  certainly"
        be  successful.  These  appeals  are  not  therefore  put  by   the
        Appellants on the basis either that there  is  a  significant  risk
        they would be refused entry clearance, or that  their  applications
        would definitely be the subject of  refusal,  so  that  they  would
        thereby be prevented from completing the degree courses upon  which
        they have embarked. Upon reflection I am not however satisfied that
        this submission can be accepted at face value. It is  not  possible
        to assume on the limited  evidence  adduced  before  me  that  this
        argument is correct. It may well be, for example,  that  the  Third
        and Fourth Appellants would not be able to  demonstrate  that  they
        met the relevant financial thresholds to  satisfy  the  maintenance
        requirements. I infer that they are dependent financially upon  the
        First Appellant, and his true financial circumstances are opaque to
        say the least.
    47. If, and contrary to the case  advanced  by  the  Third  and  Fourth
        Appellants, there is a significant risk that their entry  clearance
        applications would quite properly and lawfully be  refused  by  the
        ECO, then as Judge Birkby observed they  would  still  be  able  to
        pursue their studies, albeit at a different University, whether  in
        Pakistan or elsewhere. This is not a situation in which  either  of
        them would necessarily be prevented from studying  altogether.  Nor
        is there any cogent or reliable evidence offered  to  suggest  that
        their studies to date would count for nothing. Finally it  must  be
        noted that the whole of the tertiary education  undertaken  by  the
        Third and Fourth Appellants has been pursued since the  2008  grant
        of leave, that was obtained through their father's dishonesty.
    48. It was asserted that any return to Pakistan by the third and Fourth
        Appellants in order to make  an  application  for  entry  clearance
        would cause disruption to their studies. That cannot be right,  and
        indeed it was subsequently accepted on their behalf that since both
        were now at the end of the University summer term there would be no
        disruption to their studies if  they  returned  and  made  such  an
        application during the long summer vacation. That  concession  must
        be right, and the point must also in my  judgement  extend  to  any
        other vacation.
    49. It was asserted  that  there  were  delays  in  the  processing  of
        applications from nationals of  Pakistan  for  entry  clearance  as
        students, but on the other hand it was accepted that there  was  no
        evidence to that effect before  me.  In  particular  there  was  no
        evidence to suggest that any application made now  would  not  have
        been processed, and decided, well  before  the  start  of  the  new
        University term. I am therefore not satisfied  that  there  is  any
        proper evidential  basis  to  this  assertion,  and  I  reject  it.
        Moreover I note that the period taken to consider  and  decide  the
        applications could be minimised if the Third and Fourth  Appellants
        were to return to Pakistan armed with  all  of  the  evidence  that
        might be necessary to support their applications,  and  I  consider
        that I should infer that this would be the case.
    50. Mr Macdonald QC therefore had to accept that the  argument  against
        requiring the Third and Fourth Appellants to make such  an  out  of
        country application boiled away to being an argument that the  cost
        and inconvenience involved in doing  so  rendered  the  requirement
        that they should do so, disproportionate. It is not suggested  that
        the cost of doing so is beyond the family's reach  -  the  argument
        appears to be merely that the family should not be obliged to  make
        the expenditure, and that the Third and  Fourth  Appellants  should
        not be put to the inconvenience. It is however extremely  difficult
        to identify the nature of the inconvenience relied  upon,  inherent
        in making a trip to Pakistan in the summer vacation, when  both  no
        doubt continue  to  have  family  friends,  and  members  of  their
        extended families, who  they  could  visit.  On  the  face  of  the
        evidence their grandmother is still alive, and she would  no  doubt
        also be glad of their visit. I  conclude  that  the  disruption  of
        their everyday routine would be no more than that inherent  in  any
        foreign holiday taken during a student's summer vacation.
    51. On the other hand, as set out above, there is in my  judgement  the
        real prospect that they will be unable to meet the requirements  of
        the Immigration Rules for entry clearance.
    52. It is accepted by the Third and Fourth Appellants  that  they  rely
        upon the principle rehearsed in Chikwamba [2008] UKHL  40,  arguing
        that their circumstances are such that they should not be  required
        to undertake the step of making an out of country application,  and
        should instead be  granted  a  period  of  discretionary  leave  to
        remain. (Whilst the argument is that this should be a grant of ILR,
        I can see no proper basis for the argument that  the  discretionary
        leave sought should be for anything other than an equivalent length
        to the period that would have been granted had they applied out  of
        country as students; whether that be one,  or  two  years.)  It  is
        argued that requiring them to leave the United Kingdom to make such
        an application would be a disproportionate breach of their  Article
        8 rights. It is said to be a  punishment  without  a  purpose,  and
        moreover a punishment inflicted on individuals who are innocent  of
        any wrongdoing.
    53. I have referred myself to the decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
        Mumu (paragraph 320; Article 8; scope) [2012] UKUT 143,  but  there
        is no suggestion that either paragraph 320 or 322 would be  applied
        by the Respondent to refuse an out of country application  made  by
        the Third or Fourth Appellants.
    54. Under  Article  8  I  have  to  determine  the  following  separate
        questions:
        Is there an interference with the right to respect for private life
        (which includes the right to  physical  and  moral  integrity)  and
        family life?
        If so will such interference have consequences of such  gravity  as
        to potentially engage Article 8?
        Is that interference in accordance with the law?
        Does that interference have legitimate aims?
        Is the interference proportionate in a democratic  society  to  the
        legitimate aim to be achieved?
    55. It is not in dispute that the  Third  and  Fourth  Appellants  have
        established a "private life" during the time  that  they  have  now
        lived in the United Kingdom. It is not  suggested  that  either  of
        them is not a genuine student, and  their  studies  therefore  form
        because of their age the most significant  part  of  that  "private
        life".
    56. Equally, it is not in dispute that the Third and Fourth  Appellants
        enjoy a "family life" together in the United Kingdom with the First
        Second and Fifth Appellants. That "family life" has however  to  be
        viewed in the context of the lack of any current immigration status
        on the part of the First  Second  and  Fifth  Appellants,  although
        there is at present no formal removal decision in relation to them.
    57. As is now conceded, the interference resulting from the decision to
        refuse the Third and Fourth Appellant's applications for ILR is  in
        accordance with  the  law,  and  the  Respondent's  decisions  have
        legitimate aims. Those aims are the  maintenance  of  the  economic
        wellbeing of the United Kingdom  through  the  maintenance  of  the
        immigration  controls  approved  by  Parliament,  and   of   public
        confidence in their maintenance, and of the economic well being  of
        the country.
    58. In my judgement the Article 8  appeals  of  the  Third  and  Fourth
        Appellants had therefore to be viewed  in  the  following  context.
        They had entered the United Kingdom lawfully on 25  September  2004
        as the dependents of their father, who had been admitted under  the
        HSMP. The last grant of leave to remain that had been made to  them
        in their capacity as the dependents of their father, had only  been
        obtained  as  a  result  of  their   father's   dishonesty.   Their
        applications for ILR as the dependents of their  father,  had  been
        refused under the Immigration Rules  because  his  application  had
        been refused on the grounds of his dishonesty.  Their  parents  and
        younger sibling would ultimately have to  return  to  Pakistan,  or
        they would be the subject of a further removal decision.  Thus  the
        Third and Fourth Appellants faced an individual choice; whether  on
        the one hand to return to Pakistan  and  to  pursue  their  studies
        there, and make their lives there, or, on the other  hand,  whether
        to return to Pakistan, and make applications for entry clearance to
        continue their studies in the United Kingdom. If the First, Second,
        and Fifth Appellants also returned (or were removed)  to  Pakistan,
        it did not automatically follow, even if they took the first course
        and  chose  to  study  in  Pakistan,  that  the  Third  and  Fourth
        Appellants would choose to study in the same city  in  which  their
        family chose to settle upon return. Again they would face a choice,
        no different to that  made  by  most  young  people  of  their  age
        electing tertiary education; whether or  not  to  live  with  their
        families full time whilst studying, or, whether to  leave  home  to
        study and to return to see their families during college vacations.


    59. It is in my judgement plain that at the  heart  of  the  Article  8
        argument advanced for the Third and Fourth Appellants is the  tacit
        assertion that they should be permitted to avoid the  necessity  of
        making these choices, and be permitted to avoid  the  necessity  of
        making any application for entry clearance  from  Pakistan  in  the
        usual way, supported by the usual evidence, and  after  payment  of
        the usual fees. In short it is  their  case  that  they  should  be
        permitted to do absolutely nothing, and that the Respondent  should
        simply be required to grant them  discretionary  leave  to  remain.
        Even if one's starting point were that they were  innocent  victims
        of their father's dishonesty, and  that  because  of  the  family's
        migration pursuant to the HSMP they had lived since 2004 under  the
        impression that they would be able to live in  the  United  Kingdom
        permanently,  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  identify  why   the
        Appellants should be entitled to take such a stance.
    60. In Chikwamba, at paragraph 42, the House of Lords clearly  accepted
        that an appalling immigration history was something that could  and
        should be taken into account when considering  the  proportionality
        of the proposed interference posed by the removal decision.
    61. In Hayat [2011] UKUT 444, the Upper Tribunal said;
        23. The significance of Chikwamba, however, is to make plain  that,
        where the only matter weighing on  the  respondent's  side  of  the
        balance is the public policy of requiring a person to  apply  under
        the rules from abroad, that legitimate objective  will  usually  be
        outweighed by factors  resting  on  the  appellant's  side  of  the
        balance.
        24.  Viewed  correctly,   the   Chikwamba   principle   does   not,
        accordingly, automatically trump anything on the State's side, such
        as a poor immigration history.  Conversely, the principle cannot be
        simply "switched off"  on  mechanistic  grounds,  such  as  because
        children are not involved, or that (as here) the appellant  is  not
        seeking to remain with a  spouse  who  is  settled  in  the  United
        Kingdom.
        25. Like the absence of children, that last factor may be one which
        diminishes the force of the principle; but whether it  will  do  so
        depends upon an assessment of  the  facts.   For  example,  if  the
        position disclosed by the evidence had been  that  the  appellant's
        wife was due to finish her studies only a few weeks after the  date
        of the hearing, and was intending  to  return  to  her  country  of
        origin, and the evidence  was  such  that  she  did  not  need  the
        appellant to be present with her while she finished her studies and
        prepared to leave, then the  Chikwamba  principle  would  have  had
        nothing to add to the appellant's case.  The actual  facts  of  the
        present case, however, were very different.   As  we  have  already
        seen, the appellant's wife had the best part of a year to go before
        the end of her first tranche of the ACCA course.  She has now  been
        given leave to remain until 2014 in order to complete that  course.
        There is no suggestion that her practical and  emotional  need  for
        her husband to be with her has diminished in any respect.
        26. The fact that  the  presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  the
        appellant's wife depends upon her status here  as  a  student,  and
        only on that, has to be acknowledged in undertaking  the  balancing
        exercise.  However, as we have indicated, that fact alone does  not
        negate the Chikwamba principle.  She  is  entitled  to  remain  and
        study here until 2014.  In practice, if the appellant  were  to  be
        removed, it is highly likely that she would be without his help and
        support for a  very  substantial  proportion  of  that  time.   The
        evidence is that she needs the appellant's help and  support.   She
        has committed no breach of the  Immigration  Rules.   Nor  has  the
        appellant.  There is a  likelihood  that,  if  the  appellant  were
        removed, his wife will find she is unable to continue her  studies,
        thus negating the rationale of requiring him to go back to Pakistan
        to make an entry clearance application.
        27. In short, on a proper analysis of the facts, the  principle  in
        Chikwamba points plainly to the factors in favour of the  appellant
        outweighing the single factor relied on by the respondent.
    62. As  explained  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Hayat,  the  Chikwamba
        principle does not therefore mean that no individual should ever be
        required to return  to  their  country  of  origin  to  seek  entry
        clearance in the usual way. On the contrary if  there  are  factors
        that  weigh  in  the  Respondent's  favour   when   balancing   the
        proportionality of removal, other than simply the public policy  of
        requiring entry clearance  to  be  sought  from  abroad,  then  the
        Chikwamba principle does not automatically mean that they carry  no
        weight.
    63. The Court of Appeal in Hayat [2012] EWCA  Civ  1054  approved  that
        approach. (I do not  consider  that  Zhang  [2013]  EWHC  891  adds
        anything to the analysis of the relevant principle by the Court  of
        Appeal.)
    64. On the facts of this case there clearly are factors that  weigh  in
        the Respondent's favour. The dishonesty that led to  the  grant  of
        leave to remain to the family in April 2008, and that  led  to  the
        refusal of the 2010 applications for ILR  was  that  of  the  First
        Appellant, but in my judgement it plainly falls within the scope of
        the principle that was being addressed in both Chikwamba and Hayat,
        and  weighs  in  the  Respondent's  favour   when   balancing   the
        proportionality of removal, because  it  was  the  reason  for  the
        inability of the Third and Fourth Appellants to secure ILR  as  the
        dependents of an HSMP. Moreover, as set out above, there  is  their
        own failure to take any step to demonstrate that they were  willing
        or able to  meet  all  the  requirements  of  the  out  of  country
        application process, save for  physically  making  the  application
        from out of the country. Thus there  is  in  my  judgement  a  real
        prospect that they will be unable to meet the requirements  of  the
        Immigration Rules for entry clearance.
    65. The issue is therefore whether or not Judge  Birkby's  approach  to
        the question of proportionality involved an error of law such  that
        it requires his decision to be set aside and remade. I am satisfied
        that it did not. The decision that he reached was in  my  judgement
        one that he would have been bound to reach even with the benefit of
        Mr Macdonald QC's arguments so long as  he  had  properly  directed
        himself as to the approach to be taken to the Chikwamba principle.


   The First, Second and Fifth Appellants
    66. It is accepted that the argument that  Mr  Macdonald  QC  seeks  to
        raise on behalf  of  the  First  Second  and  Fifth  Appellants  by
        amendment to the grounds for  the  application  for  permission  to
        appeal depends in turn upon the success of the arguments raised  on
        behalf of the Third and Fourth Appellants. The argument is that  if
        the Third and Fourth Appellants are entitled to the  grant  of  ILR
        that they seek then it is not proportionate  to  refuse  their  own
        applications, and so separate the family.  As  such  that  argument
        must in my judgement fail.
    67. In the circumstances I decline to grant  permission  to  the  First
        Second  and  Third  Appellants  to  vary  the  grounds   of   their
        application for permission to appeal out of time, and I decline  to
        revisit the  issue  of  whether  or  not  they  should  be  granted
        permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  those  amended
        grounds.





   DECISION


    68. The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
        on 31 May 2012 contained no error of law in the  dismissal  of  the
        Appellants' appeals, and it is accordingly confirmed.


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005
      Unless and  until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellants
        continue to be granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No
        report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify
        the Appellants. This direction applies both to the  Appellants  and
        to the Respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead
        to proceedings being brought for contempt of court.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 27 June 2013




