

                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/25975/2013
      IA/25950/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Determination Promulgated|
|On July 14, 2014                |On July 18, 2014         |
|                                |                         |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                mr hasen mia
                              mr mashiur rahman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hossain (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  The  appellants,  born  October  11,  1987  and   October   30,   1988
    respectively, are citizens of Bangladesh.  On  December  12,  2012  the
    appellants applied to extend their  leave  to  remain  for  as  Tier  1
    "entrepreneurs".

 2. The respondent refused their applications on June 14, 2013.

 3. On June 26, 2013 the appellants appealed under  Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 4. The matter was listed before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Devittie
    (hereinafter referred to as "the FtTJ") on March  26,  2014  and  in  a
    determination promulgated on April 23, 2014 he dismissed their appeals.



 5. The appellants appealed the decisions on April 28, 2014. Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grimmett on  May
    22, 2014 who found it was arguable that the FtTJ had erred  in  finding
    funds were not freely available and for considering the  appeals  under
    the wrong Immigration Rules.

 6. The matter was listed before me on the above date  and  the  appellants
    were in attendance.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUES

 7. Mr Hossain agreed the following:-

     a. There was no appeal on human rights grounds.
     b. Although the FtTJ had applied the wrong Rules in  paragraphs  [5(i)
        and (iii)] of his determination this in itself would not amount  to
        an error in law because the correct Rules said the same as the Rule
        applied by the FtTJ. The FtTJ had applied the Rules as they were at
        date of hearing as against the Rules in force at the  date  of  the
        application.
     c. Section 85A of the 2002 Act applied to this appeal.

    SUBMISSIONS


 8. Mr Hossain relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted as follows:-

     a. The FtTJ found at paragraph  [4]  of  his  determination  that  the
        respondent should have exercised evidential flexibility. Even if no
        error of law was found on certain matters it is submitted the  FtTJ
        should have found the decision was not in accordance with  the  law
        and remitted  it  back  to  the  respondent  to  consider  all  the
        documents that had been submitted.


     b. Although Mr Rahman had not  received  his  English  language  tests
        results by the date of application,  he  had  taken  them  and  the
        results were submitted on December 24, 2014. Although  issues  were
        now being raised about the test this was not a matter raised before
        the FtTJ and was something that could be raised subsequently by the
        respondent by the issuing of a section 10 notice.

     c. The FtTJ erred by not finding an authorised  signatory  had  signed
        the bank letter. The document at page C of the respondent's  bundle
        referred to the signatory of the bank as an "authorised Signatory".
        The FtTJ erred in paragraph [5(i)] of his determination.

     d. The bank was Standard Chartered and this is a worldwide  bank  with
        its principal office in London. Although the letter at  page  C  of
        the respondent's bundle did not  mention  who  regulated  the  bank
        there was subsequent letter, page  17  of  Mr  Mia's  bundle,  that
        confirmed the bank was regulated and in any  event  the  respondent
        could have used her own facilities to check. In any event,  if  the
        FtTJ was not satisfied with the format of  the  letter  then  under
        paragraph 245AA a correct letter could have been sought.

     e. The FtTJ erred  in  paragraph  [5(iii)]  of  his  determination  by
        finding the funds were not transferable. The letter at  page  J  of
        the respondent's bundle confirmed the funds were transferable.

     f.  There  was  satisfactory  evidence  of  third  party   declaration
        compliance. The witness statements confirmed the correct  documents
        were sent and copies were in the bundles. It was  not  unusual  for
        the respondent to lose or misfile documents.


 9. Mr Kandola relied on the Rule 24  response  dated  June  10,  2014  and
    submitted:

     a. The appellant, Mr Rahman, had not passed his English language  test
        as at the date of application. The test also originated from  TOEIC
        and the mere fact he had provided evidence to show  he  had  passed
        would not be accepted in light  of  the  recent  issues  raised  in
        respect of the provider.


     b. There was no evidence that the document at  Page  C  contained  the
        signature of a person authorised to sign on behalf of the bank.

     c. The Standard Chartered letter  dated  December  10,  2012  did  not
        confirm an appropriate  body  regulated  the  bank.  The  fact  the
        principal office of the bank was in  the  United  Kingdom  did  not
        satisfy the Rules. The second letter from the bank  dated  December
        1, 2013 could not be admitted  as  section  85A  of  the  2002  Act
        prevented its admission. The missing information was not  something
        the respondent was obliged to seek from the appellant because  when
        the application was refused there were a large  number  of  reasons
        for the refusal and evidential flexibility only applied  where  the
        obtaining of that missing piece of information would  lead  to  the
        application succeeding. The  Tribunal  in  Durrani  (Entrepreneurs:
        bank letters; evidential flexibility) [2014] UKUT 00295 (IAC)  made
        clear there  is  no  separate  evidential  flexibility  outside  of
        paragraph 245AA HC 395.

     d. It is accepted the letter at page  J  of  the  respondent's  bundle
        confirms the funds were transferable to the United Kingdom  but  as
        the appeal would fail on other grounds this would not amount  to  a
        material error.

     e. The respondent's file clearly  shows  the  additional  third  party
        documents contained in  the  appellants'  bundles  at  pages  16-17
        (Rahman) and 15 to 16 (Mia) were not sent to with the  application.
        The letter dated December 11, 2012 refers to  confirmation  letters
        dated December 5, 2012 but the documents  in  question  were  dated
        December 6, 2012. The absence of these documents  means  the  third
        party declaration did not meet the Rules.


10. I reserved my decision and confirmed that if there was an error then  I
    would be able to remake it without any further submissions.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

11. The FtTJ rejected the appellants' appeals on the  basis  they  did  not
    satisfy the Immigration Rules. Mr Hossain has primarily challenged  the
    findings contained at paragraph [5] of his determination.

12. During his submissions Mr Hossain submitted that the FtTJ had  accepted
    that evidential flexibility applied to this appeal and my attention was
    drawn to paragraph [4] of the determination. However,  I  am  satisfied
    that the FtTJ's finding was not an open ended acceptance of  evidential
    flexibility  but  related  to  the  requirement  to  provide   original
    documents. This approach has no  bearing  on  issues  relating  to  the
    English language certificate, whether the bank was regulated or whether
    the third party declaration was in the correct format.

13. This is a points based application and  the  FtTJ  was  concerned  with
    whether the applications satisfied the  Rules.  Mr  Hossain  previously
    confirmed there was no claim under article 8 ECHR.

14. I have considered paragraph 41-SD and I have considered the application
    against the Rules that were in place at the date of application and not
    the Rules that subsequently came into force.

15. I therefore turn to the matters that were raised before me:-

     a. In relation to the question of whether the bank was  regulated  the
        Rules make clear that  any  foreign  bank  must  confirm  it  is  a
        regulated bank. The letter submitted by the appellants did  not  do
        this. I am asked to accept that the bank in question was  regulated
        because firstly, a second  letter  confirmed  this,  secondly,  the
        original letter refers to the principal office being in London  and
        thirdly, I was invited to  find  that  paragraph  245AA(d)  HC  395
        placed an obligation on the respondent to look at the  internet  in
        certain circumstances. Dealing with these three submissions I  find
        as follows:-


           i. The second letter cannot be taken into account  in  assessing
              whether the Rules were met because Section 85A  of  the  2002
              Act bars this.


          ii. The letter submitted did not meet the Rules. It may  well  be
              the bank is regulated by an appropriate body but the onus  is
              on the appellant to  provide  the  correct  information.  The
              appellants failed to provide this with their applications and
              this is not a matter that would engage evidential flexibility
              as set out in paragraph 245AA HC 395.

         iii. Paragraph 245AA (d) did not come into force until October  1,
              2013 and the appellants cannot take advantage of  the  change
              in the Rule.

          iv. The Tribunal in Durrani allowed some room for manoeuvre.  The
              relevant passages can be found at paragraphs [12] to [17]  of
              Durrani:-

                12. All of the requirements listed in paragraph  41-SD(a)(i)
                of the Rules are to be construed reasonably and sensibly, in
                their full context....


                15. The cornerstone of the second ground of appeal, properly
                analysed, consists of an assertion.  The assertion is to the
                effect that an  "evidential  flexibility"  policy  of  sorts
                survived the introduction of paragraph  245AA.   The  latter
                provision of the Rules came into operation on  06  September
                2012. It is common ground that paragraph 245AA governed  all
                of  the  applications  for  entrepreneurial  migrant  status
                generating this  cluster  of  appeals.   The  FtT's  primary
                reason for rejecting this ground of appeal was  the  absence
                of  any  evidence  that   some   policy,   independent   and
                freestanding of  paragraph  245AA,  also  applied  to  these
                applications:  see  [32].  We  endorse  this  reasoning  and
                conclusion.  In  doing  so,  we  highlight  the  distinction
                between argument and evidence. The  question  of  whether  a
                policy exists, in whatever context it arises, is a  question
                of fact.  This ground of appeal  fails  because  it  has  no
                supporting evidence, direct or inferential.


                16. In our judgement, this ground of appeal must fail on the
                further basis that whereas the Upper Tribunal  in  Rodriguez
                held  that  the  two  documents  appended  to  its  decision
                constituted a policy of  the  Secretary  of  State  of  wide
                ranging scope and effect, the Court of Appeal reversed  this
                holding: see  Rodriguez  (Flexibility  Policy)  [2013]  UKUT
                00042 (IAC), [9] - [13]  and  Appendices  and  Secretary  of
                State for the Home Department - v -  Rodriguez  [2014]  EWCA
                Civ 2, [82] - [101].  Insofar  as  necessary,  we  are  also
                mindful of the additional evidence adduced on behalf of  the
                Secretary of State in Rodriguez see [47]  and  [65].   While
                this was not admitted on  the  basis  of  the  new  evidence
                principles, we cannot pretend that it  does  not  exist  and
                were not invited to do so.


                17. Thus, the Appellant's appeal must be dismissed.  To this
                we would add  that  the  Appellant's  application  and  both
                ensuing appeals were, in our estimation, doomed  to  failure
                in any event on account of the  egregious  and  irremediable
                failure to comply with all of the requirements enshrined  in
                paragraph 41-SD(c) of the Immigration Rules.


           v. I therefore turn to the issue in hand  namely  whether  there
              has been an error in  law  on  this  issue.  Mr  Hossain  has
              submitted  that  the  FtTJ  should  have  found   either   an
              appropriate  body  regulated  this  particular  bank  or  the
              respondent should have enquired further. I am satisfied  that
              a letter submitted twelve months later was properly excluded.
              Following on from what the Tribunal said in Durrani there was
              no  separate  "evidential  flexibility"  policy  outside   of
              paragraph 245AA HC 395.

     b. In so far as there is a requirement for both appellants to have the
        English language certificate I refer to the authority of Ali (s.120
        -  PBS)  [2012]  UKUT  00368(IAC)  where  the  Tribunal  stated  at
        paragraph [20] that,


              "... what is said in AQ (Pakistan) [2011] EWCA Civ 833  about
              the relevant date being the date of decision not the date  of
              application has to be seen as not applying to cases  governed
              by section 85A....".


        Accordingly, although the appellant had taken his test at the  date
        of application  he  did  not  actually  pass  it  until  after  his
        application and was therefore unable to  provide  a  valid  English
        language certificate. Mr Rahman could not meet the Rules and as  Mr
        Hossain acknowledged both appellants had to satisfy the  Rules  for
        the appeal to succeed.

     c. The appellants' UK representatives  submitted  a  letter  with  the
        third party declaration when they submitted their application.  The
        respondent's file was examined and there was no evidence  that  the
        additional documents now contained in the appellants' bundles  were
        ever sent. There  was  evidence  of  other  documents  having  been
        submitted but  there  was  no  documentary  evidence  submitted  to
        confirm the authorisation documents had been submitted prior to the
        application. This is another mandatory requirement of the Rules and
        following Durrani these documents have to  be  submitted  with  the
        application.

  16. In Akhter and another (paragraph  245AA:  wrong  format)  [2014]  UKUT
      00297 (IAC) the Tribunal made clear  that  where  there  are  material
      defects in the Appellant's application such as the letter not  stating
      the Appellant's name or other requirements  then  paragraph  245AA(b),
      accorded its ordinary and natural meaning,  is  not  engaged  and  the
      appellant cannot invoke paragraph 245AA in  support  of  a  contention
      that  he  should  have  been  given  an  opportunity  to  rectify  the
      deficiencies in his application.


  17. There were two other issues raised in this appeal regarding authorised
      signatories and whether monies could be transferred. I find:


     a. The appellant  provided  a  letter  contained  at  Page  J  of  the
        respondent's  bundle.  This  letter  confirmed   the   funds   were
        transferable to the United Kingdom and I find the FtTJ's finding at
        paragraph [5(ii)] was incorrect in light of the fact there  was  no
        evidence to contradict what was contained in that letter.

     b. The  letter  from  the  bank  at  Page  C  contains  an  authorised
        signature. There is nothing in the Rules that suggests this has  to
        be by a  particular  person  and  I  find  the  FtTJ's  finding  in
        paragraph [5(i)] has no basis.

18. Following the recent decisions of Fayyaz (Entrepreneurs: paragraph  41-
    SD(a)(i) - "provided to") [2014] UKUT 00296 (IAC), Akhter and Durrani I
    am satisfied the  FtTJ  did  not  err  in  refusing  these  appeals  in
    circumstances where the specified documents had not  been  provided  at
    the date of application. I am satisfied that there was  no  requirement
    to invite the appellant to rectify any  deficient  documents.  Although
    other documents (bank letter, third party signatory letter and  English
    language certificate) were subsequently provided this does  not  assist
    these appellants.

    DECISION


19. There is no material error of law. I uphold the original decisions.

20. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.

Signed:                                 Dated: 20 October 2014





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT

I make no fee award

Signed:                                 Dated:



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
