
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/25462/2014
     IA/25453/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 11th September 2015                 |             On 22nd September 2015 |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                   mrs elizabeth adeaga (First Respondent)
                  master ayomide sokoya (Second Respondent)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr A Burrett of Counsel (Direct Access)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Mrs Adeaga and Mstr. Sokoya are citizens  of  Nigeria  (not  Brazil  as
    stated in the Decision and Reasons now under consideration).  They  are
    mother and son whose dates of birth as recorded as 18th July  1968  and
    11th February 2001.  There is something of an immigration  history  but
    for the purposes of this appeal it is sufficient to note  that  various
    applications for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  were  made  in
    2010 which were rejected by the Secretary of State  but  no  appealable
    decision was served upon the Respondents or either of them  until  16th
    August 2013.  The decision,  when  eventually  it  came,  required  the
    Respondents to leave the United Kingdom.  The Respondents and  each  of
    them appealed in the First-tier Tribunal. Their appeals were  heard  by
    Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Andonian  on  20th  February  2015,
    sitting at Taylor House.

 2. This was a human rights appeal.   Consideration  therefore  was  to  be
    given to Appendix FM; paragraph 276ADE and  the  wider  application  of
    Article 8 ECHR.  In summary the case advanced by the Respondents is set
    out at paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 of  the  Decision  and  Reasons  of  Judge
    Andonian.

 3. The second Respondent was said to be doing well at school  in  year  7,
    hardworking, and  at  the  time  of  the  decision  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, preparing for his GCSE examinations.  He was described  as  a
    person of good character with good marks and good reports.

 4. The first Respondent was desirous of her son remaining  in  the  United
    Kingdom to continue his education.  She had been in a relationship with
    her current partner for nine years.  She had had a  difficult  previous
    relationship.  She arrived in the United Kingdom before  her  son.   It
    was his father who brought him to the United Kingdom  before  returning
    to Nigeria and has not been seen since.  The second  Respondent's  case
    also was that were she to return to Nigeria she would have  no  support
    and her son has made progress in the United Kingdom and  has  formed  a
    relationship with her  partner  whom  it  is  said  treats  the  second
    Respondent as his own.

 5. The first Respondent's partner is said to be a taxi driver who came  to
    the United Kingdom in August 1980.  He met the first  Respondent  at  a
    party in 2004.  The relationship blossomed.

 6. What I have set out  above  is  the  basis  upon  which  the  case  was
    advanced.  Judge Andonian went on at paragraph 6 of  his  Decision  and
    Reasons to recognise where the burden and standard  of  proof  lay  and
    then went on to say very little other than that the burden of proof had
    been discharged.  The "appeal" (sic) was allowed under paragraph 276ADE
    of the Immigration Rules although it is  not  clear,  even  from  that,
    whose appeal since there were two Appellants.

 7. Not content with the decision of Judge Andonian, by Notice  dated  16th
    March 2015 the Secretary of State made application  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The grounds run to twelve paragraphs but
    in short it can be said that the  Secretary  of  State  contended  that
    there were no sufficient findings.  On 5th May 2015 Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Grimmet granted permission thus the matter  comes  before
    me.  It is of note that in granting permission that Judge Grimmett said
    in the second paragraph of his grant, "I could find no reasons  in  the
    decision".

 8. Mr Burrett in a valiant attempt to  defend  the  Decision  and  Reasons
    sought to persuade me that given the Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department was not represented,  the  evidence  before  the  judge  was
    unchallenged, and therefore it could be inferred, reading the extent of
    reasons as a whole, that the judge had accepted  all  of  the  evidence
    that had been placed before him.

 9. In my judgment that argument is not sustainable because it  would  have
    been possible  for  the  judge  to  have  allowed  the  appeal  without
    accepting all of the evidence.  It may have been some of  the  evidence
    but one does not know what evidence.  It is trite law that a  party  to
    proceedings is entitled to know why they have lost. That is as true  of
    the Secretary of State as it would have been  for  the  Respondents  to
    this appeal. If they had been  on  the  receiving  end  of  a  decision
    without  sufficient  clarity  for  them  to  know  why  they  had  been
    unsuccessful they might also, rightly,  have  complained.   Justice  is
    blind.

10. What I find in the Statement of Reasons of Judge Andonian  is  no  more
    than a record of the evidence that was given  and  a  decision  without
    reasons for the decision.  The statement of  reasons  is  fundamentally
    flawed.  Still further the judge has  failed  to  set  out  the  public
    interest factors and set against them, either  adequately  or  at  all,
    those factors which he found favoured the appellants.

11. Where there is, as I find, a material error of law it is for the  Upper
    Tribunal either to remake the decision or remit it.  I cannot begin  to
    remake the decision where there are no  findings  of  fact.   In  those
    circumstances the only proper course is to  remit  the  matter  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal. I would have  said  that  there  are  no  findings
    preserved but in this case there are no findings and so the matter will
    start all over again.

Decision and Directions

12. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.   The
    decisions of the First-tier Tribunal  are  set  aside  (though  I  have
    already observed the judge appears to have  thought  he  only  had  one
    appeal before him).  The  matter  is  remitted  to  Taylor  House  with
    directions which appear below namely:

    (1)  That no interpreter is required.

    (2)  The matter should be listed before  any  judge  other  than  Judge
         Andonian.

    (3)  The number of witnesses shall be three.

    (4)  There shall be a time estimate of 3 hours.

    (5)  As to the date of listing that will be dealt with administratively
         in due course with notice of hearing to be sent out to the parties.

Signed                              Date



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
