
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/25920/2015
                                                               IA/25921/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 January 2017                    |On 18 January 2017                   |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                        Mrs ankitaben mayukumar patel
                       Mr mayurkumar jagdishbhai patel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellants, nationals of India dates of birth respectively  9  June
    1980 and 4 July 1975, appealed against  the  Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse leave to remain dated 2 July 2015.  Their appeals  against  that
    decision came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford and on 4 July  2016
    he dismissed their appeals under the Rules.  The position was that  the
    Appellants and each of them  had  requested  an  oral  hearing.   After
    receiving notice of the hearing for 15 June 2016  in  Birmingham  their
    representatives  London  Imperial  Immigration  communicated   to   the
    Tribunal  indicating  that  they  were  no  longer  acting   and   more
    importantly  a  further  communication  on  behalf  of  the  Appellants
    indicated that they no longer  wished  to  have  an  oral  hearing  and
    requested the appeal to be decided on the papers.

2.    They  were  notified  that  this  could  not  be  done   without   the
    Respondent's consent, which  was  not  forthcoming,  and  whilst  their
    attendance was excused the hearing was still in  a  float/reserve  list
    and would be heard unless the Respondent objected  without  a  hearing.
    What happened was that at the hearing on 15  June  the  Respondent  was
    represented and a Home Office Presenting Officer made  representations,
    obviously in pursuit of an objection to a written determination on  the
    papers by the judge.  The representations  were  around  the  issue  of
    whether or not the Appellant had been involved in using  a  proxy  test
    taker when undergoing  her  TOEIC  examination  at  a  private  testing
    centre.  The judge was familiar with and recited the  case  of  SM  and
    Qadir v SSHD [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC) which  now  in  the  light  of  MA
    [2016]  UKUT  450  has  been  further  supported  by  the  decision  of
    Mujinder and Qadir [2016] EWCA Civ 1167.

3.   The judge was also provided with what have  been  referred  to  as  the
    'generic' statements of Mr  Millington  and  Miss  Collings.  It  would
    appear the evidence was taken to be at least sufficient to  engage  and
    establish that there was a case to be  addressed  i.e.   a  proxy  test
    taker had been used.  The judge had the Appellant's  bundle  but  there
    was no statement or effort  it  would  seem  to  provide  any  innocent
    explanation of  the  issues  raised  by  the  Respondent.  The  written
    statement of the Appellant (AB32 to 34) does not in terms  address  any
    explanation of the Appellant's involvement in the test taking exercise:
    Rather a different issue was actually addressed namely whether or not a
    so called "60 day letter" should have been issued to the Appellant.

4.   The statement of the Appellant  contains  a  bare  assertion  that  she
    undertook the  test,  the  certificates  are  genuine  and  she  denies
    deception but that is wholly insufficient to be an explanation or to be
    cogent evidence of her  having  undertaken  the  test.   She  gives  no
    description of the nature of the test, the issues that she was expected
    to address nor does she give any description of attendance at the  test
    centre or its circumstances or the way the test was  conducted.   There
    is nothing therefore to support her claim other than a  bare  assertion
    that she undertook the test.  It  was  perhaps  therefore  unsurprising
    that, in the light of the Home Office Presenting Officer's submissions,
    the judge concluded that the Appellant had in fact used  a  proxy  test
    taker and had not undergone the test.  In the circumstances it seems to
    me that that was a  conclusion  that  the  judge  was  wholly  properly
    entitled to reach.

5.   So far as the grounds  of  appeal  against  the  judges'  decision  are
    concerned what  is  suggested  is  that  an  innocent  explanation  was
    provided by a representatives' letter of 7 September 2015.  If,  it  is
    said, that that letter was before the judge it is not on the file but I
    do not see how  a  representatives'  letter  and  assertions  could  be
    sufficient evidence to displace the reasonable inference drawn  that  a
    proxy test taker had been used.  The grounds argue in effect that there
    was unfairness in  the  way  the  judge  dealt  with  it  and  received
    additional evidence on the date of the hearing. Insofar  as  the  judge
    did receive any further evidence,  for  example  from  Professor  Peter
    French or specific evidence from Matthew Lister and his documents  then
    the fact is that the judge was entitled to proceed with it. If  it  had
    struck him that there was any element of  unfairness  in  doing  so  he
    would have put the matter of the additional documentation to be served.
     Absent of any innocent  explanation  being  proffered  it  was  hardly
    likely even without the additional evidence, not least in the light  of
    the case law, was going to lead to any different outcome to the appeal.

6.   I therefore  conclude  that  there  was  no  unfairness  in  the  judge
    proceeding with the case at a hearing and there was  no  unfairness  in
    proceeding with the receipt of the evidence.   Ultimately  it  was  the
    choice of the Appellants not to  attend  the  hearing  and  they  would
    therefore, had they chosen to appear, had the opportunity to  make  any
    further representations on the innocent explanation but none  has  been
    forthcoming nor  what  response  there  was  to  the  further  evidence
    confirming the  ETS  exercise.   The  grounds  cite  the  cases  of  MM
    (unfairness) E & R Sudan [2014] UKUT 105 and Miah [2014] UKUT 00515 and
    a general point on the issue of disclosure but those  points  generally
    made are not supported by the evidential context asserted.

7.   It does not seem to me, not least when the Appellants have  chosen  not
    to  appear  today,  that  there  is  in  fact  any  unfairness  to  the
    Appellants.  In the circumstances when there is, even  as  of  now,  no
    innocent explanation to raise a scintilla of doubt about the outcome of
    this matter I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

8.   The second ground raised in relation to what is said to be  an  invalid
    CAS is of course essentially dealt with by  the  circumstances  of  the
    proxy test taking in any event but it seems to me in the  circumstances
    of the case the Secretary of State was entitled to take the  view  that
    she did at the relevant time and  in  the  circumstances  there  is  no
    substance in the point about the invalid  CAS  and  the  revocation  of
    sponsorship.

Decision
The appeal is dismissed.
No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   Date 14 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed   Date 14 January 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
