
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25482/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 21 November 2014             |On 24 November 2014             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                            Ruth Gzifa Afi Nutsu
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr S Subrarayan, instructed by Sivaramen
For the respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Ruth Gzifa Afi Nutsu, date of birth 1.4.89, is a citizen
    of Ghana.

 2. This is her appeal against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Pacey promulgated  7.8.14,  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent, dated 8.7.13, to refuse to grant  leave  to
    remain in the UK.  The Judge heard the appeal on 29.7.14.

 3. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Levin  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    10.10.14.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 21.11.14 as an appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the determination of Judge Pacey should be set aside.

 6. In granting permission to  appeal,  Judge  Levin  found  merit  in  the
    grounds that the judge erred in "failing to consider and by failing  to
    make any finding upon whether the child Mercedes  normally  lived  with
    the appellant and whether the eligibility requirements  of  Section  E-
    LTRPT2.3 of Appendix FM were met by reason thereof."

 7. More significant, however, is that  given  that  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State did not contain any removal  directions  and  was  a
    decision not to grant leave to remain, as opposed to a refusal to  vary
    leave to remain, there was no right of appeal against the decision  and
    thus the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to consider the appeal at all.

 8. At the time of her application on 9.3.12,  the  appellant  had  an  EEA
    Residence Card. This explains why there was no  removal  directions  in
    the decision of 8.7.13, although it appears  that  the  residence  card
    expired on 22.5.12 and was not renewed, for reasons that have not  been
    explained to me. However, the fact remains that as the application  was
    for something which the appellant did not have, leave to  remain  under
    the Immigration Rules, the decision did not remove  anything  from  her
    and did not even require her to  leave  the  UK.  The  decision  merely
    refused to grant that which she sought. I rejected the  submissions  of
    Mr Subrarayan that the decision removed her right to remain in the  UK.
    The decision could not take away that which she did  not  have,  except
    under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006,  as  amended.  There  has
    been no application and thus no decision under those Regulations. In TB
    (EEA national:  leave  to  remain)  Nigeria  [2007]  UKAIT  00020,  the
    Tribunal held that a resident permit granted under the EEA  Regulations
    is not Leave to Enter or Leave to Remain.  A person who has a Residence
    Permit does not, therefore, meet any requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules that he have Leave to Enter or Leave to Remain.

 9. Mr Kandola explained that in due course a removal decision would now be
    made, which would in due course entitle the  appellant  to  an  appeal.
    However, it is clear that a decision to refuse to grant leave to remain
    is not one of the decisions listed under section 82 of the 2002 Act and
    defined as an "immigration decision," which gives rise to  a  right  of
    appeal.

10. In Virk v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    652 it was held that although the Secretary  of  State  had  failed  to
    raise before the First-tier  Tribunal  the  issue  of  that  Tribunal's
    jurisdiction to entertain a family's application for leave  to  remain,
    the Upper Tribunal was entitled  to  dismiss  the  family's  subsequent
    appeal against the First-tier Tribunal's decision on the basis that the
    First-tier Tribunal had not had jurisdiction, notwithstanding that  the
    point had not been raised below. In the present case, the Secretary  of
    State had not complied with directions requiring  her  to  clarify  the
    basis for the statement in the refusal decision that there was no right
    of appeal. However, in R (on the application of Nirula) v FTT (IAC) and
    SSHD  [2012] EWCA Civ 1436 the Court of Appeal said that  the  Tribunal
    was entitled to take a point on its jurisdiction of its own motion.

11. It follows that there was no right of appeal against  the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State and therefore the decision cannot stand.

Conclusion & Decision:

12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I re-make the decision by  finding  that  there  was  no
                    valid appeal before the First-tier Tribunal and thus  no
                    appeal that could be decided.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
                    did not have jurisdiction to consider the merits of  the
                    appellant's claim.
Signed: [pic]     Date: 21 November 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the  Asylum  and
Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.




Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
(rule 23A (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
2005 and section 12(4)(a) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007).

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: There is no valid appeal and thus there can be no fee award.

Signed: [pic]     Date: 21 November 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

