

                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/25049/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On January 23, 2015                  |On February 13, 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MRS ALEV KILINC
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms Asanovic, Counsel, instructed by Pickup Scott
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey. The appellant entered the  United
    Kingdom on June 29,  2004  on  an  entry  clearance  visa  valid  until
    December 9, 2004 with the intention of being with  her  partner,  Yasin
    Kilinc. On August 25, 2005 she married her partner  who  is  a  Turkish
    national. She applied for limited leave to remain  under  the  European
    Community Association Agreement on December 2, 2004 but the  respondent
    refused her application on July 9, 2007. The  appellant  appealed  that
    decision on July 24, 2007 but  her  appeal  was  dismissed  and  appeal
    rights were exhausted on November 8, 2007.  The appellant gave birth to
    two children born April  23,  2006  and  October  12,  2008  and  those
    children and her husband were granted discretionary leave to remain  on
    November 2, 2012 under the Legacy Programme and  this  leave  is  valid
    until May 2, 2015.

 3. On March 28, 2013 the appellant applied for leave to  remain  based  on
    family life but this  was  refused  without  a  right  of  appeal.  The
    appellant judicially reviewed the decision to  refuse  the  application
    and by consent on February 27, 2014 the respondent agreed to review  it
    further. On June 3, 2014 the respondent refused her  application  under
    the Immigration Rules.

 4.  The  appellant  appealed  under  section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on June 12, 2014 and  the  matter  came
    before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ghaffar  (hereinafter  referred
    to as the "FtTJ") on October 1, 2014 and in a decision  promulgated  on
    October 17, 2014 he dismissed the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules
    but  allowed  the  appeal  on  article  8  ECHR  grounds  finding   the
    appellant's removal would be a disproportionate interference  with  her
    family life.

 5. The respondent lodged grounds  of  appeal  on  October  23,  2014.  She
    submitted  the  reasons  given  for  allowing  the  appeal   were   not
    exceptional and did not merit the granting of relief  under  article  8
    ECHR because the family life could continue in  Turkey.  The  fact  the
    children and husband had discretionary  leave  until  May  2015  was  a
    factor to be taken into account but it was not determinative  of  their
    ability to return to Turkey. The appellant's husband's asylum claim had
    been dismissed and no weight should have been attached to this.

 6. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McDade granted permission to appeal on
    December 2, 2014 stating there was an arguable error in  law  based  on
    the grounds.

 7. On December 23,  2014  the  appellant's  solicitors  filed  a  Rule  24
    response in which they submitted:

      a. The FtTJ was entitled to allow the application under article 8 ECHR
         as he had  given  reasons  in  paragraphs  [18]  and  [22]  of  his
         determination why he felt  it  necessary  to  consider  the  appeal
         outside of the rules.

      b. At paragraph [24] of his  determination  the  FtTJ  considered  all
         factors  (positive  and  negative)  and   concluded   removal   was
         disproportionate.

 8. The appellant was in attendance in court and was represented as set out
    above.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 9. Mr Duffy  relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal.  Whilst  there  was  no
    intermediary test of "exceptionality" he maintained that the  FtTJ  had
    to find something to allow the appeal under article 8  ECHR.  Mr  Duffy
    accepted the appellant and her husband had lived in the United  Kingdom
    for many years and that the Secretary of State had been aware  of  both
    the appellant, her husband and eldest child  since  2007  but  she  had
    rejected all claims by the appellant to be a dependant on her husband's
    claim. It was accepted the appellant's husband had leave following  his
    failed asylum claim as he had been granted discretionary leave based on
    the Legacy Programme. However, the FtTJ failed  to  take  into  account
    that article 8 does not give the appellant an automatic right to choose
    where they want to live and the FtTJ had failed to consider at all  the
    option of a life in Turkey as a family unit bearing in mind all parties
    were Turkish nationals and none of them had any  permanent  entitlement
    to remain here. The FtTJ failed to apply the "reasonableness" test  set
    out in Huang (FC) (Respondent) v.  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (Appellant) and Kashmiri (FC) (Appellant)  v.  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department (Respondent) (Conjoined  Appeals)  [2007]
    UKHL 11 and had regard to the fact the Immigration Rules were  not  met
    and could never be met because the  appellant's  husband  and  children
    only had discretionary leave.

10. Ms Asanovic submitted that the grounds of appeal did  not  identify  an
    error in law because there was no requirement to show  "exceptionality"
    before considering article 8 outside of the Rules. The FtTJ  was  aware
    the appellant had been here for ten years and her husband had been here
    for fourteen years. The grounds argued today were nothing more  than  a
    challenge to the FtTJ's findings. The  FtTJ  reminded  himself  of  the
    correct  law  and  in  particular  Razgar   [2004]   UKHL   00027,   EV
    (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 and section 19 of the Immigration Act
    2014. There FtTJ considered the appeal outside of the Rules because the
    appellant could not meet the rules as  her  husband  only  had  limited
    leave to remain. The  findings  made  were  open  to  the  FtTJ  as  he
    discounted return to Turkey finding it would be disproportionate.

11. I reserved my decision.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

12. The FtTJ allowed the appellant's appeal under  article  8  ECHR  having
    found at paragraph [17] of his determination that the appellant did not
    satisfy the Immigration Rules. At paragraph [18] he  went  on  to  find
    there were exceptional and compassionate circumstances to consider  the
    matter outside of the Rules.

13. Mr Duffy accepted that there  was  no  longer  a  requirement  to  find
    "exceptional circumstances" to consider a case outside of the Rules but
    he argued that in order to allow the appeal under article  8  the  FtTJ
    had to demonstrate that he had carried  out  a  balancing  exercise  in
    proportionality  in  determining  whether   there   were   "exceptional
    circumstances" requiring the grant of leave  outside  the  Rules  under
    Article 8.

14. Judge Grubb sitting as a High Court judge stated at paragraph [59] case
    of R (on the application of Halimatu SA Adiya Damilola Aliyu and Fatima
    Oluwakemi Aliyu) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2014]
    EWHC 3919 (Admin) re-affirmed the test to be applied as:

          "In my judgment, the Secretary  of  State  (apart  from  'complete
         code' situations) always has a discretion to  grant  leave  outside
         the Rules. That discretion  must  be  exercised  on  the  basis  of
         Article 8 considerations,  in  particular  assessing  all  relevant
         factors in determining whether a decision  is  proportionate  under
         Article 8.2. There is, in principle, no  "threshold"  criterion  of
         "arguability". I respectfully agree with what  Aikens  LJ  said  in
         this regard in MM (at [128]). However that factor,  taken  together
         with other factors such as the extent to which the Rules have taken
         into account an individual's circumstances relevant to  Article  8,
         will condition the nature and extent of the consideration  required
         as a matter of law by the Secretary of  State  of  an  individual's
         claim under Article 8 outside the Rules. If there  is  no  arguable
         case, it will suffice for the Secretary of State simply briefly  to
         say so giving adequate reasons for that conclusion.  At  the  other
         extreme, where there are arguable good grounds that  the  Rules  do
         not adequately deal with an individual's circumstances relevant  in
         assessing Article 8, the Secretary of  State  must  consider  those
         circumstances and identifiably carry  out  the  balancing  exercise
         required  by  proportionality  in  determining  whether  there  are
         "exceptional circumstances" requiring the grant  of  leave  outside
         the Rules under Article 8."

15. In deciding Mr Duffy's submission I have to have regard to  the  FtTJ's
    whole determination as this identifies to me what matters the FtTJ  was
    aware of and why he allowed the appeal.

16. The FtTJ took oral evidence from the appellant and her husband  and  he
    also had written  statements  of  evidence.  The  parties'  immigration
    history was  noted  in  paragraphs  [3],  [7],  [9]  and  [10]  of  his
    determination. The FtTJ was aware of both their nationalities  and  the
    fact the appellant's husband, in particular, had family in Turkey.

17. The FtTJ gave good reasons in paragraph [18] for considering  the  case
    outside of the Rules not  least  because  the  best  interests  of  the
    children are not covered by those Rules.  He was aware of the relevance
    of the Immigration Act 2014 and importantly he noted the family  matrix
    in paragraph [22] where he found the appellant and her husband were  in
    a genuine and subsisting marriage and they had two young  children  who
    were cared for primarily  by  the  appellant.  He  found  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect the two children to leave the United Kingdom  in
    light of the  length  of  time  they  had  been  living  here  and  had
    integrated themselves into UK life. These are of  course  factors  that
    the Tribunal must have regard to both under Section 55 of the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and Section 117B of the  2002  Act
    (as inserted by Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014).

18. The FtTJ then went on to consider the children  and  section  55  "best
    interest"  and  reminded  himself  of  the  decision  of  the  relevant
    paragraphs  of  EV.  The  Tribunal  at  paragraph  [35]  defines  "best
    interests of the children" as having regard to:

          " ... (a) their age; (b) the length of time that  they  have  been
         here; (c) how long they have been  in  education;  (c)  what  stage
         their education has reached; (d) to what extent  they  have  become
         distanced from the country  to  which  it  is  proposed  that  they
         return; (e) how renewable their connection with it may be;  (f)  to
         what  extent  they  will  have   linguistic,   medical   or   other
         difficulties in adapting to life  in  that  country;  and  (g)  the
         extent to which the  course  proposed  will  interfere  with  their
         family  life  or  their  rights  (if  they  have  any)  as  British
         citizens."

19. He considered the appeal on the basis that at the date of  hearing  the
    appellant's husband was entitled  to  remain  here,  the  ages  of  the
    children, the length of time they had lived here, the fact the youngest
    had never been to Turkey and the eldest had spent a  short  time  there
    and the children spoke English as their main language.

20. By following the decision of  EV  the  FtTJ  had  regard  to  the  best
    interests of the children set against the economic  well-being  of  the
    country and in particular she had regard to the fact their  father  was
    able to financially support both of them, the appellant and himself. He
    also took into account the fact the children and father  had  leave  to
    remain albeit that was discretionary leave.

21. The FtTJ was aware of the family circumstances in Turkey  and  attached
    no weight to the  appellant's  husband's  fear  of  being  returned  to
    Turkey.

22. Article 8 is a discretionary right and it is discretionary  because  it
    does mean applicants can choose where they want to  live.  However,  in
    this appeal the FtTJ had regard to the evidence, immigration  histories
    and circumstances and he concluded that it would be disproportionate to
    remove.

23. Whilst Mr Duffy sought to persuade me that there was an error in law  I
    am satisfied that the decision reached was properly open  to  the  FtTJ
    and I also find that there FtTJ did not err in his approach to  article
    8 ECHR. He properly dismissed the appeal under the Rules and took those
    factors along with all the other matters in allowing the appeal outside
    of the Rules.

Decision

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not disclose  an  error  in
    law. I upheld the original decision.

25. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended)  an  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order was made in the First-tier and I see  no  reason  to  amend  that
    order.



Signed:     Dated: February 13, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT

I make no alteration to the original fee award.



Signed:     Dated: February 13, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
