
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/25747/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 29 September 2017                      |On 16 October 2017                |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  mr yi he
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Fielden of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge A J M Baldwin.  To avoid  confusion  I  shall
    refer to the Secretary of State as such throughout and to Mr Yi  He  as
    the claimant.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of China who was born on 20 August 1993.   He
    made an application for entry clearance to settle in the United Kingdom
    with his parents in 2011. The Entry Clearance Officer refused to  grant
    entry clearance on 2 November 2011.  The claimant appealed against that
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal and in a decision promulgated on 31
    August 2012 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Adio  allowed  the  claimant's
    appeal.  The claimant entered the United Kingdom on 3 March  2013.   He
    was granted leave to remain in the United Kingdom to 13 March 2015.  On
    9 March 2015 he applied for further  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Secretary of State refused the claimant's application  on
    6 July 2015.  The claimant appealed against that decision to the First-
    tier Tribunal.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 3. In a decision promulgated on 5 January 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge A
    J M Baldwin allowed the appellant's appeal.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    found that the appellant's situation is in some  respects  exceptional,
    that the Secretary of State had accepted  the  judicial  decision  that
    allowed the claimant to join his father who had settled status  in  the
    UK and that the claimant has gone on to establish a private and  family
    life in the UK in the expectation that this is where he would now live.
     The judge concluded that private and family life the claimant had been
    permitted to develop lawfully in the  UK  is  such  that  it  would  be
    disproportionate and unreasonable to expect him to leave the UK.

 4. The Secretary of State applied for permission  to  appeal  against  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision and on 25 July 2017 First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Page granted permission to appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 5. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge failed to  properly  assess
    the public interest in his assessment outside  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Reliance is placed on the cases of Mostafa [2015] UKUT 00112 and  Adjei
    [2015] UKUT.  It is asserted  that  the  public  interest  outside  the
    Immigration Rules must be assessed through the lens of the  Immigration
    Rules - reliance being placed on the case of SS Congo [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    387.  Ground two asserts that the judge misdirected himself in  law  in
    finding that the claimant had an expectation that he would be permitted
    to remain in the United Kingdom.  It  is  asserted  that  the  claimant
    entered the UK at the age of 19 with  limited  leave  to  remain  until
    2015.  It was submitted that no unambiguous promise  was  made  to  the
    claimant to give rise to a legitimate expectation  of  settlement.  The
    appellant's 2012 appeal was allowed outside the Rules in  circumstances
    pertaining to the date of decision in 2011 and that it would have  been
    obvious that a further application for further leave would have  to  be
    made as an adult.  Given that the appellant's mother still has no leave
    the claimant could not possibly hope to succeed under  Rule  298.   The
    third ground asserts that the judge has failed to apply  the  mandatory
    provisions in Section 117B, has failed  to  weigh  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control and made no findings of financial independence.  It
    is asserted that judge had failed to give little weight  to  a  private
    life contracted when the status  was  precarious  contrary  to  Section
    117B(5).  It is asserted that has these matters been properly  assessed
    and taken together with the judge's negative findings  with  regard  to
    English language at paragraph 22 the scales would have weighed  against
    the claimant in the proportionality of assessment.

 6. The claimant's representative handed up  a  skeleton  argument  at  the
    beginning of the hearing.  She also provided a copy of the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio who heard the claimant's appeal in 2012.
     After a  short  adjournment  to  permit  Mr  Walker  to  consider  the
    documents the hearing recommenced.

 7. Mr Walker indicated that having now seen the decision of Judge Adio  in
    the claimant's case it was clear that the claimant  was  granted  leave
    that did not follow the decision made by  Judge  Adio.  Following  that
    decision he accepted that the  claimant  ought  to  have  been  granted
    indefinite leave to remain because the appeal was allowed on the  basis
    of the appellant's application for leave to settle as a  minor  in  the
    United Kingdom with a parent who was settled here.  He  submitted  that
    this raised the Devaseelan point and therefore the  grounds  of  appeal
    submitted by the Secretary of State were now  incorrect.   He  accepted
    that the First-tier Tribunal decision, having now seen the decision  by
    Judge Adio, was correct.  He accepted that following  the  decision  of
    Judge Adio the claimant ought to have been granted indefinite leave  to
    remain to settle in the United Kingdom and that it was an error to have
    granted him discretionary leave to remain.  In light of  those  factors
    the First-tier Tribunal decision that the  claimant  had  a  legitimate
    expectation that he would be permitted to remain in the United  Kingdom
    on the facts of this case  that  the  claimant  still  lives  with  his
    parents and is dependent on his father cannot be considered  to  be  in
    error.

 8. There was no need for me  to  hear  any  further  submissions  from  Ms
    Fielden.  Given the Secretary of State's acceptance that  in  light  of
    the decision of Judge Adio First-tier Tribunal Judge  Baldwin  did  not
    err in reaching the conclusion that on the  facts  of  this  case  (the
    starting point was the decision of Judge Adio) the  claimant  has  been
    allowed to establish private and family life in the United Kingdom with
    a legitimate expectation that he would be allowed to remain  here  such
    that it would be disproportionate and unreasonable  to  expect  him  to
    return to China.

 9. There was no error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    dismissed.     The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 12 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
