
[pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25835/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 March 2016                              |On 1 June 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                ZAHID MAHMOOD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Janjua, Janjua & Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Zahid Mahmood, was born on 13 February  1973  and  is  a
    male citizen of Pakistan.  By  a  decision  dated  10  June  2014,  the
    appellant was refused further leave to remain on a discretionary  basis
    in the United Kingdom.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  against
    that decision on Article 8 ECHR grounds; the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    (Judge Hindson) recorded at [3] that the appellant's representative (Mr
    Janjua) accepted "that the appellant cannot succeed under  the  Rules."
    The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal in a decision  promulgated
    on 2 July 2015.  Permission was initially  refused  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Astle) but granted on renewal (UTJ Linsley).

 2. At [13], Judge Hindson recorded:

         The appellant has been in the UK for about ten years.  He was  here
         legally until the breakdown of his marriage, at which point (a time
         he cannot remember but prior to August 2013) he  should  have  told
         the Home Office that this, the basis upon which he  had  permission
         to be in the UK, had ended.

 3.  The  judge  went  on  in  the  following  paragraph  to  describe  the
    appellant's immigration status as "precarious".  The Grounds of  appeal
    assert that that finding (as  to  the  illegality  of  the  appellant's
    residence) was not accurate.  Ground [2]  argues  that,  prior  to  the
    expiry  of  his  discretionary  leave,  the  appellant  had   made   an
    application for an extension  of  leave.   He  had  indicated  in  that
    application that he was no longer living with his wife  and  sought  an
    extension of leave on the basis  of  private  life  only.   Before  the
    hearing in May 2015, the appellant claimed that he completed ten years'
    lawful residence in the United Kingdom.

 4. Judge Linsley, granting permission, dealt with this point at [4]:

         It is arguable that this [finding that the appellant was not in the
         United Kingdom lawfully] was a material error of law given the need
         to weight the public interest maintaining immigration  control  was
         arguably necessary  (despite  the  concession  of  the  appellant's
         representative recording at paragraph 3 of the  decision)  for  the
         First-tier Tribunal to have considered whether the appellant  could
         succeed under the Immigration Rules at paragraph 276B on the  basis
         of his  ten  years'  continuous  lawful  residence.   However,  the
         appellant would arguably have to show that he could show sufficient
         knowledge of the English language and  sufficient  knowledge  about
         life in the UK in accordance with the  accepted  documentation  set
         out at Appendix KoLL of the Immigration Rules, and compliance  with
         the other provisions of paragraph 276B, for this ultimately to have
         been a material error.

 5. Judge Linsley had also directed that the  appellant  should  "file  any
    further evidence with the Tribunal and serve it upon the respondent ten
    days prior to the hearing date" in order that, should it be  necessary,
    the Tribunal may remake the decision at the initial hearing.   No  such
    additional evidence has been filed or served.

 6. I am not persuaded that the judge has erred in law.  Even if I were  to
    accept that the appellant had completed ten years' lawful residence and
    that the judge was incorrect at [13] where he stated that the appellant
    had not been in the United Kingdom legally after the breakdown  of  his
    marriage, it is not at all clear on  what  basis  the  appellant  might
    succeed in a claim for further leave to remain.  As Judge  Linsley  has
    pointed out in granting permission, the appellant would  have  to  show
    that any error on the part of  the  judge  was  a  failure  by  him  to
    consider whether the appellant might qualify under paragraph  276B  the
    appellant would need to show that he was in a position to  satisfy  the
    requirements of that provision.  He has not provided any such  evidence
    and, indeed, his failure to show proficiency in  the  English  language
    was recorded by the judge at [15]  ("he  does  not  speak  English,  as
    evidenced by his reliance on an interpreter in the hearing.")

 7. As  Judge  Linsley  also  indiactes,  the  judge's  possibly  incorrect
    assessment of the appellant's immigration status  may  have  influenced
    his assessment of  proportionality  under  Article  8  ECHR.   However,
    although the judge refers  in  general  terms  to  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control  [17]  he  has  not  stressed  the  fact  that  the
    appellant was (as the judge thought) living  illegally  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The  judge's  reference  to  the  precarious  nature  of  the
    appellant's immigration status [14] is not  misplaced  given  that  the
    appellant had only been granted the discretionary leave  to  remain  in
    order to prove the subsistence of a marriage which had, in fact, broken
    down.  I do not find that the judge's analysis of the appeal on Article
    8 ECHR grounds is flawed for the reasons given in the grounds of appeal
    or at all.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 30 May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed                              Date 30 May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
