
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25603/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 June 2014                               |On 2 July 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB

                                   Between

                               DIRISA MULINDWA
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Daykin, Counsel, instructed by Tuckers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL

1.   This is an appeal that was allowed on Article 8 grounds at  the  First-
    tier.  For clarity and  convenience,  however,  I  will  refer  to  the
    parties as they were at the First-tier hearing.

2.   The Secretary of State had been given permission to  appeal  against  a
    decision allowing the appellant's appeal on Article  8  grounds.   This
    decision was by First-tier Tribunal Judge Thomas,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 31 March 2014.

3.   At the hearing before me Mr Jarvis, for the Secretary of State,  sought
    leave to withdraw the  Secretary  of  State's  case  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The basis of this  application  was  that,  on  the  factual
    findings, the requirements under Appendix FM for  leave  to  remain  on
    Article 8 grounds as a parent, with reference to  the  exception  (EX1)
    appear to have been met.  Although this aspect was  not  considered  in
    the First-tier hearing  the  various  challenges  to  the  approach  to
    Article 8, based on Gulshan  and  other  cases,  became  academic.   Mr
    Jarvis indicated that the appellant would be given leave, initially for
    a 30 month period.

4.   There were some discussions as to whether the appellant would  have  to
    remain on the ten year route to settlement or  whether,  alternatively,
    he could show that he came within Rules other  than  EX1  alone,  which
    would permit him to switch to the five year  route.   No  clear  answer
    emerged, but the appellant's representatives will consider  the  matter
    further  and  advise  the  appellant  on  the  possibility  of  further
    submissions being made at a later date.

5.   Having considered the matter I gave leave for  the  withdrawal  of  the
    Secretary of State's case in accordance with Rule 17  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

6.   As a consequence of the withdrawal the judge's  decision  allowing  the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds stands.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb
