
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/25850/2015
      IA/25854/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 27 January 2017                        |On 23 May 2019                   |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between


                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     SS
                                     JS

                           (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Respondent:    Mr M Azmi of Counsel instructed by Crowngate Law
Solicitors
For the Appellant:     Ms A Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


                                  Anonymity

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellants. This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.




1.    The Secretary of State appeals with permission  against  the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Raikes sitting at Birmingham.  For ease in
    following this decision I shall continue to refer to SS and JS  as  the
    Appellants.  They are mother and daughter and they had appealed against
    the Secretary of State's decision to make  refuse  them  further  leave
    pursuant to the  Immigration  Rules  and  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

2.    The Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  allowed  the  Appellants'
    appeal based on the Immigration Rules

3.    The Secretary of State's ground of appeal is headed as being a  single
    ground but is not easy to follow. It can best summarised as follows:

    1) At paragraph 30 of her decision the Judge said that  the  Appellants
       could not meet the Immigration  Rules  under  Appendix  FM,  yet  at
       paragraph 31 she said that they meet the requirements  of  paragraph
       276 ADE(1)(vi);
    2) The First Appellant was born in 1975 and the  Second  Appellant  was
       born in 2003. Paragraph 276ADE requires the applicant to be over  18
       years of age and therefore it was not open to the Judge to  consider
       her case under this route;
    3) Paragraph 33 of the Judge's decision said that Paragraph  276ADE(vi)
       applies to both Appellants because, "If removed the Appellants would
       be unable to maintain the relationship with the father as it  stands
       today and there would be in my view therefore be  real  difficulties
       particularly in respect of the child with having to adapt in India."
       There was no relationship with the father.
    4) The duty to protect the best  interests  of  the  child  was  wholly
       unreasoned and there had been a failure to conduct a proportionality
       exercise.

4.    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchison.

5.    At the hearing before me Ms Aboni made very brief  submissions  saying
    that the Judge had misdirected herself in  allowing  the  appeal  under
    Paragraph 276ADE. She said the appeal should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for re-hearing. She said there had been no  consideration
    of Article 8 outside of the Rules.

6.    Mr Azmi said that when the decision of the Judge is  looked  at  as  a
    whole it would be seen that there was no  material  error  of  law.  At
    paragraph 31 the Judge was very clear. The Judge was aware of the  sub-
    paragraphs at ADE. Was the Judge in  error  in  respect  of  the  First
    Appellant or both Appellants? Mr Azmi said that looking  at  the  "very
    significant obstacles" matter required consideration of the full facts.
    The First Appellant would be returning to India on her  own.  Maybe  it
    would have been better for the Judge to  have  dealt  with  the  matter
    separately for each Appellant but that was of no real consequence here.
    The  Judge  had  referred  to  the  public  interest  in  relation   to
    considering the matter outside of the Rules. Mr Azmi said that I should
    find that there was no material error of law and that I  should  uphold
    the Judge's decision.

7.    Ms Aboni replied to say that there was consideration of  the  case  by
    the Judge under the Immigration Rules at paragraph 34 and that required
    consideration of the public interests. She said I should remit the case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

8.    I had reserved my decision.

9.    Paragraph 276ADE, in so far is relevant, provides,

     "The requirements to be met by an application for leave to  remain  on
    the grounds of private life in the UK are  that  at  the  date  of  the
    application, the applicant:...


    (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the  UK
    for at least 7 years..."....

      (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged  18  years  or  above,  has
    lived continuously in the UK for less  than  20years  (discounting  any
    period of imprisonment) but there would be very  significant  obstacles
    to the applicant's integration into the country tor which he would have
    to go if required to leave the UK".

10.   The child in this case arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  in  2013  and
    therefore has not been in the United Kingdom for more than 7 years. The
    difficulty with the Judge's decision is  that  although  she  correctly
    recognised that because  the  Appellants  had  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom only in 2013 and that  therefore  the  child  could  not   meet
    Paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iv), she went on to say at paragraph 34 that the
    Appellants did meet Paragraph 276ADE (1) (iv). The Secretary  of  State
    rightly points out that (a) Paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  only  applies  to
    those under 18 in any event.

11.   I have considered whether there may merely be typographical errors  in
    the decision, but in my judgement, it  is  quite  clear  that  even  by
    correcting some of the  references,  the  difficulties  remain  because
    there is inadequate reasoning of the findings in respect of  the  "very
    significant  obstacles"  which  would  arise  by  a  removal   of   the
    Appellants.

12.   Therefore, despite Mr Azmi's valiant efforts in  seeking  to  persuade
    me to uphold the Judge's  decision,  in  my  judgment,  the  Judge  did
    materially err in law for the reasons identified by  the  Secretary  of
    State. The Judge appears to have confused the requirements of Paragraph
    276ADE in respect of the different sub-paragraphs  and  the  Article  8
    assessment is wholly deficient. Indeed, the Judge herself said that she
    did not need to consider the matter outside of the  Immigration  Rules.
    The errors are irredeemable and cannot be  overlooked  as  being  of  a
    technical nature.

13.   I therefore conclude that there will have to be a complete  re-hearing
    of the matter. That re-hearing  shall  take  place  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. It will be a re-hearing in respect of all issues. None of the
    findings of the Judge shall stand. It will be a matter for  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to set any further directions.



Notice of Decision

There was a material  error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal.
The Secretary of State's appeal against it is allowed.
The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


An anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                             Date 18 March 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
















