
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25090/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|Heard on 11th of December 2017           |on 10th of January 2018           |
|Prepared on 2nd of January 2018          |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                              MR KULWANT SINGH
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Hashim of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of India born on 11th  of  April  1961.  He
      appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Caroll
      sitting at Taylor House on 6th  of  March  2017  which  dismissed  the
      Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated 23rd  of
      June 2015. That decision was to refuse the Appellant's application for
      leave to remain under the long residency provisions and Article  8  of
      the Human Rights Convention.


   2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally in August 1993.  In
      the same month he made an asylum application which was refused by  the
      Respondent in September 1996.  The  Appellant  appealed  against  that
      refusal but his appeal was dismissed by the Tribunal in July 1998. The
      Appellant remained in the United Kingdom on  temporary  admission  but
      absconded. On 20th of January 2009 he  submitted  an  application  for
      leave to remain on the grounds of long residency which was refused  in
      October 2009 with no right of appeal. The Appellant  remained  in  the
      United Kingdom thereafter and on 3rd of December  2014  applied  again
      for leave to remain  on  the  basis  of  his  private  life  and  long
      residency. It was the refusal of that application which gave  rise  to
      the present proceedings.

The Respondent's Decision

   3. The Respondent accepted that the Appellant  satisfied  sub  paragraphs
      (i) and (ii) of paragraph 276ADE (1) of the Immigration Rules that  is
      that the Appellant did not fall  for  refusal  under  the  suitability
      requirements and had made a valid application for leave to  remain  on
      the grounds of private life. However, the Appellant had not  submitted
      sufficient documentary evidence to prove that  he  had  lived  in  the
      United Kingdom for 21 years and 3 months because there was  a  gap  in
      the documentation between 2002 and 2008. The Appellant could not  show
      continuous residence in United Kingdom for  at  least  20  years.  Nor
      could he show that he had lived continuously in the United Kingdom for
      less than 20 years but there would be very  significant  obstacles  to
      his integration into India. The Appellant had spent over 32  years  in
      India before arriving in the United Kingdom. He would  not  have  lost
      all ties to his home country nor  would  he  be  unfamiliar  with  the
      language and culture of India if he were to be returned there.

The Decision at First Instance

   4. At [18] of the determination the Judge noted that  the  Appellant  had
      had no contact with the Respondent between 1998 and 2009. There was  a
      dearth of  credible  documentary  or  oral  evidence  to  support  the
      Appellant's claimed continuous residence since 1993.  There  were  for
      example no tenancy agreements, employment  documents  or  evidence  of
      funds. The Appellant could not show that he had lived continuously  in
      United Kingdom for at least 20 years nor  could  he  demonstrate  very
      significant obstacles to his integration into  India  is  required  to
      leave the United Kingdom. The Appellant did  not  have  a  partner  or
      children in the United Kingdom and there was no evidence from  any  of
      the family members the Appellant claimed to have in this country.  The
      evidence as to the Appellant's private life was  the  Judge  found  at
      [20] scant to say the least. There were no  exceptional  circumstances
      and the appeal was dismissed.


The Onward Appeal

   5. The Appellant appealed against this decision arguing  that  the  Judge
      had failed to make adequate findings in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
      oral evidence on the issue of continuous  lawful  evidence.  Crucially
      the Judge had overlooked an important letter from  the  Respondent  to
      the Appellant dated 12th of October  2009  which  confirmed  that  the
      Appellant had "remained in the United  Kingdom  unlawfully  since  his
      Tribunal concluded on 21st of July 1998 and  upheld  the  decision  to
      refuse his asylum application". Further the Respondent had written  to
      the Appellant's member of Parliament on  5th  of  March  2013  with  a
      chronology of the Appellant's immigration  history.  This  had  stated
      next to the entry dated 21st of July 1998 that the Appellant's  appeal
      against refusal of asylum had been dismissed  and  "he  remained  here
      unlawfully since".


   6. The Judge had erred in failing to determine how likely it  would  have
      been for the Appellant in the United Kingdom unlawfully, to have  left
      and return to the United Kingdom during the period  between  1993  and
      2002. The Judge also erred at [12] of the determination  in  rejecting
      the evidence of a witness who had not attended. The Judge had rejected
      at [17] a letter from the Appellant's general practitioner  confirming
      the Appellant had been registered with the practice since 1993 because
      the letter gave no further information as the  dates  of  appointments
      attended  by  the  Appellant.  That  letter  had  not  been   properly
      considered although it established continuous residence. The Judge had
      given inadequate reasons for rejecting the claim under Article 8.


   7. The application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers  before
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Page on  12th  of  October  2017.  In
      granting permission to appeal he noted the argument that the Judge had
      overlooked the 2009 letter. Permission was granted on all grounds.


   8. The Respondent replied to the grant on 8th of  November  2017  stating
      that the Judge  had  given  adequate  and  rational  reasons  for  the
      conclusions reached as to the credibility of the  Appellant's  claims.
      The weight to be attached to witness evidence was  a  matter  for  the
      Judge and conclusions on weight should not be interfered with  in  the
      absence of a material mistake  of  fact  or  perversity.  The  alleged
      concession in the October 2009 letter from  the  Respondent  had  been
      withdrawn by the refusal letter under appeal dated 23rd of June 2015.

The Hearing Before Me

   9. In oral submissions counsel relied on the points made in  the  grounds
      namely that the Judge appeared to have overlooked the letter from  the
      Respondent in 2009 confirming  that  the  Appellant  had  remained  in
      United Kingdom unlawfully and had overlooked the letter to the  Member
      of Parliament. If the Judge had  looked  at  that  correspondence  the
      result of the case would have been different. The patient  records  of
      the Appellant's GP Dr Gill were exhibited to the  Appellant's  bundle.
      These showed entries for  example  in  2001  that  the  Appellant  had
      attended the GP surgery on 21st of September 2001 complaining of  neck
      ache. The Appellant must therefore have been in the United Kingdom  at
      that time.


  10. In reply, the Presenting Officer stated that the Respondent  may  have
      accepted that the Appellant had been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
      period of time but had changed her position in her letter dated  2015.
      The  Judge  was  not  required  to  accept  the  Respondent's  earlier
      concession because it was withdrawn. The Appellant's response to  this
      submission was that it was  unfair  and  unjust  if  the  Respondent's
      withdrawal in 2015 was allowed to stand. The Judge should have  looked
      at the earlier correspondence.

Findings

  11. The Appellant's arrival in the United  Kingdom  was  accepted  by  the
      Respondent in the refusal letter under  appeal  as  being  an  illegal
      entry on 16th of August 1993. The Appellant's  application  was  dated
      3rd of December 2014  and  thus  provided  the  Appellant  could  show
      continuous residence for that period  he  would  satisfy  the  20-year
      requirement. The medical evidence he produced to the Judge only showed
      that he had been registered with his GP since 1993.  Further  evidence
      now produced in the form of his patient record showed  that  while  he
      did not attend the GP surgery between December 1993 and June  2000  he
      did attend accident and emergency on at least 4 occasions during  that
      time.


  12. The Respondent wrote  two  letters  stating  that  the  Appellant  had
      remained unlawfully in the United Kingdom following the  dismissal  of
      his asylum  appeal  in  1998.  The  1st  letter  was  written  by  the
      Respondent to the Appellant's solicitors on 12th of October  2009  and
      the 2nd was written by the Respondent to  the  Appellant's  Member  of
      Parliament on 5th of March 2013. The Respondent could not be  expected
      to prove a negative. The two letters in question indicate  that  there
      was no information before the Respondent that the Appellant  had  left
      the country between 1998 and the submission of his  2009  application.
      This was a period of 11 years during which it now appears he  attended
      his GP surgery and a hospital.


  13. The Judge was not persuaded  by  supporting  evidence  called  on  the
      Appellant's behalf  at  the  hearing.  The  weight  to  be  placed  on
      statements made by people who did not attend to be cross  examined  on
      those statements was a matter for the Judge who was entitled to reject
      that evidence for the reasons she gave. What the Judge had before  her
      were two letters from the Home Office seeming to indicate that it  was
      not disputed that the Appellant had remained  in  the  United  Kingdom
      unlawfully. That is not quite the same as saying that  the  Respondent
      accepted that the Appellant had  remained  unlawfully  notwithstanding
      the clear wording of  the  letters.  Nevertheless,  they  represent  a
      concession made on two separate occasions by the Respondent  that  the
      continuous residence in the United Kingdom of the  Appellant  was  not
      challenged.


  14. The Respondent's case is that she wishes to withdraw those concessions
      and put the Appellant to proof  of  his  stay  in  this  country.  The
      Appellant argues that the withdrawal of the concessions freely made by
      the Respondent at  an  earlier  stage  is  unfair.  If  there  was  no
      supporting evidence produced by the Appellant to show his residence in
      this  country  during  the  "missing  years"  I  would  not  have  any
      objections to the Respondent's withdrawal of the concession since  the
      position would be that the Appellant did not have any evidence of  his
      own but was relying on the supposition  of  the  Respondent  that  the
      Appellant had been in this country. Taken with  the  unreliability  of
      the Appellant's witnesses that would not in my view make it unjust for
      the Respondent to withdraw the concession and put the Appellant proof.




  15. The Judge's objection to the medical evidence was that a  letter  from
      the GP had given no further information as to dates  of  appointments.
      It does not appear that the patient  records  were  before  the  Judge
      since they appear  for  the  first  time  in  the  Appellant's  bundle
      produced for the hearing before me along with a  letter  from  the  GP
      dated 29th of November 2017. All that the Judge appears to have had at
      first instance was a letter from the GP Dr Gill dated 27th of February
      2008 confirming that the Appellant had been a patient of the  practice
      since 1993. That  did  not  of  itself  take  the  case  significantly
      further. It was not an error for  the  Judge  to  fail  to  deal  with
      evidence not put before her.


  16. The only basis on which the patient records produced  to  me  but  not
      before Judge Caroll can be admitted (in relation to the issue of error
      of law) is under the principles in  the  well-known  case  of  Ladd  v
      Marshall. The evidence must satisfy a twofold test. Firstly,  are  the
      records relevant to the issues in the case and  secondly  was  it  not
      reasonable to have obtained this  evidence  before  the  hearing?  The
      patient records are undoubtedly relevant to the case since  they  deal
      with the missing years and indicate that  the  Appellant  was  in  the
      United Kingdom during that time.


  17. Could they not have been obtained before the hearing?  The  difficulty
      here was that the Appellant was no longer represented by his  previous
      representatives by the time of the hearing before Judge Caroll.  Those
      representatives came off the record on 2nd of February 2017 just  over
      a month before the hearing at Taylor House. That put an  unrepresented
      Appellant in obvious difficulties for example in knowing what evidence
      he needed to produce and what enquiries had been made thus far.


18.  On that basis, I am prepared to admit the patient records  which  show
    that the Appellant was in this country at all material times  and  that
    therefore it would not be right for  the  Respondent  to  withdraw  the
    statements made by her on 2 previous occasions that the  Appellant  was
    living unlawfully in this country. The Appellant has  not  been  served
    previously with removal directions and the clock has not stopped. I  am
    satisfied on the basis of the evidence that there was a material  error
    of law in disregarding the letters from the Respondent which  confirmed
    that the Appellant had been in the  United  Kingdom  for  the  relevant
    periods.  The  Respondent  could  not  in  all  fairness  withdraw  her
    concession. As such I set the decision  at  first  instance  aside  and
    proceed to remake the decision.  There  is  no  need  to  take  further
    evidence or remit the case back to the First-tier as matters are clear.
    I am satisfied that the documentary evidence that is to say the patient
    records taken with the two letters from the Respondent  are  sufficient
    to show that the Appellant has been in this country  for  at  least  20
    years continuously. I  therefore  remake  the  decision  this  case  by
    allowing the Appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
    law and I have set it aside. I remake  the  decision  by  allowing  the
    Appellant's appeal

Appellant's appeal allowed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 2nd of January 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Although I have overturned the decision at first instance, I do not  disturb
the decision not to make a fee award since I have allowed the appeal on  the
basis of evidence produced after the hearing.

Signed this 2nd of January 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
