
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA 25449 2011

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Piccadilly Exchange                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 March 2014                              |On 20 May 2014               |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                        DEPUTY TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                            CHAUDHRY NAEEM YOUSAF
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Ali, Counsel instructed by M and K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This has proved to be a surprisingly difficult  case.   It  concerns  an
    appeal by a citizen of Pakistan against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing his appeal against a decision refusing to  revoke  a
    deportation order made against him.

 2. This case has a  long  history.   A  deportation  order  was  originally
    contemplated following the appellant  being  sentenced  to  four  years'
    imprisonment when he was one of a group of men indulging in a  self-help
    remedy in pursuance of rent due from  recalcitrant  tenants.  The  Crown
    Court took a particularly dim view of the  appellant's  conduct  because
    the tenants were themselves very vulnerable people being asylum  seekers
    without much understanding of their rights in the United Kingdom.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed an appeal against a decision  to  make
    the appellant the subject of a deportation order and that decision stood
    but there was a subsequent appeal against a decision refusing to  revoke
    the deportation order and that appeal was successful before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  It is clear there had been some change in  circumstances
    between the two events and the First-tier Tribunal  hearing  the  appeal
    against the revocation decision was  impressed  by  evidence  about  the
    appellant's role in his family and the dependency of  his  children  and
    sick wife.

 4. This decision was criticised not for what it decided  but  for  what  it
    failed to do.  It did not have proper regard to the public  interest  in
    reaching the decision and  for  that  reason  an  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was successful. A Deputy Judge of the  Upper  Tribunal  allowed
    the Secretary of State's appeal and made a decision which proved  to  be
    somewhat troublesome.  The Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge remitted the case
    to the First-tier with certain directions which are set out at paragraph
    18 of the determination of 5 September 2012 and  this  required  further
    submissions to be made on the existing evidence.

 5. With the benefit of hindsight we find  it  surprising  that  the  Deputy
    Judge did not make provision for providing up-to-date evidence on  human
    rights issues but it is right to say that both parties  agreed  that  no
    further oral evidence would be called.

 6. We note that the decision of the Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge was dated 5
    September 2012 and was promulgated on 6 September 2012.  This followed a
    hearing on 3 September 2012 and so far at least the Tribunal was looking
    quite efficient.  For reasons we have not been able  to  ascertain  that
    determination was re-promulgated and went out for the second time on  26
    June 2013.  This led to a  hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  3
    October  2013.   On  that  occasion  there  was   clearly   considerable
    misunderstanding.  Mr Ali, who  appears  before  us,  appeared  on  that
    occasion and he wanted to argue the case on the basis  of  the  existing
    findings of fact but the First-tier Tribunal Judge decided that  it  was
    open to him to re-make all of the findings because of the way  in  which
    the case had been  put  before  him  by  the  directions  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 7. Mr Harrison says that the approach  taken  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge was the approach agreed by the Secretary  of  State  and  followed
    points made in the skeleton argument submitted by the Secretary of State
    in accordance with directions.  He said that the case  took  its  likely
    course and this should have been obvious to Mr Ali or those  instructing
    him. They should have come along prepared to deal with it.  We see  some
    force in that but the fact remains that none  of  the  findings  of  the
    determination allowing the appeal had been criticised and we  understand
    Mr Ali's sense of grievance on behalf of his client when he  found  that
    points were in issue that he was not expecting to be in issue.  Not only
    were they in issue they were resolved against him.

 8. However the real point of concern is that the Tribunal did  not  receive
    up-to-date evidence dealing with the present  relationship  between  the
    appellant  and  his  wife  and  the  present  relationship  between  the
    appellant and his children.   The  elder  child  now  has  achieved  her
    majority but the younger child is not yet 18.

 9. We wish to make it plain that we do not in any way want to prejudice the
    outcome of any further hearing but it is trite law  to  say  that  these
    relationships could at least be very important matters in any Article  8
    balancing exercise even in the context of a deportation appeal.

10. Although we have very considerable sympathy for the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge who was conspicuously trying to do the right thing  in  accordance
    with directions we find that the need for up-to-date evidence on Article
    8 matters is so imperative that it  outweighed  the  directions  of  the
    Tribunal and the judge erred by not allowing up-to-date evidence  to  be
    introduced into proceedings.

11. There had been a gap of about thirteen  months  between  the  first  and
    second  promulgations  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision   and   this
    unexplained delay must have played its part in this confusion.

12. We find therefore that the First-tier Tribunal did err and we set  aside
    that decision and we direct the case be heard again  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which will no doubt issue its own standard  directions  in  the
    expectation that all issues will be at large subject to usual principles
    relating to matters being reheard.

13. We do not wish to predict the outcome of that case but it  seems  to  us
    that the past findings are of limited value  what  will  matter  is  the
    present evidence of what is going on in that family although all matters
    that need to be introduced can.

14. Therefore we find the First-tier Tribunal erred in law, set  aside  that
    decision and substitute a decision allowing the  appeal  to  the  extent
    that we direct the case be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.  This
    must be decided by a judge who has not yet determined this appeal.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 19 May 2014                    |








