
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA 25898 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 March 2014                              |On 28th April 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    B S N
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant Mr J Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Masih of Counsel instructed by Crowngate Law
Solicitors
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent  to  this  appeal,  hereinafter  "the  claimant",  appeal
    successfully to the  First-tier  Tribunal  a  decision  of  the  present
    appellant, hereinafter "the Secretary of State", a  decision  to  remove
    him from the United Kingdom.

 2. Much of  this  determination  concerns  the  claimant's  children  whose
    anonymity needs to be preserved. Pursuant to rule 14(1) of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 I make an  order  prohibiting  the
    disclosure of publication of any information likely to lead  members  of
    the public to identify the appellant's children and any  breach  of  the
    order shall be punishable as a contempt of court.

 3. The children are aged almost 16 years, 13  years  and  almost  5  years.
    They are the children of the claimant's wife by an earlier  relationship
    and they are British citizens.

 4. The claimant's conduct has been somewhat discreditable.  He came to  the
    United Kingdom in 2012 as a visitor although it has been established  by
    the First-tier Tribunal that he came at a  time  when  his  relationship
    with the woman who is now his wife had been established and  he  entered
    the United Kingdom not intending to return.

 5. Mr Singh says, with considerable  justification,  that  this  makes  his
    removal more than ordinarily important because it is undesirable for the
    purposes of maintaining immigration control that a person who flouts the
    law in this way is seen to get away with it.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge rejected evidence that the claimant's wife
    could not manage without his presence in the United Kingdom.  She  found
    that her mother had helped her in the past and could be expected  to  do
    so again.

 7. Nevertheless  at  paragraph  29  of  the  determination  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge decided that removing the  claimant  would  have  such  a
    detrimental effect on the family life established in the United  Kingdom
    that  was  disproportionate  to  the  proper  purpose   of   maintaining
    immigration control and so allowed the claimant's appeal.

 8. Mr Singh argues that it is a significant error on the part of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge not to have spelt out the importance of  maintaining
    immigration control and particularly in this case where the claimant has
    behaved in this discreditable way.   I  understand  that  point  but  am
    impressed by Ms Masih's contention  that  it  was  acknowledged  in  the
    determination that the claimant had behaved in this way and it is  plain
    from later paragraphs that the First-tier Tribunal Judge took account of
    all the circumstances including the need  to  maintain  the  immigration
    system.

 9. Frankly it would have been better if the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had
    spelt out in more detail that she appreciated this points but  I  cannot
    read the determination sensibly and assume that she was unaware  of  the
    claimant's behaviour to  regard  it  as  unimportant  because  she  made
    express findings about it. It is clearly something on her mind with  the
    other matters to be considered.

10. Mr Singh also argued in accordance with the  grounds  that  it  was  not
    right to allow the appeal when the situation could have been avoided  by
    the claimant returning to his country of which  he  is  a  national  and
    making an application in accordance with the  Rules.   This  would  have
    only involved a relatively short period of separation and  is  something
    that should not have  been  expected  to  impact  too  severely  on  the
    children of his new family.  Again this is a point made  perfectly  well
    by Mr Singh.  However the judge's findings at paragraph 29 are clear and
    they are that the children's education  should  not  be  interrupted  by
    reason of relocation to India.

11. The  judge  also  found  that  the  youngest  child  in  particular  had
    developed a close relationship  with  the  claimant  who  had  played  a
    central role in the lives of all of  the  children  and  these  are  the
    circumstances  taken  into  account  when  the  judge  carried  out  the
    balancing exercise.

12. The First-tier Tribunal Judge acknowledged  the  need  for  "exceptional
    circumstances" required by  the  rules  and  the  Secretary  of  State's
    understanding of them.

13. She also reminded herself, correctly, of  the  statutory  obligation  to
    put first the interests of the children in the appeal.

14. She then allowed the appeal.

15. I remind myself of the guidance given by the House of Lords in the well-
    known case of R  (Iran)  &  Ors  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at paragraph 15  where  Brooke  LJ  Vice-
    President of the Court of Appeal, Civil Division  quoted  with  approval
    Lord Phillips MR in English v Emery Reimbold & Strick  Ltd  [2002]  EWCA
    Civ 605, to the effect that Tribunal's  decision  should  stand  if  the
    reasoning  is  discernable  and  lawful.   Although  clarity  is  to  be
    encouraged a decision does not become unlawful because points could have
    been made better or  because  a  different  decision  maker  might  have
    reached a different conclusion on the same facts.

16. In my experience when  appeals  are  allowed  under  article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights it is rarely because of  the  effect
    of removal on a person's own private and family life but because of  how
    a person's removal would impact on  others,  particularly  children.   A
    great deal depends on  the  particular  impression  made  by  particular
    witnesses and of course I was not there to hear what  sort  of  evidence
    was given.  What is clear is that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found
    that the removal of the claimant would interfere disproportionately with
    the lives of the children in the United Kingdom.  Reasons were given for
    that including the particularly  close  relationship  with  the  younger
    child and the critical stage in the education of the older children.  It
    is also plain from the determination that the  aggravating  features  of
    the offence identified by Mr Singh were appreciated.

17. I have decided that the judge has reached a conclusion open  to  her  on
    the facts for the reasons given.  Cases involving children are likely to
    be contentious and are likely to produce decisions which  are  intensely
    fact-specific and to some extent dependent on the importance  particular
    judges give to maintaining family life in particular  circumstances.   I
    cannot say after reading the determination that the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  misdirected  herself  in  any  way  or   reached   a   conclusion
    irrationally or for reasons not open to her and  so,  not  without  some
    hesitation, I decided that I  must  dismiss  the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal and that is my decision.

     Decision

     Secretary of State's appeal dismissed




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 16 April 2014                  |



