
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)            Appeal Number: Ia/25236/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined without a hearing           |Determination promulgated|
|at Field House                         |                         |
|on 10th September 2013                 |On 18th September 2013   |
|                                       |                         |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SPENCER


                                   Between


                                NERITAN KAMBO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania, born on 4th  August  1979.   His
    appeal against the decision of the respondent,  made  on  19th  October
    2012, refusing his application for permanent residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom under regulation 15(1)(f) of the Immigration (European Economic
    area) Regulations 2006, as a person  who  had  resided  in  the  United
    Kingdom for a period of 5 years and who at the end of that period was a
    family member who had retained the right  of  residence  in  accordance
    with regulation 10(5), was dismissed under  the  regulations,  after  a
    hearing before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hague,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 14th March 2013.

 2. On 29th April 2013 I granted permission  to  appeal  on  the  following
    grounds:

          "It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal judge made an  error
          of law in stating that because a decision to remove the appellant
          had not been made article 8 of the ECHR was  not  engaged.  Since
          the appellant expressly raised human rights grounds of appeal  in
          the statement attached to his notice of appeal and in response to
          a request to state additional grounds, it is  arguable  that  the
          First-tier Tribunal judge made an error  of  law  in  failing  to
          determine them, see the decisions of the Court of Appeal in JM  v
          Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA  Civ  1402
          and Lamichhane v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
          [2012] EWCA Civ 260."

 3. I indicated that for the reasons which I had  given  I  had  taken  the
    provisional view that the appeal to the Upper Tribunal  in  respect  of
    the  failure  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  to   consider   the
    appellant's human rights grounds of appeal under article 8 of the  ECHR
    should be allowed without a hearing  and  that  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to First-tier Tribunal Judge Hague in order for him to re-make
    his decision by considering these grounds. I invited submissions to the
    contrary to be made to the Upper Tribunal within 21 days of the date of
    the order.   No submissions to the contrary have been received  by  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 4. In these circumstances without a hearing, pursuant to rule  34  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  I  set  aside  the
    determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  grounds  that,  as
    indicated in the grant of permission to appeal, the First-tier Tribunal
    judge made an error on a point of  law  in  his  determination  of  the
    appeal.  I remit the appeal to First-tier Tribunal Judge Hague  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal for him to re-make the decision after consideration
    of the appellant's human rights grounds of appeal under  article  8  of
    the ECHR, pursuant to  section  12(2)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and paragraph 7.2(a)  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statements.


Signed                                  Dated



P A Spencer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

