
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/25618/2014
                                                               IA/25627/2014
                                                               IA/25636/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19th January 2016                 |On 29th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                       MRS MARIAM WASIM ASLAM BUTT (1)
                                   MB (2)
                                   AB (3)
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling, Counsel, instructed by Goodfellows
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS







  Introduction

    1. The first appellant is a citizen of India born on 16th May 1974.  The
       second and third appellants are also citizens of India. They are  her
       children born on 29th June 2006 and 18th June 2011 respectively.  The
       first appellant entered the UK first on a work visa  in  31st  August
       2004. She made other visits after this,  and  has  been  continuously
       present since approximately December 2005. The second  appellant  and
       third appellants have  lived  in  the  UK  continuously  since  their
       births. On 17th December 2011 the  appellants  made  a  human  rights
       claim which was refused on 4th December 2012. On  5th  November  2013
       the first appellant made a claim based on long  residence  which  was
       refused on 19th December 2013. On 25th April 2014 the  appellant  was
       served with notice as an overstayer.

    2. On 9th May 2014 the appellants raised additional human rights grounds
       in a one stop notice. On 11th June 2014 the application was  refused;
       and on 17th June 2014 the appellants appealed against the decision of
       the respondent. This appeal against the  decision  was  dismissed  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge R G Handley in a determination  promulgated
       on the 4th December 2014.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted by the Vice President of  the  Upper
       Tribunal on 24th August 2015 following  a  grant  of  permission  for
       judicial review by Mr Justice Blake dated 7th July 2015  against  the
       previous refusal of permission by  the  Upper  Tribunal.  Mr  Justice
       Blake noted that the second appellant's period of residence  had  not
       been factored into the assessment  under  EX1  when  considering  the
       reasonableness of expecting him to leave the UK as a  child  who  had
       lived in this country for more than seven years.

    4. I found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  at  a  hearing
       dated 17th November 2015 for the reasons which are appended at  Annex
       A below. The remaking of the appeal was adjourned.

  Evidence & Submissions

    5. The first appellant gave evidence mainly in English but  occasionally
       through the Tribunal Hindi interpreter, whom she confirmed she  could
       understand. Mr Abraham  Sillah,  a  family  friend,  also  gave  oral
       evidence to the Tribunal in English. Both  witnesses  confirmed  that
       their statements were true and correct, and  their  evidence  to  the
       Tribunal. The second  appellant  gave  evidence  to  confirm  he  had
       written his letter and answered a few questions from Mr  Melvin.   In
       summary the totality of the evidence is as follows.

    6. The first appellant came to the UK first in 2004 for three months  on
       a work visa as a make-up artist for some Indian performers.  She  had
       done training and a couple of  years  work  as  a  beautician  before
       travelling to the UK whilst she lived at home with  her  family.   It
       was on this visit to the UK she met her future husband Mr Wasim Butt.
       She returned in May 2005 with a visit visa to see  him.  Her  husband
       had told her to name a friend  of  his,  Mr  Khalil  Rehman,  as  the
       sponsor on her visa application as he was a man with property and was
       therefore a preferable sponsor.

    7. During this visit she married her husband, Mr  Wasim  Butt  whom  she
       believed to be a British citizen who had lived in the UK for the past
       15 years. She had  an  Islamic  conversion,  changed  her  name,  and
       married Mr Butt without consultation with her family. She showed  the
       Tribunal tattoos that she has of the Hindu god Ganesh  and  the  word
       "Om" on her arm  which  support  her  Hindu  origins,  and  gave  her
       original  Hindi  name,  Manisha  Bhalchandra  Malvankar,  which  also
       appears on the children's birth certificates  with  a  note  she  was
       previously known by this name. The first appellant  has  not  removed
       the tattoos as she believes there is a danger of damaging her hand.

    8. The first appellant then returned to India to tell her  family  about
       her conversion and marriage. They were furious and hostile,  and  did
       not want anything further  to  do  with  her  due  to  her  religious
       conversion and marriage.

    9. The first appellant re-entered the UK again  on  another  visit  visa
       (again giving Mr Rehman her  husband's  friend  as  the  sponsor)  in
       approximately December 2005 to escape her family there and return  to
       her husband. On arrival in the UK her husband took her  passport.  He
       was extremely controlling and isolated her from the community. He did
       not even allow her to do things like shopping.

   10. The second appellant was born on 29th June 2006, and  it  was  around
       this time that the first appellant found out that Mr Wasim  Butt  had
       lied to her about his nationality (he was not British by a  Pakistani
       citizen) and that about the fact he had another wife and two children
       in Pakistan. The first appellant wished to end the  relationship  but
       her husband threatened to take the second appellant  away  from  her,
       and did so for one night. She therefore  decided  to  remain  in  the
       relationship out of fear of losing her child. The third appellant was
       born on 18th June 2011.

   11. A couple of months' after the birth of the third appellant the  first
       appellant's husband was  arrested  and  removed  by  the  Immigration
       Service. The first appellant's husband has not been in touch with any
       of the appellants since he was removed from the UK, even though  they
       have remained living in the same property. The first appellant has no
       wish to contact Mr Butt and has made no efforts to do so.  The  first
       appellant describes the second appellant as being initially quiet  or
       shocked by his father's absence but then he has seemed  to  adapt  to
       the situation, and has not asked about his father  since  that  time.
       The second and third appellants have  had  no  contact  with  anyone,
       including any family, in India.

   12. Initially after Mr Butt was returned to Pakistan the first  appellant
       felt depressed and suicidal. She was given antidepressants by her  GP
       but she found these made her too tired to care for her children.  She
       stopped taking them, and found friends and support within the  Muslim
       community. One of the sources of support is Abraham  Sillah  and  his
       family who have befriended the appellants over the past three  years,
       and provided practical support such as mending  the  heating  boiler;
       giving money, toys and groceries; as well as providing friendship  to
       all the appellants including playing  X-box  games  with  the  second
       appellant.

   13. The appellants say they cannot reasonably return  to  live  in  India
       because the first appellant's family  will  not  accept  her  or  her
       children due to her religious conversion and being separated from her
       Pakistani husband and so there will be no family support.  The  first
       appellant remains deeply hurt by their rejection.

   14. The first appellant says she would not be able to support and protect
       her young family as a single parent in a reasonable way in  terms  of
       accommodation and other material things from work as a beautician  in
       India given the low pay she would be  likely  to  receive  from  this
       work, her lack of work experience and lack of support with childcare.
       The first appellant felt that the second and third  appellants  would
       not be well treated  in  India  as  she  would  be  a  single  parent
       converted Muslim and their father an absent Pakistani, and she  would
       be unable to protect them against any societal hostility due to their
       background.

   15. The second and third appellants are very well integrated  into  their
       schooling in the UK and are excelling at their school work, and extra
       curricular activities such as street dancing and drawing.  The  first
       appellant attends events, celebrations and parents  meetings  at  the
       second and third appellants'  school.  The  second  appellant  has  a
       strong circle of friends in the UK with whom he plays football, swims
       and plays computer games. He is a very competitive boy who tries  his
       best  to  win  always.  He  also  has  regular  Islamic  lessons  and
       understands some Arabic. The second appellant is asthmatic  which  is
       well managed but needs the daily use of inhalers.

   16. The second and third appellants  speak  a  bit  of  Hindi  but  since
       starting school speak in English both within and  outside  the  home.
       They cannot read or write in Hindi. The second appellant has  largely
       taught the first appellant to speak English.  The  second  and  third
       appellants' only knowledge of India is through what they have learned
       about Hinduism at school.

   17. All the appellants are supported by the Muslim community  in  the  UK
       who provide them with financial and social support in  this  country.
       The support comes via a man called "uncle" who lives  in  Ilford  who
       collects money for them; the Zakat Foundation (which  believe  it  is
       particularly important to  support  Muslim  converts);  a  circle  of
       Muslim ladies via a whatsapp group; and individuals such as Mr Sillah
       and his family. The support provides sufficient funds to pay the rent
       on the property where the family live and buy food, but they are also
       given food and clothes. The money is provided in cash and there is no
       paperwork or receipts as it is informally  collected  charity  money.
       The appellants have never been reliant on any UK state  benefits  and
       the first appellant has never worked in the UK. In the UK  the  first
       appellant believes she would eventually be able to support her family
       from work as a beautician.

   18. The second appellant explains in his own  letter  and  also  in  oral
       evidence to the Tribunal that he  does  not  wish  to  be  forced  to
       relocate to India. He is very attached to the UK and in particular to
       his school and teachers in this country, and is engaged with a number
       of other activities such as football and dance, and Islamic  learning
       in his community. He aspires to be a creator of computer games.

   19. Mr Melvin relied upon the reasons for refusal letter and made further
       submissions. It is contended in summary that it would  be  reasonable
       for the second appellant to leave the UK and live in India as  he  is
       only in primary education, and is at an age when he can adapt to life
       in India with the help of his mother who lived there for the first 30
       years of her life. Other family members would also be able to support
       his integration there. Children in India are entitled to education to
       14 years, and although the  education  might  not  be  of  such  high
       standard it would  be  accessible.  The  second  appellant  would  be
       capable of learning Hindi with the support of his  mother.  His  best
       interests were simply to be with his mother and sister. There was  no
       evidence that there would be societal persecution of the  second  and
       third appellants as Muslim children of a single  mother.  His  mother
       would be able to support him financially as she has a profession. The
       second appellant was capable of making new friends quickly  according
       to the first appellant.

   20. The appellants were not in  the  UK  lawfully:  the  first  appellant
       should be seen as someone who had used deception to enter the  UK  on
       visit visas; who contrary to her evidence had known her  husband  was
       unlawfully present and that she was  remaining  without  status.  The
       family remaining was not in the public interest as the children  were
       receiving public funds for their  education  and  health  needs.  The
       evidence of the first appellant and Mr Sillah should not be  accepted
       with regards the support the first appellant receives in the UK  from
       charitable sources. If the first appellant  were  allowed  to  remain
       there was no evidence that she could support  her  children  here  or
       that she was integrated into UK society.

   21. Mr Spurling submitted that no  protection  claim  was  made  for  the
       appellants. The first appellant was however concerned that she  would
       not be able to protect her children in the sense that she would be  a
       single mother returning to India without a network of  support  in  a
       country where it is public knowledge that there is communal violence.
       He submitted that the evidence given should be found to be  credible,
       particularly in relation  to  the  first  appellant's  conversion  to
       Islam, the circumstances of her marriage, her  dislocation  from  her
       family and support from the Islamic community in the UK.

   22. In relation to whether it was reasonable for the second appellant  to
       live in India he submitted that I should  not  place  issues  of  the
       economic impact on the UK in  the  balance  or  the  conduct  of  his
       parents. These were not relevant according to  the  respondent's  own
       guidance. (See Immigration Directorate Instructions Family Migration:
       Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family Life and Private Life: 10 Year Routes
       August 2015 at paragraph 11.2.4 "Would it be unreasonable to expect a
       non-British child to leave the UK?").

   23. Mr Spurling submitted that in accordance with this guidance it  would
       not be reasonable to expect the second appellant  to  leave  the  UK.
       There were not major health issues but it was relevant  that  he  had
       asthma that was well managed in the UK; he is  highly  integrated  in
       the UK and presents culturally as a "London boy"; he has  significant
       community support equivalent to extended family in the  UK  from  the
       Sillah  family  and  others  in  the  Muslim  community;  he  has  no
       connection with India: he had never lived  there,  had  contact  with
       anyone in that country as his mother was estranged from  all  of  her
       family there, or attended school. If he returned there he would be in
       a precarious situation as the child of a single mother on a low  wage
       who had never supported herself through work  in  that  country.  The
       second appellant's cultural ties had been  made  complicated  by  his
       mother's conversion to Islam; he is able only to speak a little Hindi
       and cannot read or write in this language. Whilst there were  factors
       that went the other way this sufficed to meet  the  test  of  it  not
       being reasonable to  expect  the  second  appellant  to  leave  under
       paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules. This in turn meant
       also that the first appellant was entitled to succeed  under  EX1  of
       Appendix FM, and that in turn meant of course that it  would  not  be
       proportionate under the general law relating to  Article  8  ECHR  to
       remove the third appellant.

   24. At the end of hearing I reserved my decision.

  Conclusions - Re-making

   25. It is accepted that Appendix FM E-LTRPT 2.2-2.4 and 3.1  are  met  in
       this case.   It  is  accepted  that  the  second  appellant  met  the
       requirement of having  lived  in  the  UK  for  7  years  immediately
       preceding the date of application and that the first appellant has  a
       genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  him.  It  thus
       remains to be determined whether it would be reasonable to expect him
       to leave the UK. If  the  appellants  can  show  on  the  balance  of
       probabilities that it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  second
       appellant to leave the UK then the first appellant can show that  she
       satisfies EX 1 of Appendix FM, and qualifies for permission to remain
       under the 10 year route under the Immigration  Rules.  Similarly  the
       second appellant needs to show on the balance of  probabilities  that
       it would not be reasonable to expect him to leave the UK for  him  to
       qualify for leave to remain under paragraph  276ADE  (1)(iv)  of  the
       Immigration Rules.

   26. I find the first and second  appellants  and  Mr  Sillah  all  to  be
       credible witnesses. Their evidence was consistent with their  written
       statements and other known facts, and was  given  without  hesitation
       and was heartfelt.

   27. I have no hesitation in finding that it is in the  best  interest  of
       the children, the second and third appellants, to remain  in  the  UK
       where they are settled with a highly dedicated community  of  friends
       and where they are excelling  in  school.  The  appeal  documentation
       provides numerous examples of prizes and projects  completed  by  the
       second appellant and his school reports refer  to  him  as  a  "great
       organiser who can always be relied upon to be a  group  leader".  The
       second appellant has lived in the UK since his birth,  now  for  nine
       and a half years, and is in his sixth year of schooling. If  he  were
       to remain here for another six months (until  his  10th  birthday  on
       29th June 2016) he would be entitled to register as a British citizen
       on the basis of having been born here and lived in  the  UK  for  the
       first 10 years of his life regardless  of  his  lack  of  immigration
       status during this time, see s. 1(4) of the British  Nationality  Act
       1981. This must be a measure of how  close  he  is  to  the  relevant
       degree of integration into UK society that would generally be  needed
       to be seen as a citizen in the eyes of the law. The  third  appellant
       has started her primary schooling and has lived in the UK  since  her
       birth for the past four and a half years.

   28. To require the second and third appellants to leave this  environment
       where they are doing so well, and have such a high degree of positive
       integration into  the  life  of  their  school  and  community  would
       particularly not be in these children's best interests in  the  light
       of the following factors. They would be going to a country where they
       have no connection bar through  their  mother  the  first  appellant,
       their only  carer  and  parent.  The  first  appellant,  has  genuine
       trepidation and some realistic fears about her ability to establish a
       happy independent life for the second and third appellants due to the
       breakdown in relations with her family there;  her  children's  mixed
       nationality parentage; her status as a single parent; her own lack of
       recent work experience; and the fact that her only work experience is
       in a relatively low paid area. It is clear that the  first  appellant
       has already suffered two serious life upsets: being very unkindly and
       violently  rejected  by  family  following  her  marriage  and  being
       deceived by her husband as to his immigration and marital status  and
       unkindly treated  by  him  during  that  marriage.  It  is  therefore
       understandable in this context that she  has  no  confidence  in  her
       ability to build  a  new  life  protective  of  her  children's  best
       interests without her current extensive network of  Muslim  community
       supporters (which I find could not be  simply  transferred  to  India
       given it is an informal face to face and  cash  based  support),  and
       given her previous lack of experience of forming a family unit alone.
       In these circumstances I find  it  highly  unlikely  that  the  child
       appellants would, at least for an initial period of many months, have
       equivalent housing, financial support and social and  community  life
       and are likely to be impoverished in the these basic provisions.

   29. Additional factors pointing to leaving the UK not being in  the  best
       interests of the child appellants are that it is accepted  that  they
       would not have access to the same quality of schooling and would have
       to contend with a new language not written in the Roman script  which
       they are totally unable to read and write. I acknowledge however that
       the best interests of the children are simply a primary consideration
       and only are not decisive of the question  of  whether  it  would  be
       reasonable to expect the second appellant to leave.

   30. I am guided by the respondent's  guidance  on  whether  it  would  be
       reasonable to expect a non-British child to leave the UK referred  to
       above and also by EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874,  which
       cites Lady Hale in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 4 at paragraph 33
       as saying:
           "Specifically, as Lord Bingham indicated in EB (Kosovo), it will
           involve asking whether it is reasonable to expect the  child  to
           live in another country. Relevant to this will be the  level  of
           the child's integration  in  this  country  and  the  length  of
           absence from the other country; where and with whom the child is
           to live and the arrangements for looking after the child in  the
           other country; and the strength  of  the  child's  relationships
           with parents or other family members which will  be  severed  if
           the child has to move away."

   31. As Mr Spurling has submitted this is not a case where all the factors
       point one way when the reasonableness of the second appellant leaving
       the UK to live in India is considered. It is not disputed that he  is
       entitled to citizenship of that country, and it  is  clear  that  his
       mother the first appellant (and only parent exercising  any  parental
       responsibility in this case) has not been lawfully present since  the
       expiry of her visit visa in  2006  and  that  the  second  and  third
       appellants have never had leave to remain. He is not a child who  has
       been shown to have a serious life threatening illness which could not
       be treated in India.  I am sure that asthma  inhalers  are  available
       there. He is clearly an able and friendly boy who has himself not  be
       scarred by the difficult circumstances in which the  first  appellant
       has found herself as a  result  of  her  marriage.  He  also  has  no
       extended biological family members who are entitled to  live  in  the
       UK.

   32. In terms of whether it is reasonable that the second appellant  leave
       the UK and go to live in India I have preserved the finding from  the
       First-tier Tribunal that the first appellant would not be at risk  of
       serious harm from her family in that country. I find  ultimately  for
       the reasons set out below that it would not be reasonable  to  expect
       the second appellant to leave given his degree of integration in  the
       UK and the factors which are likely  to  make  integration  in  India
       difficult in his case.

   33. I find that the first appellant is estranged from her family in India
       on grounds of her conversion to Islam (which I find to  have  been  a
       genuine and one which  has  endured  the  breakdown  of  her  Islamic
       marriage as is evidenced  by  her  continuing  involvement  with  and
       support by the Muslim community and the second  appellant's  learning
       of the Koran) and on the basis of her now being a single parent  with
       children from a marriage to  a  Pakistani  man  the  family  did  not
       support. I find therefore she would be returning to live as a  single
       parent in India  with  two  young  children  (the  first  and  second
       appellants) to support without the provision of any accommodation  or
       money assistance from others in that country. I find on  the  balance
       of probabilities that at least it would  take  many  months  for  the
       first appellant to establish a support network of  friends  and  find
       reasonable accommodation, work and financial support. This is because
       the return would not be one which would be supported by  any  friends
       or family in India; because the informal cash and in  part  commodity
       based support she has here  could  not  be  easily  transferred;  and
       because she has never actually had to work to provide for herself and
       her children independently;  and  because  she  has  no  recent  work
       experience; and because she is not highly qualified or trained in  an
       obviously well paid profession.

   34.  I  also  consider  relevant  to  issues  of  the  second   appellant
       integrating that he has never visited India, and  has  no  social  or
       other ties to that country himself  and  has  never  attended  school
       there. He is able to speak a little Hindi, but cannot read  or  write
       in that language. He has also lived in the UK for  nine  and  a  half
       years, and become as Mr Spurling  submitted  "a  London  child",  and
       would have to deal with losing all of the  cultural  certainties  and
       friendships he has built up over this period of time  with  only  the
       support of a mother who has no faith in her own  ability  to  protect
       him and his younger sister, and who has experienced serious set backs
       in her own recent life. As set out above, I find leaving the UK would
       not be in his best interests.

   35. Whilst it is generally reasonable to expect a  child  who  is  not  a
       British citizen to return with a parent who has no right to remain in
       this country I find there are particular circumstances in  this  case
       which mean it would not be reasonable to expect the second  appellant
       to leave the UK, and thus that the first and  second  appellants  are
       entitled to remain under the Immigration Rules.

   36.  I  also  conclude  in  these  circumstances  that  it  would  be   a
       disproportionate breach of the right to respect for  family  life  to
       remove the third appellant which would  clearly  be  interfered  with
       were she removed. I have outlined above why I find that removal would
       not be in her best interests, which must a primary  consideration.  I
       also note that under s.117B(4) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
       Asylum Act 2002 does not require little weight to be given to  family
       life relationships to a mother and  brother  formed  whilst  she  was
       unlawfully in the UK; and also that she can speak English. So  whilst
       accepting that she is not financially independent and  giving  weight
       to immigration control and her  inability  to  meet  the  Immigration
       Rules I find that her removal would not be proportionate to her right
       to respect to family life.

  Decision:
    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error on a point of law.
    2. I set aside the decision relating to Article 8 ECHR  both  under  the
       Immigration Rules and outside of those Rules.
    3. I remake the appeal allowing the  appeal  of  the  first  and  second
       appellants under the Immigration Rules relating to Article 8 ECHR and
       of the third appellant under Article 8 ECHR .


           Fiona Lindsley
Signed:     Date: 20th January 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley



  Fee Award Note: this is not part of the determination.
  In the light of my decision to re-make the  decision  in  the  appeal  by
  allowing it, I have considered whether to make a fee award.  I  have  had
  regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note: Fee Awards in Immigration
  Appeals. I have decided to make no fee award because as I was  not  asked
  to do so, and because it was clearly necessary to consider evidence given
  in the appeal process to reach my conclusion


           Fiona Lindsley
Signed:     Date: 20th January 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley


                                   Annex A

                            DECISION AND REASONS

  Introduction

    1. The first appellant is a citizen of India born on 16th May 1974.  The
       second and third appellants are also citizens of India. They are  her
       children born on 29th June 2006 and 18th June 2011 respectively.  The
       first appellant entered the UK first as  a  visitor  on  31st  August
       2004. She made other visits after this. She and the second  appellant
       have lived in the UK continuously since  his  birth,  and  the  third
       appellant has lived in the UK for her entire life. On  17th  December
       2011 the appellants made a human rights claim which  was  refused  on
       4th December 2012. On 5th November 2013 the first  appellant  made  a
       ten year claim based on long residence  which  was  refused  on  19th
       December 2013. On 25th April  2014  the  appellant  was  served  with
       notice as an overstayer.  On  9th  May  2014  the  appellants  raised
       additional human rights grounds in a one stop notice.  On  11th  June
       2014  the  application  was  refused;  and  on  17th  June  2014  the
       appellants appealed against the  decision  of  the  respondent.  This
       appeal against the decision  was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge R G Handley in a determination promulgated on the 4th  December
       2014.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted  by  Vice  President  of  the  Upper
       Tribunal on 24th August 2015 following  a  grant  of  permission  for
       judicial review by Mr Justice Blake dated 7th July 2015  against  the
       previous refusal of permission by  the  Upper  Tribunal.  Mr  Justice
       Blake noted that the second appellant's period of residence  had  not
       been factored into the assessment  under  EX1  when  considering  the
       reasonableness of expecting him to leave the UK as a  child  who  had
       lived in this country for more than seven years.

    3. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law

  Submissions

    4. At the start of the hearing I supplied Mr Spurling with copies of the
       refusal letters and Mr Duffy with  a  copy  of  the  decision  of  Mr
       Justice Blake.

    5. Mr Duffy said, in summary, that whilst he accepted that there  was  a
       failure to engage  with  aspects  of  the  Immigration  Rule  EX1  of
       Appendix FM that there were ultimately no material errors of  law  as
       contained in the decision were proper reasons  for  finding  that  it
       would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.

    6. Mr Spurling argued that the First-tier Tribunal had  not  appreciated
       that seven years residence or more  was  indicative  of  their  being
       strong connections by a child with the  UK  such  that  it  was  very
       likely to be in their best interests  to  remain  and  would  not  be
       reasonable to expect them to leave. He said that the respondent's IDI
       at 11.2.4 stated that "strong reasons will be required  in  order  to
       refuse a case with continuous UK residence of more than 7 years".  He
       also argued that there were inadequate factual findings for the First-
       tier Tribunal to have been found  to  have  properly  determined  the
       issue of  whether  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the  second
       appellant to leave the UK.

  Conclusions - Error of Law

    7. I find that the First-tier Tribunal has erred in law as the  decision
       under Appendix FM is flawed. As noted by Mr Justice Blake the  period
       of UK residence of the second appellant is not mentioned at all  when
       reasonableness of return to India is  considered,  thus  excluding  a
       relevant factor. Further at paragraph 26 of the decision it  is  said
       that "he has not long started his formal education" when in  fact  he
       was in year 4 of primary school, thus having done over four years  of
       compulsory UK education (reception, years 1-4). It is  not  therefore
       clear that the First-tier Tribunal had in mind the correct period  of
       residence of the second appellant or the private life ties that  this
       would imply and indeed which are documented  in  the  copious  school
       documents provided to the First-tier Tribunal which show an extensive
       involvement with school life by the second appellant, and his being a
       group leader in the school context  (see  school  report  H-  Primary
       School). There is no reference at all to these  school  documents  in
       the decision.

    8. There is also no  finding  as  to  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       accepted the first appellant's evidence of her  conversion  to  Islam
       following her marriage to a Pakistani  citizen;  or  whether  it  was
       accepted that this had caused a rift with her  family.  It  is  clear
       that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  on  reasonableness  of
       return was predicted on there being financial support from family, as
       well as UK based friends and the first appellant's  work.  However  I
       find that there was insufficient reasoning to support the finding  at
       paragraph 22 of the decision that "the appellants would  be  able  to
       receive some support and assistance from members of their  family  in
       India". I do not accept that the finding that the appellants did  not
       face a real risk of serious harm from the family,  which  is  clearly
       set out in the decision and is not challenged by any party as legally
       flawed, means that it follows that  the  family  would  provide  such
       assistance.  Clearly family support on return to India  (particularly
       given that the second appellant would  be  returning  with  a  single
       parent mother - the first appellant) would be a  relevant  factor  in
       considering the best interests of the second appellant  in  returning
       there  and  whether  it  was  reasonable  to  expect  him  to  return
       especially as the evidence of the first appellant was that she  would
       not be  able  to  support  the  appellants  through  her  work  as  a
       beautician and would have nowhere to live.

    9. I do not accept Mr Spurling's view that  seven  years  residence  (or
       more) creates a presumption absent any evidence to the contrary  that
       it would not be in the best interests of a child to  remove  them  or
       that it would not be reasonable to remove  such  a  child.  It  is  a
       factor which must be considered along with other evidence adduced  by
       the appellants going to these issues. It is notable that at 11.2.4 of
       the IDI on Family Life dated August 2015 relied upon by  Mr  Spurling
       the view of the Secretary of State at b. is that if the  child  would
       be leaving with their parent(s) "it will generally be  reasonable  to
       expect a child to leave the UK with their parent (s), particularly if
       the parent(s) have no right to remain in the  UK;"  This  clearly  is
       seen by the Secretary of State as a strong reason to  refuse  a  case
       where a child has more than seven years residence.

   10. I am mindful that the views of the child ought to  be  considered  in
       assessing their best  interests  where  this  is  appropriate.  Those
       representing the appellants should give consideration as  to  whether
       the second appellant should  set  out  his  own  views  on  his  best
       interests and the reasonableness of his returning with his family  to
       India to the Tribunal in a letter in his own words,  and  whether  it
       would be appropriate for him  to  attend  to  give  very  brief  oral
       evidence confirming he had written  the  letter.  It  would  also  be
       desirable for a more detailed and up-to-date statement from the first
       appellant to be drafted setting out the social / private life ties of
       all family members in  the  UK,  her  employment  prospects  in  this
       country and the financial, work, education, accommodation and  social
       situation for the family on return  to  India,  and  her  views  (and
       reasons for  those  views)  on  the  best  interests  of  the  second
       appellant.

  Decision:
    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error on a point of law.
    2. I set aside the decision relating to Article 8 ECHR  both  under  the
       Immigration Rules and outside of those Rules.
    3. I adjourn the re-making of that decision.

  Directions
    1. The remaking hearing will take place on 19th January 2016.
    2. A Hindi interpreter is required.
    3. Any further evidence relied upon by either party must be  filed  with
       the Tribunal and served on the other party at least seven days  prior
       to the hearing date on 19th January 2016.


           Fiona Lindsley
Signed:     Date: 17th November 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

