
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
IA/25351/2015

                                                   HU/23912/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |         Decision & Reasons         |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|on 14 December 2017                    |         on 22 December 2017        |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

        THE HONOURABLE LADY RAE, SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE,
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                                     SA
                                     YA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E. Waheed, Counsel, instructed by Dylan Conrad
                    Kreolle
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Metzer (FtJ), promulgated on 5 December  2016,  dismissing
        the appellant's joined appeals against  the  respondent's  decision
        dated 7 July 2015 to revoke his EEA Permanent Residence  card,  and
        the respondent's decision dated 28 January 2016 refusing his  human
        rights claim.



   Factual Background


     2. The appellant is a national of Nigeria,  date  of  birth  25  March
        1972. He arrived in the United Kingdom, unlawfully, in either  2000
        or 2001. He married a French national on 6 January 2004 and applied
        for an EEA residents card as her spouse. This was  refused  in  the
        same year. On 11 November 2011 the appellant applied once again for
        an EEA residents card, this time on the basis that  he  retained  a
        right of residence following the termination of his marriage to the
        EEA national. This application was  refused,  but  his  appeal  was
        allowed on 27 April 2012  and  the  appellant  was  issued  with  a
        permanent residence card.


     3. The appellant's partner is YA, who is also a Nigerian national.  On
        26 March 2013 she was arrested on suspicion of overstaying  and  in
        respect of offences relating to the possession of a false document.
        A search of her residence uncovered documents indicating  that  she
        and the appellant had been  married  long  before  he  married  the
        French national. They have 5 children, born in  2004,  2006,  2008,
        2010, and 2013. At least 2 of these children are British citizens.


     4. On 30 March 2015, the appellant was convicted of bigamy, of using a
        false  instrument  with  intent,  and  of  seeking  to  obtain  the
        avoidance/postponement/revocation   of   immigration    enforcement
        action.  He  received  two  concurrent  sentences  of   12   months
        imprisonment,  and  a  further  concurrent  sentence  of  6  months
        imprisonment.      YA was also found guilty of  offences  including
        bigamy.


     5. In light of the appellant's convictions  the  respondent  concluded
        (echoing the view of the sentencing judge) that his marriage to the
        French national was a sham  and  revoked  his  permanent  residence
        card. This decision carried a right of appeal which  the  appellant
        exercised. Meanwhile, the respondent considered that the  appellant
        fell within the automatic deportation provisions of UK Borders  Act
        2007 and a deportation order was  made.  Following  representations
        made on the appellant's behalf  the  respondent  also  refused  his
        human rights claim. This  latter  decision  attracted  a  right  of
        appeal which was duly exercised.   Both  appeals  were  joined  and
        considered by the FtJ at a hearing on 9 November 2016.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     6. At the outset of his decision the FtJ stated that the appellant did
        not seek to appeal the decision revoking his residence card made on
        7 July 2015. This may have been based on submissions  made  at  the
        hearing as we cannot locate any document  in  which  the  appellant
        withdrawals his appeal against the 7 July 2015 decision.


     7. The judge heard evidence from both the appellant and  his  partner,
        and considered a bundle of documents running to 272 pages. Included
        in  this  bundle   were   birth   certificates   and   registration
        certificates relating to the children, letters from  the  children,
        photographs of the appellant  and  his  children,  a  Hertfordshire
        County Council 'Child and Family  Assessment'  dated  14  September
        2016, a further letter from Hertfordshire Children's  Services  and
        completed 'Child and Family  Assessment',  dated  19  October  2016
        (indicating that  there  were  no  safeguarding  concerns  for  the
        children), and documents detailing the  children's  involvement  in
        football teams.


     8. At paragraph 24 of his decision the FtJ noted  that  the  appellant
        had 5 children (although he  wrongly  stated  that  they  were  all
        British citizens), and that it  was  necessary  to  consider  their
        welfare  pursuant  to  s.55  of  the   Borders,   Citizenship   and
        Immigration  Act  2009.  The  FtJ  made  brief  reference  to   the
        Hertfordshire  County  Council  assessment,   which   referred   to
        potential breaches of article 8 if  the  children  who  removed  to
        Nigeria or separated from their parents. The FtJ  observed  however
        that there was  no  question  of  the  children  being  removed  or
        separated from their mother. The  FtJ  then  stated,  "...  in  the
        circumstances, although  section  55  is  of  significance,  it  is
        necessary to consider all the other relevant features."  The  judge
        observed that neither the appellant nor  his  partner  appeared  to
        accept their convictions, and that there was no  evidence  relating
        to the appellant's business or church or community involvement. The
        judge noted that the children were doing well in relation to  their
        sporting activities and was satisfied that this would continue even
        if he was not present.


     9. Based on a concession from the appellants' representative  the  FtJ
        was satisfied that the 2012 EEA appeal would not have been  allowed
        if the true position was known, and concluded  that  the  appellant
        had never been lawfully resident in the UK. In paragraph 26 the FtJ
        noted the  serious  nature  of  the  conviction,  the  respondent's
        legitimate interest in immigration control, and commented that  the
        extent of the appellant's assistance with his children appeared  to
        be his involvement in fearing them to "sporting activities,  school
        and the like." The FtJ indicated that he took into  account  s.117C
        of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, and  paragraph
        399 of the immigration rules, and  concluded  that  there  were  no
        "exceptional circumstances" to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
        deportation. The appeal was dismissed.

The grounds of appeal and the error of law hearing

    10. The grounds, which adopted a scattergun approach, criticised, inter
        alia,  the  judge's  approach  to  the  appellant's  children   and
        contended that the judge had not  considered  whether  his  removal
        would be unduly harsh on the children.


    11. In granting permission Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor stated,


         The appellant is entitled to a decision from which he can
         understand why has lost his appeal. It is arguable that the FtT's
         decision is so deficient in its reasoning that it does not fulfil
         this function. Although the FtT identifies that it has 'taken into
         account section 117C of the 2002 Act' it is further arguable that
         it fails to lawfully engage with section 117C(5) and/or provide
         lawfully adequate reasons in relation thereto. Although not
         pleaded, the same can be said of the FtT's consideration, or lack
         of consideration, of paragraph 399(a) of the Rules.


    12. We heard brief submissions from Mr Waheed and Mr  Jarvis.  Although
        recognising that it was not a model decision, Mr  Jarvis  submitted
        that the FtJ nevertheless applied the 'unduly harsh' test, that  he
        was entitled to take account of the appellant's  particularly  poor
        immigration history, and, while  he  accepted  that  there  was  no
        detailed assessment of the children's  evidence,  even  taking  the
        case at its highest the public interest factors were sufficient  to
        outweigh the best interests of the children.


    13. We indicated our satisfaction that the FtJ had materially erred  in
        law by failing to identify the best interests of the  children,  by
        failing to consider the evidence provided by the children,  and  by
        failing to adequately determine whether the impact on the  children
        would be unduly harsh.

Discussion

    14. In a human rights appeal involving 5 children, at least two of whom
        are British and 3 of whom have resided in the UK  for  7  years  or
        more, the FtJ has given surprisingly little  consideration  to  the
        position of and evidence relating to the children. The FtJ made  no
        reference to the ages of the children or their length of residence.
        No reference has been made to the letters written by the  children.
        The FtJ made a single reference to the Hertfordshire County Council
        'Child and Family Assessment' and failed to engage with any of  the
        observations contained in the assessment. Although referring to the
        duty to consider the best interests of  the  children  under  s.55,
        nowhere in his decision does the FtJ  actually  identify  the  best
        interests of the children. At paragraph 24 he  merely  notes  that,
        although section 55 is of significance, it is necessary to consider
        other relevant features. Having then noted that the  appellant  and
        his  partner  still  deny  any  wrongdoing  in  respect  of   their
        convictions, and the absence of any  evidence  of  the  appellant's
        business or his involvement with the church, the FtJ observes  that
        the children  were  "doing  well  in  relation  to  their  sporting
        activities" and found that even if the appellant  was  not  present
        they would be able to continue to do so.  With  respect,  the  best
        interests of the children extended  far  beyond  their  ability  to
        engage in sporting activities.


    15. At paragraph 26 the FtJ states that the extent of  the  appellant's
        assistance with his children  appears  to  be  his  involvement  in
        ferrying  them  to  sporting  activities  and   school.   This   is
        inconsistent with the respondent's acceptance  that  the  appellant
        enjoys a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  his
        children. In her decision  refusing  the  human  rights  claim  the
        respondent  notes  that  a  parental   relationship   requires   "a
        significant and meaningful positive involvement in a  child's  life
        with a significant degree of responsibility for the child welfare."
        It was accepted by the respondent that the appellant enjoyed such a
        relationship with his children. There has been no engagement by the
        FtJ with the evidence relating to the emotional  bond  between  the
        appellant and his children, and no satisfactory assessment  of  the
        impact on the children if separated from their father.


    16. Nowhere in the decision does the FtJ refer to Exception 2 contained
        in s.117C(5). There is no mention of the  'unduly  harsh'  test  in
        respect of the children, and no satisfactory  attempt  is  made  to
        determine whether the impact on the children would be unduly harsh.


    17.  For  these  reasons,  we  are  satisfied  that  the  decision   is
        unsustainable. Given that there has been no  meaningful  assessment
        of the appellant's relationship with his children or the impact  of
        his deportation on those  children,  it  is  appropriate  for  this
        matter to be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  full
        rehearing before a judge other than Judge Metzer.



Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by material errors of law.  The
matter is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh  (de  novo)
hearing, to be heard by a judge other than Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
Metzer.

Signed
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge  Blum                                              Date
    21 December 2017


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed
[pic]

Upper                  Tribunal                  Judge                  Blum
    Date 21 December 2017

