
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25811/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 November 2015                  |On 18 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                LORD TURNBULL
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                           LUIS DANIEL JUAREZ DIAZ
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E. Daykin, Counsel, instructed by Ozkutan & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal by Mr Luis Daniel Juarez Diaz who is  a  citizen  of
    Mexico.  He appeals against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dated 16 March 2015 in  which  his  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's refusal to grant him indefinite leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom was refused.

2.   The Secretary of State was  asked  to  consider  giving  the  appellant
    indefinite leave to remain on the basis that he was the  civil  partner
    of Mr McCloud.  In  her  letter  of  refusal  the  Secretary  of  State
    explained that on the facts made known to her she considered  that  the
    appellant had failed to discharge the  burden  of  proof  demonstrating
    that he satisfied all of the requirements of the Immigration Rules  and
    in particular paragraph 287(a). In arriving at this view the  Secretary
    of State  relied  upon  discrepancies  in  the  answers  given  by  the
    appellant and his partner at their interview and  concluded  that  they
    had not been living together as civil partners during the previous  two
    years or that their relationship  was  currently  subsisting.  On  that
    basis the Secretary of State concluded that  Mr  Juarez  Diaz  and  his
    partner did not intend to live together  permanently  and  refused  the
    application.

3.   Before the First-tier Tribunal  the  Judge  dismissed  the  appeal.  At
    paragraph 24 of her determination she held that the appellant  had  not
    discharged the burden of proof to establish that  he  had  been  living
    together with Mr McCloud in a civil partnership which  was  subsisting,
    nor that the parties intended to live permanently with  each  other  as
    civil partners.  She therefore concluded that the Secretary of  State's
    decision was in accordance with the law and the applicable  Immigration
    Rules.

4.   The first  ground  of  appeal  advanced  on  behalf  of  the  appellant
    asserted unfairness arising out of a suggestion made  only  in  closing
    submissions before the First-tier Tribunal that the  civil  partnership
    entered into was in the nature  of  a  marriage  of  convenience.   The
    second  ground  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   had
    approached her decision erroneously by taking account of  the  case  of
    Papajorgji (EEA spouse: marriage of convenience) [2012]  UKUT  38  and,
    the third ground submitted that she had made an erroneous assessment of
    the evidence before her.

5.   For the appellant Ms Daykin took us through the grounds of  appeal  and
    supplemented them in oral submission.   For  the  respondent  Mr  Kotas
    submitted that the grounds of appeal constituted nothing  more  than  a
    disagreement with legitimate findings on the evidence made by the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  He submitted that there had been no error  as  to
    the standard of proof in the mind of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  in
    the decision which she made  and  he  submitted  that  the  Judge  took
    account of the whole evidence led before her.  He also  submitted  that
    insofar as the Judge had taken account of the case of  Papajorgji  then
    any mistake in so doing was one of form rather than  of  substance.  He
    submitted that the weight to be given to the evidence which was led was
    for the Judge who presided at the Tribunal.

6.   We have given consideration to the competing submissions made.  In  the
    first place we take note that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  herself
    points out at paragraph 18  of  her  determination  that  the  case  of
    Papajorgji may not be directly in point.   We have, at the very  least,
    reservations as to the relevance of the case of Papajorgj, particularly
    outside its own parameters.   Even  if  there  is  some  value  in  the
    guidance given in that case to a situation such as was before the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge, we have concerns about the way in which the  Judge
    appeared to apply  the  case.  When  looking  to  what  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge said in paragraph 24 of her decision  we  consider  that
    she has applied the case in a rather confused manner.  We observe,  for
    example, that there is no finding as to whether or not the Secretary of
    State had discharged the burden of raising a suspicion of a marriage of
    convenience.

7.    Looking  to  the  manner  in  which  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    approached the assessment of the evidence we  consider  that  there  is
    force in the submission that she has not taken account of, or given any
    weight  to,  certain  aspects  of  the  evidence  which  were  in   the
    appellant's favour.  We note she records the  submission  made  to  the
    effect that only 17 questions out of 320 asked at the interview of  the
    appellant and Mr McCloud appear to disclose any  apparent  differences.
    However, there is  no  analysis  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    determination as to what she made of the remaining 303 questions  which
    apparently did not disclose discrepancies.

8.   We also consider that it was wrong of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  to
    rely upon her own view of the photographs which were tendered on behalf
    of the appellant in support of the suggestion that he was  party  to  a
    subsisting relationship.  The  judge  concluded  that  the  photographs
    displayed nothing more than friendship. In explaining  that  conclusion
    she expressed herself this way:

         "In particular, I note that there is  no  suggestion  that  any  of
         these photographs were taken at the civil ceremony".

    We think it was wrong of the judge to come to that  conclusion  in  the
    absence of    any discussion of the  photographs  in  evidence  and  in
    particular in absence of any such suggestion being  made,  particularly
    when it transpires that the conclusion may be incorrect.

9.   Lastly, we also see some support for the criticism  levelled  today  at
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge's approach to the standard of proof.   We
    note for example what was said in paragraph  23  of  her  determination
    concerning the absence of the appellant's name on certain documents and
    the explanation tendered for that by him, which the Judge described  as
    not finding convincing. We would not place terribly much weight on that
    point alone, it may be that the  Judge  has  simply  expressed  herself
    inelegantly there.  In combination though, we are  satisfied  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision discloses  an  error  of  law  and
    shall set the decision aside.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside

The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to remake the decision

No anonymity direction is made


Signed   Date

Lord Turnbull
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
