

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/25035/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On April 24, 2015                             |On May 19, 2015              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR LOVEPREET SINGH GILL
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
    For the Appellant: Mr Parkinson (Home Office Presenting Officer)
    For the Respondent:     No attendance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of India. The  appellant  last  entered  the
    United Kingdom as a visitor on September 17, 2013 with leave  to  enter
    until March 4, 2014.  On March 1, 2014 he applied for leave  to  remain
    on the basis of his private life but this application  was  refused  by
    the respondent on May 27, 2014.

 3. The appellant appealed this decision on June  12,  2014  under  section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 4. The appeal came before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Clapham  SSC
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") on November 18, 2014, and in  a
    decision promulgated on December 11, 2014  he  allowed  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds.

 5. The respondent lodged grounds of appeal on December 18, 2014 submitting
    the FtTJ had erred by materially  in  law  by  materially  misdirecting
    himself in law, making a  wholly  irrational  decision  and  by  giving
    weight to immaterial matters.

 6. On February 4, 2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Davies  gave
    permission to appeal finding the FtTJ may have erred  by  allowing  the
    appeal because he appeared to accept the appeal could not succeed.

 7. The matter came before me on the above date and the Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department was represented as set out above. There was  no
    attendance by the appellant  although  I  was  satisfied  he  had  been
    properly served with notice of the  hearing  because  I  was  passed  a
    letter dated April 24, 2015 in which  the  appellant  acknowledged  the
    hearing  date.  His  former  solicitors  had  previously  notified  the
    Tribunal that they had ceased to act for the appellant.

PRELIMINARY ISSUE

 8. I raised with Mr Parkinson his grounds of appeal and in particular  the
    fact the FtTJ had concluded at paragraph [29] of his decision that  the
    appeal could not succeed at the date of hearing. This was an in-country
    appeal and the relevant date, as determined by  Section  85(4)  of  the
    2002 Act, is the date of decision. The FtTJ had also found  that  there
    was no evidence to support his claim that removal  would  infringe  his
    aunt's article 8 rights.

 9. I indicated to Mr Parkinson that I was satisfied the FtTJ had erred  in
    paragraph [30] of his determination when he allowed the appeal  because
    all of his previous findings pursuant to the events as at the  date  of
    hearing were contrary to that decision.

10. Mr Parkinson agreed with this approach and further submitted  that  the
    decision should be remade and the appeal dismissed.

FINDINGS

11. The appellant came as a visitor and shortly before his leave expired he
    applied to remain on the grounds removal would  breach  his  article  8
    right to private life. At the time he  submitted  his  application  his
    uncle was terminally ill and he was providing care for  him.  The  FtTJ
    had found that if the appeal was being considered at  that  stage  then
    this  background  could  amount  to  a  compelling  and   compassionate
    circumstance.

12. There was no evidence the appellant could satisfy paragraph  276ADE  HC
    395 because he had only been in the United Kingdom for a  short  period
    of time and there were no significant obstacles preventing his return.

13. As to whether there are any circumstances that require me  to  consider
    the matter outside of the Rules I have had regard  to  the  application
    and the documents submitted. This application was based on the fact his
    uncle needed caring for but at the date of hearing  that  situation  no
    longer existed due to his uncle's unfortunate death.

14. The FtTJ found there was no  medical  evidence  to  support  any  other
    medical issues relating to the appellant's aunt and  accordingly  there
    was no basis to find there was any private life at all. The  fact  they
    are related does not amount to private life and  following  the  recent
    decision of The Secretary of State for the Home Department v SS (Congo)
    & ors [2015] EWCA 387 I have concluded there is no reasonably  arguable
    case under article 8 that is not sufficiently dealt with  by  reference
    to paragraph 276ADE HC 395.

15. This is a case where the appellant has been here for a short period  of
    time (17 months) and only sought to stay to care for his terminally ill
    uncle. That application was refused and at the date of hearing there is
    nothing else that I am invited to consider especially in light  of  the
    previous finding of the FtTJ in relation to  the  appellant's  aunt-  a
    finding I endorse.

16. I therefore confirm the appellant does not meet the  Immigration  Rules
    and I find no reason to consider this appeal outside of the  Rules  for
    the reasons hereinbefore recited.

DECISION

17. There was a material error. I have set aside the decision and I dismiss
    the appellant's appeal.

18. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 and I see no reason to alter that order.



Signed:     Dated:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the decision was not in  accordance  with  the  law  we  uphold  the  fee
decision made by the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed:     Dated:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
