
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/25956/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 24th April 2017                        |On 3rd May 2017                   |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                    F M T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Saffer
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 21st July 2016.

 2. She is a citizen of Nigeria who came to the UK in 2002  as  a  visitor,
    made four further visits, and finally arrived on 8th October 2006.  She
    overstayed and worked illegally.  She then made an asylum  claim  which
    was then later withdrawn and, in 2014 applied for leave  to  remain  in
    the UK on human rights grounds.  She was refused  and  her  appeal  was
    dismissed by Judge Saffer.

 3. The appellant has a son, E, who was born in 2010.  She also  cares  for
    her stepson, J, at the weekends and during  the  holidays.   J  is  her
    partner's son and is a British citizen.

 4. The appellant was unrepresented.  Mr Bates, on behalf of the  Secretary
    of State, accepted that the judge had erred in his determination.

 5. The judge accepted that the appellant saw J regularly. If the appellant
    were to be removed to Nigeria with her son E, on the face  of  it,  J's
    relationship with the appellant and with his half-sibling  E  would  be
    drastically altered.  J is a qualifying child and cannot leave  the  UK
    because his mother is British and lives here.

 6. The judge ought to have carried out  a  best  interests  assessment  in
    relation to J, and, on the basis of that  assessment,  apply  paragraph
    117B of the 2002 Act to the proportionality balancing exercise.

 7. In Kaur (Children's best interests/public  interest  interface)  [2017]
    UKUT 00014 the Tribunal held  that  in  the  proportionality  balancing
    exercise the best interests of a child must be  assessed  in  isolation
    from other factors such as parental misconduct.  In this case the judge
    concentrated on  parental  misconduct  but  did  not  assess  the  best
    interests of one of the two children in this appeal.

 8. Moreover, although the judge  considered  paragraphs  117B(1)  to  (5),
    which count against  the  appellant,  there  is  no  reference  in  the
    determination to Section 117B(6) which states:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child; and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             UK."

 9. The decision is set aside.

10. Mr Bates said that he would wish to cross-examine the appellant on  the
    extent of the family life which she enjoys with J.  Mrs T said that she
    would be able to obtain evidence from J's natural mother, who would  be
    willing to  attend  a  hearing.   Accordingly  the  appeal  has  to  be
    adjourned and is remitted to be heard  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Saffer at Manchester.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed

[pic]
Deputy           Upper           Tribunal            Judge            Taylor
                      Date 2 May 2017

