
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25825/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 July 2017                                |On 12 July 2017               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                makhan singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel, instructed by Chris Alexander
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mathews (the judge), promulgated on 31 October 2016,  in
    which she dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal.   That  appeal  had  been
    against the Respondent's decision of 8 July 2015, refusing to issue the
    Appellant  with  a  permanent  residence  card  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the Regulations).

 2. The Appellant had married a Slovakian national on 10  April  2010.   He
    had subsequently been issued with a  residence  card  running  for  the
    usual five-year period.  By an application made on 19 February 2015 the
    Appellant sought a permanent residence card.  The Respondent's  refusal
    of the application was based upon  the  fact  that  at  that  time  the
    Appellant was  not  in  fact  divorced  from  his  wife  and  therefore
    Regulation 10(5) of the Regulations could not apply.  In  addition,  it
    was said that there was  insufficient  evidence  relating  to  the  EEA
    national's exercising of Treaty rights  over  the  requisite  five-year
    period.




The judge's decision

 3. The judge accepts that on the evidence then before  her  the  Appellant
    had divorced the EEA national on 27 November 2013  (see  paragraphs  10
    and 14).  At paragraph 15 she notes the absence of any direct  evidence
    from the ex-wife (by way of witness statement or indeed live evidence).
     There was no evidence from mutual friends either.  At paragraph 16 the
    judge notes that there were no original documents before her.  She says
    that she was not persuaded by the copy documents, and in the absence of
    evidence from the ex-wife the judge was  not  satisfied  that  the  EEA
    national had ever worked.  In paragraph 17 the judge concludes that the
    Appellant himself had not shown that he had worked during  a  five-year
    period of residence.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 4. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge failed to make findings  on
    the evidence before her.  They assert that the original documents  were
    available at the hearing but the judge had failed to ask to  see  them.
    It is also stated that the  Appellant's  employment  history  over  the
    course of a five-year period was not a requirement of the  Regulations.



 5. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nightingale  on  15
    March 2017.




The hearing before me

 6. At the outset of the hearing I indicated to both  representatives  that
    my preliminary view was  there  were  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision, based upon what was said in the grounds.

 7. Mr Tarlow confirmed  that  whilst  he  was  resisting  the  Appellant's
    appeal, this was not done so in strong terms.  He noted that  questions
    of weight were a matter for the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. In the circumstances I did not need to hear from Mr Karim.




Decision on error of law

 9. I conclude that there  are  material  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.  This is so for the following reasons.

10. First, it was the Appellant's evidence (not deemed to be unreliable  by
    the judge) that  his  divorce  from  the  EEA  national  had  not  been
    amicable.  This formed a material element  of  the  way  in  which  the
    Appellant's case had been put. At paragraph 15 in my view the judge has
    either effectively required there to be direct evidence  from  the  ex-
    wife, or has placed impermissible  weight  upon  the  absence  of  such
    evidence, or has failed to provide adequate  reasons  as  to  why  such
    evidence would  have  been  reasonably  forthcoming  in  light  of  the
    circumstances of the case.

11. Second, as Judge Nightingale commented in her grant of  permission,  it
    would have been better  for  the  Appellant's  representative  to  have
    proactively placed the original  documents  before  the  judge  at  the
    hearing.  Having said that, I am satisfied that the original  documents
    were at court on the day and I see nothing  in  the  papers  before  me
    (including the Record of Proceedings) to indicate that any request  was
    made by either the judge or  the  Presenting  Officer  to  inspect  the
    originals of any documents submitted by the Appellant.  In addition, at
    no stage, as far as I can see, has the Respondent asserted that any  of
    the copied documents submitted by the Appellant were false.   I  cannot
    see any indication on the face of the papers before me that  the  judge
    put the Appellant's representative on notice that she was not  prepared
    to attach any or any material weight  upon  copy  documents,  nor  that
    sight of original documents was requested.  If this indication had been
    given or a request made, it  is  extremely  likely  that  the  original
    documents (which were in fact at court) would have been  placed  before
    her. There was  procedural  unfairness  in  relation  to  the  original
    documents.

12. Third, the judge has failed to explain by way of reasoning why she  was
    not prepared to place any weight (as appears to be  the  case)  on  the
    copy documents.  In addition to what  I  have  said  in  the  preceding
    paragraph, the copy documents were still evidence and  their  rejection
    required reasons to be given beyond stating the  fact  that  they  were
    copies of originals.

13. Fourth, there are no findings on the evidence of the Appellant  himself
    (in relation to what he had said in writing and orally).  There  is  no
    indication that the  judge  found  the  Appellant  to  be  a  generally
    unreliable witness, and his  evidence  was  just  that:  evidence.   It
    required to be assessed  in  the  same  way  as  any  other  source  of
    evidence.  The Appellant's evidence included the assertion that his ex-
    wife had been working previously, and had been working at the  time  of
    divorce. The failure to make findings on material evidence is an error.



14. Fifth, the judge has also erred in apparently  imposing  a  requirement
    that the Appellant himself had to show that he had been working  for  a
    period of five years in  accordance  with  the  Regulations.   No  such
    requirement exists.

15. For all these reasons I set aside the judge's decision.




Remaking the decision

16. Both representatives were agreed that I could remake the decision based
    upon the evidence before me.  This I now do.

17. I asked to see and was shown the  originals  of  all  of  the  relevant
    documents before the First-tier Tribunal.

18. Mr Karim confirmed that the Appellant had been issued a residence  card
    by the Respondent previously and referred me to C2 of the  Respondent's
    bundle.  He relied upon the Upper Tribunal decision in HS  [2011]  UKUT
    00165 (IAC), at  paragraph  60.   In  respect  of  the  EEA  national's
    employment history, I was referred to payslips for the years  2010  and
    2011  contained  in  the  Respondent's  bundle.   In  respect  of   the
    Appellant's bundle (which was before the judge) I was referred to  P60s
    for the tax years 2010/2011 (at page 34) and 2011/2012  (at  page  35).
    Payslips for the year 2012 were contained at pages 24 onwards,  and  at
    pages 29 to 33A there are payslips for 2013, the last  of  these  being
    dated 30 August of that year.  Mr Karim  accepted  that  there  was  no
    documentary evidence for the ex-wife's employment as at the date of the
    termination of the marriage, that being 27 November 2013.  He submitted
    that I should accept the  Appellant's  witness  statement  evidence  in
    conjunction with the EEA national's good employment  history  over  the
    course of a number of years, including that prior to  2010.   I  should
    also bear in mind that because the divorce was not amicable it had been
    very difficult for the Appellant to  obtain  all  relevant  documentary
    evidence from his ex-wife.  In respect of the  Appellant's  position  I
    was referred to page 64 onwards  of  the  Appellant's  bundle,  and  in
    particular to page 72 where there is a  payslip  dated  17  July  2015,
    postdating the five year period following the Appellant's  marriage  to
    the EEA national. It was submitted that the Appellant  had  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence as at 10 April 2015 and he  had  not  lost
    this right subsequently.

19. Mr Tarlow took no issue with the documentary evidence to which  I  have
    been referred, but submitted that  the  Appellant's  witness  statement
    evidence  alone  was  insufficient  to  justify  a  finding  that   the
    Appellant's ex-wife had been exercising Treaty rights as at the date of
    the termination of the marriage.

20. In light of the evidence as a whole and on the balance of probabilities
    I make the following findings of fact.

21. I find that the Appellant married the EEA national on 10 April 2010.  I
    find that he was issued a  residence  card  by  the  Respondent  on  29
    October 2010.  This was valid until 29 October 2015.  I find  that  the
    Respondent was satisfied that the  EEA  national  had  been  exercising
    Treaty rights at that stage.  There is no evidence to suggest that  any
    revocation action was ever taken by the Respondent.

22. I find that the marriage was terminated on 27 November 2013.

23. I find that the EEA national was in fact in continuous employment  from
    2008 until at least the date of the  termination  of  the  marriage  in
    2013.  I have had regard to all of the documentary evidence  (both  the
    copies and the originals).  The payslips in fact go back  to  2008  and
    run through 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, and  up  to  30  August  2013.   In
    addition I have P60s for two relevant tax years.  I find  all  of  this
    evidence to be reliable.  It clearly shows a  good  employment  history
    over the course of several years.  There is, of course, a shortfall  in
    the documentary evidence.  The latest payslip is from August 2013,  and
    the marriage was terminated in November of that year.  Mr Karim submits
    that the gap can be filled by  the  Appellant's  own  evidence  in  the
    context of all the evidence before me and Mr Tarlow submits  that  this
    is not the case.  I am persuaded by Mr Karim's submission.  There is  a
    good employment history.  The documentary  evidence  runs  up  to  some
    three months only prior to the date of the termination.  There has been
    no express challenge to the credibility of  the  Appellant's  evidence,
    and I have no particular reason  to  doubt  it.   I  find  that  he  is
    credible and I place weight upon what he says in his witness  statement
    about his ex-wife's employment up until and indeed beyond the  date  of
    the termination of the marriage.  I combine this  with  the  supportive
    documentary evidence and I infer, on perfectly reasonable  grounds,  in
    my view, that the EEA national was in fact working as  at  27  February
    2013.

24. At that point and thereafter I find that the Appellant himself has been
    working.   Pages  64  onwards  of  the   Appellant's   bundle   provide
    documentary support for this, with particular relevance being  attached
    to pages 69 to 72.  It is right that there  is  not  a  great  deal  of
    documentary evidence concerning the Appellant's employment. However,  I
    have found him to be credible and I accept what  he  has  said  in  his
    witness statement.  That is combined with the documentary  evidence  to
    which I  have  referred  and  in  addition  the  self-billing  invoices
    contained from pages 73 onwards (all relating to 2015).   I  also  take
    into account what is said by the Upper Tribunal at paragraph  60(f)  of
    HS.

25. Taking the above findings into account I conclude  that  the  Appellant
    had a retained right of residence as from the date of  the  termination
    of the marriage on 27 November 2013.  This retained right of  residence
    has continued thereafter.  The relevant five-year period in relation to
    the acquisition of a permanent right of residence ran from the date  of
    the marriage, being 10 April 2010 to 10 April 2015.   Bearing  in  mind
    the EEA national's employment  history  and  the  continuation  of  the
    Appellant's retained right of residence, I  find  that  that  five-year
    period has  been  accrued  in  accordance  with  the  Regulations,  and
    therefore a permanent right of residence was acquired on 10 April 2015.



26. There is no evidence or suggestion that the  Appellant  has  lost  that
    permanent right of residence subsequently, and I conclude that  he  has
    not.

27. In light of the above the appeal is allowed.  The Appellant is entitled
    to be issued with a permanent residence card.




Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision contained material errors of  law  and  I
therefore set it aside.

I re-make the decision by allowing the Appellant's  appeal  on  the  grounds
that the Respondent's decision breached his EU law rights.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 11 July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee  award.
This appeal clearly required adjudication on contentious  matters,  and  the
Appellant has not provided all the documentary evidence he might have.



Signed   [pic]         Date: 11 July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
