



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/25075/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 21st June 2017                          |On 24th July 2017                |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                                 USMAN JAVED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ogunbasola, Counsel for M-R Solicitors, London
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He states that  his  date  of
    birth is 8th July 1987.   He  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 26th June 2015 refusing his application under  Article
    8 of ECHR on human rights grounds.  The appeal was heard  by  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Lawrence on 13th October 2016.  The appeal  was
    dismissed in a decision promulgated on 16th November 2016.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lever on 8th May 2017.  The
    permission states that the judge acknowledged that the Appellant's case
    wholly concerns his relationship with his child.  There were papers  on
    file from the Medway Family Court.  He deals with these  at  paragraphs
    3, 5 and 6 noting  that  it  is  stated  in  these  documents  that  no
    permission has been  granted  by  the  Family  Court  to  disclose  the
    documents  to  the  IAC.   The  judge  found   that   the   Appellant's
    representative had had sufficient  opportunity  for  permission  to  be
    sought from the Family Court but he did not deal with this so the judge
    refused an adjournment and decided  the  case  without  addressing  any
    evidence concerning the Appellant's alleged  contact  with  the  child.
    This was in spite of the fact that the  Appellant  gave  oral  evidence
    about his contact at the hearing.  The  permission  states  that  given
    that the relationship with the child is  central  to  the  case  it  is
    arguable that this is an error of law.  The permission states that  the
    failures were unlikely to be the fault of the Appellant.

 3. There is no Rule 24 response.

The Hearing

 4. A supplementary bundle was submitted by the Appellant's representative.
     In this bundle there is a document from Lifelines  Contact  Centre  in
    Maidstone dealing with ongoing contact between the  Appellant  and  his
    child.  The documents in this bundle were available at  the  First-tier
    hearing.

 5. The Appellant's representative submitted that there was evidence before
    the First-tier Judge of contact between the  Appellant  and  his  child
    apart from the Medway Family Court documents.  He  submitted  that  the
    judge did not consider this evidence or the Appellant's  oral  evidence
    about this, which was given at the hearing.

 6. He referred to paragraph 5 of the decision  submitting  that  it  is  a
    central error in this claim for the judge to fail to deal with evidence
    before him.

 7. He submitted that the Appellant's claim should be allowed under Rule E-
    LTRPT.2.4.  He  has  provided  evidence  about  access  rights  and  he
    submitted that relating to E-LTRPT2.4(b) the claim  should  succeed  as
    sufficient evidence of the Appellant's access rights was provided.

 8. The representative submitted that the Appellant  clearly  engages  with
    his child.  I was referred to the bank statements on  file  which  show
    receipts for money paid to his ex-partner for the child and payments to
    the child.  He submitted that E-LTRPT.3.1 has  been  satisfied  as  the
    Appellant did not come to the United Kingdom as a visitor or with valid
    leave for six months or less.  He had eighteen months'  leave  when  he
    came to the country.  He submitted that  the  judge  did  not  properly
    consider the evidence and this is an error of law.

 9. I asked about the deception which the Appellant is accused of, relating
    to his English test in his student  application.   I  was  referred  to
    paragraph 11 of the decision in which  the  judge  states  that  he  is
    unable to visit the deception issue as there was no evidence about this
    before him.

10. The Presenting Officer accepted that there is an error of  law  in  the
    judge's decision as he did not consider any of the evidence before  him
    relating to the Appellant's relationship with his child.

11. There was agreement between the parties that there is an error  of  law
    in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision and having  considered  the
    material before me I find that that is the case.  The judge should have
    considered the evidence before him relating to the relationship between
    the Appellant and his child as there was relevant evidence  before  him
    other than the Medway Family Court documents.   It  is  true  that  the
    Appellant's representative had been given time to deal  with  this  and
    had not done so and that is why an  adjournment  was  not  granted  but
    based on what was before the First-tier Judge I find that  there  is  a
    material error of law in the First-tier  decision  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision, promulgated on 16th November  2016  must  be
    set aside.

12. I direct that this appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a
    hearing de novo.  It should not be heard by Judge Lawrence.

13. No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date 21/07/2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray

