

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/25915/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 July 2014                               |On 1st Aug 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           OGOCHUKWU NNAMDI OKPALA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Representative

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Judge A D Baker) allowing the appellant's appeal  against  a
      refusal to extend his leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student  under  para
      245ZX of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended) and to  remove  him
      by way of  directions  under  s.47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
      Nationality Act 2006.

   2. For convenience, I will refer to the parties as they  appeared  before
      the First-tier Tribunal.

The Background

   3. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 15 October 1982.
      He arrived in the United Kingdom on 7 September 2007 and  was  granted
      leave to enter as a student until 30  October  2010.  Thereafter,  his
      leave was extended as a Tier 4 Student until 2 February 2013.

   4. On 1 February 2013, the appellant applied  for  an  extension  of  his
      leave as a Tier 4 Student. On 4 June  2013,  the  Secretary  of  State
      refused  that  application  on  the   basis   that   the   appellant's
      Confirmation of Acceptance of Studies (CAS) had been withdrawn by  his
      sponsor, the University of the West  of  England.   As  he  no  longer
      possessed a valid CAS, the appellant was not entitled to the  required
      points under Appendix A of the Rules and so was not entitled to  leave
      under paragraph 245ZX of the Rules as a Tier 4 Student.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

   5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
      promulgated on 13 February 2014, Judge A D Baker  concluded  that  the
      appellant could not succeed under the Immigration Rules as he did  not
      have a valid  CAS.   That  decision  is  undoubtedly  correct  and  is
      accepted by the appellant.

   6. However, the Judge went on to allow the appeal as being "otherwise not
      in accordance with the law" because the Secretary  of  State  had  not
      contacted the appellant's sponsor in order to discover why his CAS had
      been withdrawn.    The reason for the withdrawal was that, as a result
      of re-sitting examinations, a  further  period  of  study  would  have
      exceeded the five years maximum allowed for  Tier  4  Students.    The
      Judge's reasons are set out at paras 10-13  of  the  determination  as
      follows:

           "10.  The original letter from the University  of  the  West  of
                 England remains on  the  court  file  identifying  that  he
                 remains as a part-time student until June 2014 studying  on
                 his MSc.   The  material  was  not  challenged  as  to  its
                 authenticity.  In summary the respondent stated  there  was
                 not a burden on the respondent to investigate or query when
                 a CAS had been issued but withdrawn.  The grounds of appeal
                 are that the individual making  the  decision  should  have
                 exercised discretion differently.  The email at page 10  of
                 the bundle makes plain that the only reason the  university
                 withdrew his CAS was because  it  appeared  as  if  he  had
                 exceeded the five year time limit for the Tier 4 visas.

             11. Had the respondent  been  alert  to  this  reason  for  the
                 withdrawal of the CAS in other respects  ultimately  issued
                 the respondent would have been  reasonably  bound  to  have
                 made enquiries of the university and would have  been  able
                 to consider the application for leave to  remain  which  in
                 effect was to complete his course by way of a  resit  which
                 was not considered.

             12. Under "other evidence" from information that  was  provided
                 with the application it would  have  been  obvious  to  the
                 decision maker that the appellant  was  continuing  on  the
                 same course that had begun on 20  September  2010  and  was
                 making academic progression, "visa extensions needed due to
                 need  to  complete  dissertation".   The  current  CAS  was
                 assigned on 9 January 2013.  Had enquiries been made by the
                 respondent's decision maker it would have been open to  the
                 respondent to vary the leave, simply for the purpose of the
                 extension  needed  for  the   appellant   to   submit   his
                 dissertation which he had originally failed, having  passed
                 every other part of the course.

             13. Given that  this  information  was  contained  in  the  CAS
                 supplied to the respondent with the application I  conclude
                 that the decision was otherwise not in accordance with  the
                 law, the respondent failing to act reasonably in failing to
                 contact the appellant and CAS provider for more information
                 so that a reasoned decision  could  be  made.   The  matter
                 remains outstanding before the respondent  to  address  the
                 circumstances revealed by the application."

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

   7. The Secretary of State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal on the basis that there was no obligation upon the  Secretary
      of State  to  address  any  deficiency  in  a  CAS  with  the  sponsor
      institution before a decision was made.  The  grounds  rely  upon  the
      decision of the Court of Appeal in Rahman v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 11 at
      [32].

   8. On 8 April 2014 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Cheales)  granted  the
      Secretary of State permission to appeal.  Thus, the appeal came before
      me.

   9. Mr McVeety, who represented the Secretary of State, submitted that the
      Judge's decision was inconsistent with the approach set out in  Rahman
      at [32] which made clear that there was no obligation on the Secretary
      of State to provide an individual with an opportunity to  rectify  any
      deficiency in a CAS.  Mr McVeety submitted that  the  Judge's  finding
      that the Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with  the
      law was wrong in law and should be reversed.

  10. Mr Okpala, who represented himself, explained that the  CAS  had  been
      withdrawn because he would have exceeded the five years allowed  under
      the Rules but he had not had an opportunity to obtain leave  in  order
      to complete his dissertation for his MSc at the University of the West
      of  England.   He  informed  me  that  he  was  due  to  complete  his
      dissertation in January 2015.

  11. Mr McVeety pointed out in his reply that even  if  the  appellant  was
      unsuccessful in this appeal he could  make  a  fresh  application  for
      leave to complete his dissertation provided he did so within  28  days
      of his leave expiring when he became appeal rights exhausted and if he
      had a valid CAS for that purpose.

Discussion

  12. It is common ground that the appellant could not meet the requirements
      of the Rules for a Tier 4 Student as his CAS was withdrawn.  The basis
      upon which the Judge allowed the appeal was, in essence, that  it  was
      unfair or unreasonable for the Secretary of State to fail  to  contact
      the appellant and the University of the West of England  in  order  to
      ascertain the reason why the CAS had been withdrawn. Then, it is said,
      it would have been open  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to  grant  the
      appellant an extension  solely  for  the  purpose  of  submitting  his
      dissertation which he had yet successfully  to  complete  and  submit.
      That reasoning is, however, inconsistent with what  was  said  by  the
      Court of Appeal in the decision of Rahman at [32].  Richards LJ  (with
      whom Patten and Gloster LJJ agreed) said this:

           "I am not sure whether the appellant had an opportunity to check
           the CAS following its completion by the sponsor, and I note that
           part of the argument for the appellant is that he should not  be
           penalised for the shortcomings of an institution of  study  over
           which he had no control.  Nevertheless I agree with the tribunal
           that the situation here is very different from that in Naved and
           that fairness did not require the Secretary of State to give the
           appellant an opportunity to address any deficiency in  the  CAS.
           There was no question in this case of  the  Secretary  of  State
           obtaining  additional  information  without  reference  to   the
           applicant and relying on it  to  refuse  the  application.   The
           Secretary of State simply applied the terms of  the  Immigration
           Rules themselves.  Under the Rules it was the appellant who  had
           the  responsibility  of  ensuring  that  his   application   was
           supported by a CAS that meant the requirements laid down. If the
           CAS did not meet the requirements, it  could  not  earn  him  an
           entitlement to points.  If the deficiency in  the  CAS  was  the
           result of a mistake on the part of the sponsor (a  point  which,
           as I have said, was not even raised  by  the  appellant  in  the
           tribunals below), it was a matter  to  be  pursued  between  the
           appellant and the sponsor.   There  was  no  obligation  on  the
           Secretary of State to give the appellant an opportunity to  seek
           an amendment to the CAS before  a  decision  was  taken  on  the
           application.  Indeed the importance of all relevant  information
           being provided as part of the application was underlined by  the
           tribunal in Naved itself, in the  passage  I  have  quoted  from
           paragraph 21 of the determination."

  13. I accept Mr McVeety's submission that the Court of Appeal  turned  its
      face against any obligation being imposed upon the Secretary of  State
      to seek further information in  relation  to  a  deficient  CAS.   Any
      deficiency in the CAS was a matter  between  th4e  appellant  and  his
      sponsor alone. It was the student's obligation to submit a valid  CAS.
      That reasoning is, in my judgement, equally applicable to this appeal.
       Here too it was the appellant's obligation to  submit  a  valid  CAS.
      Its withdrawal, and the basis  for  its  withdrawal,  was  entirely  a
      matter between him and the University of the West of England.    There
      was no obligation on the Secretary of State imposed by  a  requirement
      to act reasonably or fairly to enquire why  the  appellant's  CAS  had
      been withdrawn.

  14. Of course, Judge Baker did not have the benefit  of  the  decision  in
      Rahman which was decided after this appeal was  heard.   Nevertheless,
      her reasoning and decision  cannot  stand  in  the  light  of  Rahman.
      Consequently, the Judge erred  in  law  in  allowing  the  appellant's
      appeal as being "otherwise not in accordance  with  the  law"  on  the
      basis that there was an obligation to contact the  University  of  the
      West of England (or the appellant)  prior  to  making  a  decision  on
      whether  the  appellant  satisfied  the  requirements  of  the   Rules
      including Appendix A as a Tier 4 Student.

Decision

  15. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the  appellant's
      appeal on the  basis  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  was
      otherwise not in accordance with the law involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law.  That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

  16. It is accepted that the appellant cannot succeed under the Immigration
      Rules and, for the reasons I have  given,  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision was in accordance with the law.

  17. I remake  the  decision  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  on  all
      grounds.

                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:
