
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/25195/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgate        |
|On  5 January 2016                   |On 15 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  ROSE UDE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Representative and no attendance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Suffield-Thompson) allowing  the  appeal  of
    Rose Ude (hereafter "the claimant") against a decision of the Secretary
    of State taken  on  3  June  2014  to  revoke  her  residence  card  as
    confirmation of her right to reside in the UK as the spouse of  an  EEA
    national under the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 (SI 2006/1003 as amended).

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 15 November  1977.
    In 2012, the appellant met Mr  Stanislav  Karchnak  in  the  UK.   They
    became friends.   At  that  time,  they  were  both  married  to  other
    individuals.  Each subsequently divorced  their  previous  spouse.  The
    relationship between the claimant and  Mr  Karchnak  developed  and  in
    August 2013 they married in  the  UK.   The  appellant  applied  for  a
    residence card as a spouse of an EEA  national  as  Mr  Karchnak  is  a
    national of Slovakia working in the UK.

 3. Following the application, the claimant and her husband attended for  a
    marriage  interview  in  Liverpool.   Following  that  interview,   the
    claimant was issued on 26 January 2014 with a residence card confirming
    her right of residence in the  UK  as  the  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national.  The claimant's evidence is that she and  Mr  Karchnak  lived
    together as a married couple.

 4. On 14 February 2014 Immigration Officers  attended  at  the  claimant's
    address.  The claimant was not at home and was  said  to  be  at  work.
    However, present in the property were the claimant's ex-husband and the
    three children of the claimant and her ex-husband.

 5. As a result of the visit, the Secretary of  State  concluded  that  the
    claimant was a party to a "marriage of convenience" and on 3 June  2014
    revoked the claimant's residence card.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The claimant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   She  attended  and
    gave evidence but her husband, Mr Karchnak did not attend.

 7. Before the Judge, the Secretary of State relied upon  the  evidence  of
    the Immigration Officers who had attended the claimant's address on  14
    February 2014 and the absence of the claimant's husband to  corroborate
    her claim that their marriage was genuine.

 8. The claimant gave evidence before  the  Judge  that  her  marriage  was
    genuine and that her husband was not present because his elderly mother
    was ill and that he had to visit her in Slovakia.   He  had  previously
    attended the marriage interview in  Liverpool  and  an  earlier  appeal
    hearing in late 2014 which had been adjourned.

 9. At paragraph 19, the Judge directed herself that:

         "In this case the burden is upon the respondent to  show  that  the
         appellant is not (sic) a party to a marriage of convenience."

10. Clearly, the word "not" has been  mistakenly  inserted  in  that  self-
    direction.  The Judge plainly meant that it was for the  respondent  to
    show that the claimant was a party to  a  marriage  of  convenience  in
    order to justify the revocation of her residence card.   That  is  also
    clear from paragraph 8 of the determination  where,  again,  the  Judge
    places the burden of proof upon the respondent to prove on a balance of
    probabilities that the marriage is not a genuine and subsisting one.

11. Having, therefore, placed the burden of proof upon the respondent,  the
    Judge went on to  consider  the  evidence  and  the  submissions  made.
    Having heard the claimant give evidence,  at  paragraph  21  the  Judge
    found that the  claimant  was  a  credible  witness  and  accepted  her
    evidence on the basis that "she did not exaggerate or  try  to  mislead
    the Tribunal".

12. Then at paragraphs 22-28, the Judge dealt with the evidence as follows:

         "22.     The Appellant and her new husband were interviewed by  the
             Respondent's Immigration Officers who are very experienced  in
             the work that they do.  They are used to seeing people day  in
             and day out who lie about their" marriages".  The interviewing
             officers were clearly of the view that the Appellant  and  her
             husband were in a genuine marriage and thus the Residence Card
             was issued.

         23. The only evidence that the Respondent now has to suggest  that
             the Appellant is not really married is  the  report  from  the
             Immigration Officers who attended the house on the 14 February
             2014.  The Appellant  was  at  work  and  therefore  there  is
             nothing  suspicious  about  her  ex-husband  minding  his  own
             children whilst she is not there.   There was a photograph  of
             the children with their father and one of him on his  own.   I
             do not find this to be indicative of her still being  married.
             She gave evidence that her children love their father and that
             he is very close to his eldest son so  there  is  nothing  odd
             about their being family photos of them with their  father  on
             display if that makes the children happy.

         24. The Immigration Officers did not go upstairs.  Had  they  done
             so they would have seen the Appellant's husband's clothes.   I
             do not see how a proper assessment can be made as to whether a
             person is living in  a  house  if  all  their  rooms  are  not
             checked.  Her new husband is unlikely to keep all his  clothes
             and toiletries in a living room.   The  Appellant  stated  his
             shoes were there and I can only assume  they  saw  a  pair  of
             men's shoes and  decided  they  belonged  to  the  Appellant's
             husband as he was there are the time.

         25. The Respondent did not supply the Tribunal with the notes from
             the Immigration Officer so we only have  an  account  via  the
             Appellant's ex-husband who does not have English  as  a  first
             language.   It  may  have  been  that  the  officers  did  not
             understand what was said or perhaps  the  Appellant's  husband
             was confused.  It is not a matter for speculation but a matter
             d on the parties and on the Tribunal.

         26. The Appellant brought a mix of original photos to court.  Some
             were of the wedding and some of them as a  couple  in  various
             places.  The most significant photos provided to me  were  the
             ones taken at Christmas where the Appellant, her  new  husband
             and  her  children  are  all  together.   I  find  that  these
             photographs were not  posed  and  they  were  totally  natural
             family photos of children laughing and playing with two adults
             they  clearly  felt  very  relaxed  with.   I  find  that  the
             photographs are genuine and reflect  the  family  relationship
             between the Appellant, her children and her new husband.

         27. I do not find that the absence of the Appellant's husband from
             the hearing is suspicious.  It is confirmed that  he  attended
             the interview in Liverpool and that he also came  to  what  he
             believed was the final hearing in December 2014 and that court
             had adjourned the case.  Had he not been genuine he would not,
             I find, have attended the last hearing.  His mother is clearly
             ill and I accept the Appellant's testimony that he  was  sorry
             not to have come but had to go to his mother.  I  also  accept
             that the Appellant could not face another adjournment  in  her
             condition.  She has had complications with all her pregnancies
             and her baby is due at the end of June so an adjournment could
             have taken weeks.

         28. The Respondent has not discharged her burden of proof.  I find
             that  the  Appellant  is  married   and   has   a   subsisting
             relationship with her new husband and that she is entitled  to
             a Residence Card.  I allow the appeal."

13. Consequently, the Judge allowed the appellant's appeal.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

14. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on two grounds.  First, the Judge had erred in law in  placing
    the burden of proof upon the Respondent to establish that the Appellant
    was a party to a marriage  of  convenience.   The  Secretary  of  State
    relied upon the decision  in  Papajorgji  (EEA  Spouse  -  Marriage  of
    Convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT  0038  (IAC).   Secondly,  the  grounds
    argue that the Judge had failed  to  take  into  account  the  lack  of
    corroborative evidence concerning the absence of the claimant's husband
    in order to visit his ill mother in Slovakia.   As a  consequence,  the
    Judge had failed to provide adequate reasons why he  had  accepted  the
    claimant's oral evidence on that issue.

15. On 15 May 2015,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (DJ  McClure)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal on both grounds.

16. Thus, the appeal came before me on 5 January 2016.

17. In an email sent to the  Tribunal  on  5  January  2016,  the  claimant
    indicated that she would not be attending the hearing as her  baby  had
    become sick overnight.  She nevertheless invited me to hear the  appeal
    despite her absence.  In the light of that, I considered it appropriate
    to hear the appeal in the absence of the claimant in the  interests  of
    justice under rule 38 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

Discussion

18. Shortly before the hearing, I provided Mr Richards, who represented the
    Secretary of State, with a copy of the recent decision of the Court  of
    Appeal in Agho v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1198.  In that case, the Court of
    Appeal considered the issue of the burden of proof where the  Secretary
    of State alleges that a marriage is a marriage of convenience.   In his
    judgement, Underhill LJ (with  whom  Vos  and  Moore-Bick  LJJ  agreed)
    concluded that the burden of proof that the marriage was a marriage  of
    convenience lay upon the Secretary of State.  Underhill  LJ  considered
    the Upper Tribunal's decision in Papajorgji and continued  as  follows:
    at [13]:

         "...What it comes down to is that as a matter of principle a spouse
         establishes a prima facie case that he or she is a family member of
         an EEA national by  providing  the  marriage  certificate  and  the
         spouse's passport; that the legal burden is  on  the  Secretary  of
         State to show that any  marriage  thus  proved  is  a  marriage  of
         convenience; and that that  burden  is  not  discharged  merely  by
         showing "reasonable suspicion".  Of course in  the  usual  way  the
         evidential burden may shift to the  applicant  by  proof  of  facts
         which justify the inference that the marriage is not  genuine,  and
         the facts giving rise to the inference may  include  a  failure  to
         answer a request for documentary proof of the  genuineness  of  the
         marriage where grounds for suspicion have been  raised.   Although,
         as I say, the point was not argued before us, that  approach  seems
         to me to be correct - as does the UT's statement that the  standard
         of proof must be the civil standard, as explained by the  House  of
         Lords in Re B (Children) [2008] UKHL35, [2009] 1 AC 11."

19. At [14],  Underhill  LJ  concluded  that  the  approach  in  Papajorgji
    "clearly places the burden of proof  on  the  Secretary  of  State  (or
    ECO)".

20. When I drew these passages to the attention of Mr Richards initially he
    continued to rely upon the Secretary of State's ground, namely that the
    Judge had been wrong to place the burden of proof upon the  respondent.
    However, despite his initial enthusiasm for that position it is, in  my
    judgement, wholly unsustainable in the light of  the  passages  I  have
    cited from Agho.  Although the Court  of  Appeal  recognised  that  the
    issue was not one that arose directly in the case before it,  the  view
    of Underhill LJ (with whom the other judges agreed)  was  a  considered
    view, and one with which I agree, and which I should follow.

21.  As  a  consequence,  the  Secretary  of  State's   first   ground   is
    unsustainable.  The Judge was correct to place the burden of proof upon
    the Respondent to establish that the claimant's  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience.

22. Mr Richards, however, maintained in his submissions the  second  ground
    of appeal which he expanded orally.  He  submitted  that  the  evidence
    before the Judge could not rationally  support  her  finding  that  the
    marriage was a genuine one.  There was the evidence of the  Immigration
    Officers and there was no corroborative evidence  from  the  claimant's
    spouse.  He submitted that the Judge was not entitled on  the  evidence
    of the claimant alone to find that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not
    discharged the burden of proving that the claimant's marriage  was  one
    of convenience only.

23. This is a case where the claimant had established that she was  married
    to an EEA national.  The evidence presented on behalf of the  Secretary
    of State did raise suspicions about the genuineness of  that  marriage.
    The claimant's ex-husband  was  found  in  what  was  said  to  be  the
    matrimonial home of the claimant  and  no  clothes  of  the  claimant's
    husband were seen and there were photographs of both the claimant's ex-
    husband with their children and one of him on his own.  As the Court of
    Appeal recognised in Agho the proof of facts which raise a  "reasonable
    suspicion" that a marriage is not genuine may,  in  effect,  shifts  an
    evidential burden to the applicant whilst leaving  the  ultimate  legal
    burden of proving that the marriage is only one of convenience upon the
    Secretary of State.

24. Here, however, the claimant did provide evidence that sought to explain
    the circumstances relied upon be the Secretary of State.  First, on the
    day of the visit she was out at work and her ex-husband  was  "minding"
    their children.  The photographs were  present  because  of  the  close
    relationship between her ex-husband and their children who  lived  with
    the  claimant.   Further,  there  was  nothing  suspicious  about   the
    Immigration Officers not finding any clothes of the claimant's  husband
    as they had not gone upstairs.  They had only looked downstairs and her
    husband's clothes and toiletries were not kept downstairs.  She pointed
    out that there was a pair  of  shoes  in  the  living  and  that  these
    belonged to her husband.

25. In addition, the claimant provided a number of  supporting  photographs
    showing her with her husband and children together including ones taken
    at Christmas.  The claimant also explained that the  husband  had  been
    unable to attend the hearing because his elderly mother was ill and  he
    had to visit her in Slovakia but he had attended  the  earlier  hearing
    which had been adjourned.

26. The Judge heard the  claimant  give  evidence.   Having  done  so,  she
    concluded that the claimant was a truthful witness who had  not  sought
    to "exaggerate or try to  mislead  the  Tribunal".   She  accepted  the
    claimant's evidence. She concluded that he photographs relied upon were
    "not posed"  and  were  "totally  natural  family  photos".   She  also
    accepted the claimant's explanation for the absence of her  husband  at
    the hearing.

27. The assessment of an individual's oral evidence is  quintessentially  a
    matter for the Judge of fact.  An appellant court or tribunal should be
    cautious indeed  in  interfering  with  a  Judge's  assessment  of  the
    veracity of a witness based upon their oral evidence.  Of course, if  a
    Judge were to ignore other evidence which cast  doubt  on  a  witness's
    veracity that might call into question the Judge's  assessment.   Here,
    there  is  no  such  contradictory  evidence.   The  claimant  was  not
    required, as  a  matter  of  law,  to  corroborate  her  oral  evidence
    concerning the basis for her husband's absence.  The  reliance  in  the
    grounds upon TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ  40  at  [21]  that  a
    Judge may take into account  the  absence  of  "independent  supporting
    evidence" which is "readily available  within  the  jurisdiction"  when
    assessing the credibility of an individual's evidence, does not support
    the Secretary of State's contention that the Judge was not entitled  to
    accept the claimant's  oral  evidence  in  the  absence  of  supporting
    documentary evidence whether from the  claimant's  husband  himself  or
    elsewhere.

28. In his oral submissions, Mr Richards pitched the Secretary  of  State's
    challenge at the level of irrationality, namely that the Judge was  not
    rationally entitled to find that the respondent had failed to establish
    that the claimant's marriage was one of convenience.  That  is  a  high
    threshold indeed requiring a conclusion that no reasonable Judge  could
    have made the finding that this Judge made.  As  I  have  already  made
    clear, the Judge was entitled to accept the claimant's  oral  evidence.
    That evidence went to rebut the "reasonable suspicion"  raised  by  the
    evidence presented on behalf of the Secretary of State based  upon  the
    Immigration Officers'  visit  on  14  February  2014.   Throughout  the
    appeal, the burden lay upon the Secretary of State to  establish  on  a
    balance of probabilities  that  the  claimant's  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience only.  I see no proper basis upon which the Judge's finding
    that the respondent had failed to discharge that burden could  be  said
    to be unsustainable as a matter of law.

29. For these reasons, I reject the Secretary of State's challenge to Judge
    Suffield-Thompson's decision to allow the claimant's appeal.

Decision

30. Thus, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow  the  claimant's
    appeal under the EEA Regulations did not involve the making of an error
    of law and that decision stands.

31. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.




                               Signed


                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:


FEE AWARD

Judge Suffield-Thompson made a fee award in  respect  of  any  fee  paid  or
payable by the claimant. I see no basis for reaching  any  other  conclusion
and I affirm that decision.




                               Signed


                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:
