
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/25713/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                   |     Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                     |
|On 28 January 2016                    |     On 4 March 2016            |
|                                      |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            mR CHIDIEBERE EZEIKE
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Brown, Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter  comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Wellesley-Cole  dated  14  January
    2015. The appeal relates to a decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Tully promulgated on 28 October 2015.   The  Judge  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had dismissed the appeal based on the  Immigration  Rules  but
    had allowed the appeal on human rights grounds. The Secretary of  State
    had sought permission to appeal. To  ease  following  these  grounds  I
    shall continue to refer to the Secretary of State as the Respondent and
    to Mr Ezike as the Appellant.

2.    The Secretary of State's  grounds  of  appeal  can  be  summarised  as
    follows:

    1) The Judge had misdirected herself because the appeal  was  dismissed
       in respect of the  Immigration  Rules  and  should  only  have  been
       allowed if the Judge had identified  the  Appellant's  circumstances
       "to be  exceptional  i.e.  that  the  refusal  would  amount  to  an
       unjustifiably harsh outcome";
    2) The Judge failed to engage with the decision of Gulshan [2013]  UKUT
       00640 (IAC) although it was cited;
    3) The circumstances advanced by the Appellant and adopted by the Judge
       failed to identify any consequences which were unjustifiably harsh;
    4) In undertaking a proportionality assessment outside  of  the  Rules,
       the  Judge  failed  to  consider   s117B   Nationality   Immigration
       Nationality and Asylum Act 2002
    5) Whilst the Appellant may have a parental relationship with his  son,
       this can continue via modern forms of communication.


3.    At the hearing before me Mr  Richards  said  that  he  relied  on  the
    grounds of appeal and did not intend to add much more.  The  ground  in
    respect of s117 was misplaced because that was dealt with at  paragraph
    33 of the Judge's decision. None of what the Judge said is  contentious
    but it missed the point. The fact was that if  the  Appellant  did  not
    qualify for further leave to remain then he should be removed from  the
    United Kingdom. There was no  need  for  the  Appellant  do  have  done
    anything criminal. The Judge missed the point  and  she  did  not  give
    appropriate weight to the balancing  exercise  and  it  was  skewed  in
    favour of the Appellant. This was amplified by the Judge  giving  undue
    weight to the relationship between the Appellant and the son.  The  son
    was not a qualifying child whether within the Rules  or  the  Act.  The
    Judge had fundamentally erred in her decision which therefore ought  to
    be set aside.

4.    Mr Brown in his submissions said that on a plain reading there was  no
    sufficient reason to set aside  the  Judge's  decision.  Based  on  the
    decision of the Administrative Court in R on the application of Sunasse
    v Upper Tribunal (IAC) [2015] EWHC 1604 (Admin) if the facts do not fit
    in within Appendix FM then one goes  on  to  consider  the  application
    outside of the Rules. I  should  not  lose  sight  of  the  facts.  The
    Appellant has a strong parental relationship. The son is almost 3.  The
    mother and son had leave to remain. Paragraphs 33 and 34 of the Judge's
    decision show no material error of law. Paragraph 36 showed that it was
    up  to  the  Respondent  to  consider  further  leave.  It   would   be
    unjustifiably harsh to expect  the  Appellant  to  return  to  make  an
    application. It would leave to severance of family life. The  challenge
    to the decision is one of weight. Most important is the  issue  of  the
    best interests of the child.

5.    I heard from Mr Richards in reply. He said that it was not  just  that
    the Appellant's son  and  former  partner's  stay  was  precarious.  In
    respect of s117B the Judge did not direct  herself  properly.  None  of
    what the Judge said at paragraph 33 was factually correct.   The  Judge
    missed the point. Immigration control is from someone not  meeting  the
    Rules.  There was no deference paid by  the  Judge  and  therefore  the
    balancing exercise was skewed and the decision was wrong.

6.    I took the unusual course of permitting Mr Brown to respond  with  the
    position that Mr Richards would get the final word. Mr  Brown  said  he
    was still unsure as to what in respect of the  public  interest  aspect
    remained. The Judge did balance things at paragraph 35.

7.    Invited to reply, Mr Richards said he had nothing further to add.

8.    The findings which the Judge made  in  this  case  (and  which  remain
    unchallenged) include that there was "overwhelming evidence"  that  the
    Appellant and his son enjoy a close bond. This evidence  included  from
    several sources that the Appellant is a loving father who  is  actively
    involved in his son's life. The Appellant sees his son regularly and is
    involved in all aspects  of  his  life.  The  Appellant  also  provides
    financial support for his son.

9.    The Judge also made findings that she  had  no  doubt  that  both  the
    Appellant and his son would be severely affected by a  removal  of  the
    Appellant from the United Kingdom. It was unlikely that  the  Appellant
    and his son would be able to spend time together  for  the  foreseeable
    future if the Appellant was removed from the United Kingdom. As for the
    son travelling to Nigeria, this was not possible on his own as  he  was
    only aged 3 and the child's mother has other young children and is in a
    new relationship and she would not be able  or  willing  to  take  that
    child to Nigeria.

10.   The Judge concluded that the son was of an age where it  was  unlikely
    that he would understand why his father was no longer present and  that
    this would be confusing and distressing for him.  The  Judge  had  also
    considered the Supreme Court's decision in ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4.

11.   Ultimately the Judge said that in her  view  and  in  this  particular
    case it was in the best interests of the child that  the  son  maintain
    the close bond that he has with the Appellant.  There would  be  severe
    damage to the relationship to do otherwise.

12.  It is against that background and  in  respect  of  those  unchallenged
    findings that I consider  this  appeal.  I  note  that  the  two  stage
    assessment requirement as set out by the Court of Appeal in SS  (Congo)
    and others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ
    387 and the decision of the Administrative  Court  in  Sunassee  [2015]
    EWHC 1604.  I shall apply the law as it stands and any  later  decision
    of the Supreme Court in SS (Congo) is not a matter for me.

13.   In this case, in my judgment, the Judge did ask  the  right  questions
    and did identify  the  compelling  circumstances  which  needed  to  be
    considered outside of the Immigration Rules. Namely the best  interests
    of the child who had a very close bond with his father who he saw on  a
    regular basis would be severely affected.

14.   Further as has  been  clear,  the  Judge  did  consider  section  117B
    although the original grounds of  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    indicated otherwise. In any event, as Dube [2015] UKUT 90 makes  clear,
    the real issue is substance and not form.  In this case the Judge noted
    the presence of the child. That was a very important factor even though
    the child was not British and the child had not  been  present  in  the
    United Kingdom for 7 years or longer.

15.   Ultimately the Judge made the numerous  extensive  findings  that  she
    did about the serious impact on the child if there was to be a  removal
    of the Appellant. Those findings are adequately reasoned and indeed are
    not themselves challenged. These are compelling circumstances  in  this
    particular case.

16.   It may well be that the decision reached by  the  Judge  was  not  one
    which all Judges would have reached, but that does not  mean  it  is  a
    decision infected by error of law.

17.   Ultimately in my judgment the  Judge  carefully  and  fully  explained
    that on the facts of this individual case there would be too severe  an
    impact on the child by a removal  of  the  Appellant.  The  Judge  also
    explained at paragraph 36 of her decision that in the circumstances the
    Secretary of State would wish to grant the  Appellant  a  corresponding
    period of leave as that of the son.

18.   Therefore having reflected on the matter, I conclude that there is  no
    material error of law in the Judge's decision. The Judge  was  entitled
    to come to the decision that she came to in view of the findings  which
    she had made and which findings were unchallenged in any  event.  These
    were the unjustifiably harsh consequences of  removal.  The  Judge  did
    consider the case law. Indeed she referred to it and then  applied  it.
    Similarly she referred to and correctly applied statute, including s117
    NIAA 2002.

19.   Accordingly, I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal Judge contains no material error  of
law and therefore remains.

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

An anonymity direction is not made.

Signed                                       Date: 1 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

