
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/25802/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 February 2018                  |On 8 March 2018                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                 JUMOKE [E]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, advocate, instructed by P G Farrell,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. We have considered whether any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances and  evidence  we
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge D C Clapham promulgated on 24 November 2016, which  dismissed
the Appellant's appeal.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on [ ] 1972 and is a national  of  Nigeria.  On  1
July 2015 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's application  for  a
residence card as  confirmation  of  a  right  to  reside  in  the  UK.  The
appellant claims that she  qualifies  for  a  retained  right  of  residence
following divorce from an EEA national in accordance with regulation 10  (5)
of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  The  appellant  was  married  to
Czech  national.  During  the  currency  of  that  marriage  the   appellant
delivered a child by a previous partner, who is not  an  EEA  national.  The
marriage between the appellant and the EEA national broke  down.  Decree  of
divorce was granted on  27  November  2014.  The  divorce  proceedings  were
commenced after the EEA national had left the UK.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge  D  C  Clapham  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal   against   the
Respondent's decision.

5. Grounds of appeal were lodged and  on  23  October  2017  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Rimmington gave permission to appeal stating

      A Union Citizen must reside in the host  member  state  in  accordance
      with article 7 (1) until the  date  of  the  commencement  of  divorce
      proceedings if a third country national was to be entitled to rely  on
      article 13(2)(c) of the Directive. As  the  Judge  found  the  divorce
      proceedings commenced after the EU citizen had departed and  the  main
      applicant could not succeed.


      However although the child, born in September 2010, was not the  child
      of the EU national it is arguable she was previously a  family  member
      and there is no requirement, as per SSHD v NA C-115/15, that the child
      had commenced school prior to the EU  national's  departure  from  the
      union.


      The grounds are arguable

The Hearing

6. (a) Mr Caskie, for the appellant, reminded us that the appellant  married
a Czech national when she was six months pregnant with another man's  child.
The father of the child is a Nigerian citizen.  The  appellant's  child  was
born with Nigerian nationality. He told us that the appellant's marriage  to
the Czech national ended in divorce and that the appellant and the  Nigerian
father of her child are now reconciled. The appellant lives with  her  child
and the child's father.

(b)  The  appellant  and  her  partner  are  Nigerian  nationals,  but   the
appellant's Nigerian partner has been granted indefinite leave to remain  in
the UK. He was granted indefinite leave  to  remain  before  this  case  was
heard in the First-tier Tribunal. Before this case was heard in  the  First-
tier Tribunal, the appellant's child made an application to  register  as  a
British citizen. That application was pending at the  date  of  the  hearing
before the First-tier Tribunal, and was granted in the few days between  the
date of hearing and the date the Judge's decision was promulgated.

(c) Ms O'Brien told us that she did not dispute the  facts  outlined  by  Mr
Caskie. The  appellant's  child  was  issued  with  a  British  passport  in
November 2016.

(d) Mr Caskie told us that the decision contains a clear error  of  law.  He
argued that the Judge  applied  regulation  10  (5)  &  10(6)  of  the  2006
Regulations, when he should have considered regulation 10  (3)  and  10  (4)
instead. Mr Caskie  then  addressed  us  at  length  on  the  definition  of
"parent" in the 2006 Regulations and in European law. He urged us  to  apply
a  liberal  definition  of  the  word,  encompassing  various   degrees   of
relationship. We listen carefully to what Mr Caskie  had  to  say,  but  his
argument  about  the   interrelationship   between   parental   rights   and
responsibilities, as created by the Children (Scotland) Act  1995,  and  the
definition of "parent" in 2006 Regulations is not something  which  we  need
to consider. We see no reason to suppose that the relationship  set  out  in
the Regulations and the Citizen's Directive 2004/38/EC are  to  be  extended
beyond those arising from blood or from an adoption recognised  by  law.  In
particular, the implicit incorporation of step-parentage is in our  judgment
ruled out by the separate listing of descendants of the  propositus  and  of
the propositus' spouse.

7.  For the appellant, Ms O'Brien reminded us that the appellant's child  is
a British citizen. The child was granted citizenship on  19  November  2016.
The Judge's decision  was  promulgated  on  24  November  2016.  Ms  O'Brien
succinctly questioned the relevance of a number of submissions made for  the
appellant, and agreed that the focus in this case is  that  the  appellant's
child was granted British citizenship before the decision was promulgated.

Analysis

8. The Judge heard this case on 7 November 2016. We are satisfied  that  the
Judge  was  told  that  the  appellant  child's  application   for   British
citizenship was outstanding at the date of  the  hearing.  In  the  14  days
between the date of hearing the promulgation of the  decision  there  was  a
material change in circumstances because the appellant's child  was  granted
British citizenship.

9.   In E and R (2004) EWCA Civ 49 the Court of Appeal said that "a  mistake
of fact giving rise to unfairness is a separate  head  of  challenge  in  an
appeal on a point of law, at least in those  statutory  contexts  where  the
parties share an interest in co-operating to  achieve  the  correct  result.
Asylum law is undoubtedly such an area." The Court of  Appeal  set  out  the
ordinary requirements for a finding of unfairness as follows:

    i)     There must have been a mistake as to an existing fact  including
    a mistake as to the availability of evidence on a particular fact;


    ii)    The fact or evidence must have been established,  in  the  sense
    that it was uncontentious and objectively verifiable;


    iii)   The appellant (or his advisors) must not have  been  responsible
    for the mistake; and


    iv)    The  mistake  must  have  played  a  material  (not  necessarily
    decisive) part in the Adjudicator's reasoning.

10. The Judge's decision is based on a mistake of fact. The decision  relies
on a finding of fact that the appellant's  child  is  a  Nigerian  national,
when, at the date of decision, the appellant's child is a  British  Citizen.
The mistake relates to a fundamental fact which almost certainly would  have
resulted in a different outcome. We  have  to  find  that  the  decision  is
tainted by material error of law. We set the decision aside.

11. In Boodhoo and another (EEA Regs: relevant evidence) [2013]  UKUT 00346
(IAC) it was held that neither section 85A of the  Nationality,  Immigration
and Asylum Act 2002 nor the  guidance  in  DR  (Morocco)*  [2005]  UKAIT  38
regarding a previous version of section 85(5) of that Act  has  any  bearing
on an appeal under the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
2006. In such an appeal, a tribunal  has  power  to  consider  any  evidence
which it thinks  relevant  to  the  substance  of  the  decision,  including
evidence which concerns a matter arising after the date of the decision.

12. We consider whether or not we can substitute our own decision  but  find
that we cannot do so because of the  extent  of  the  fact-finding  exercise
necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

13. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or




    (b)    the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.


14. In this case we  have  determined  that  the  case  should  be  remitted
because a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of  the  findings  of
fact are to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

15. We remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Glasgow  to  be
heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge D C Clapham.

16. The appellant and the child's Nigerian father have made  an  application
to marry, which the Secretary of  State  has  decided  to  investigate.  The
appellant was not allowed to attend an  appointment  for  interview  at  the
respondent's premises in Brand Street, Glasgow, because she could  not  show
a passport at the front door of the building, and so  was  denied  entry  to
the building. She could not show a passport  because  the  respondent  holds
her passport (which has now expired). She cannot renew her passport  because
the Nigerian consulate will not renew a passport for a person who  does  not
have leave to remain in the UK.

17.  The  marriage  interview   is   still   outstanding.   The   respondent
acknowledges that there  is  a  practical  difficulty  with  conducting  the
interview. We express the hope that  the  marriage  interview  will  be  re-
arranged and the respondent  will  ensure  that  the  appellant  is  granted
access to the venue for the interview.

Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

19.  We set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 24 November 2016.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 7 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


