
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25265/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 15th November 2013                         |on 17th January 2014         |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                           ROMA MAHESHKUMAR GURJAR
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Nasim instructed by Malik & Malik Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Melvin - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge  Scobbie  promulgated  on  23rd  January  2013  in  which  he
        dismissed the Appellant's appeal under both the  Immigration  Rules
        and on human rights grounds against the refusal of the Secretary of
        State to vary her leave to  allow  her  to  remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom as the dependent of a points-based migrant, her husband.


     2. Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  not  admitted  by
        First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer who  noted  that  the  application
        should have been lodged by 1st February 2013 but was  not  in  fact
        received until 7th February 2013. No explanation was  provided  for
        why the application was late and so it  had  not  been  established
        that special circumstances existed such that  it  would  have  been
        unjust not to extend time.  The application was renewed  the  Upper
        Tribunal and considered by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley who, in  a
        decision dated 3rd April 2013, granted permission to appeal on  the
        following basis:

     4.  However,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  consider  the
     appellant's Article 8 appeal  despite  the  fact  that  she  raised  an
      assertion  that   the   refusal   was   contrary   to   her   European
Convention for the protection of Human Rights and Fundamental       Freedoms
rights.  On this issue only, I grant permission.


Preliminary issue - Timeliness


     3. Although Judge Chalkley purports  to  have  granted  permission  to
        appeal to the Upper Tribunal there is no reference to any  decision
        being made regarding the fact the appeal  was  out  of  time.   The
        renewed application to the Upper Tribunal contains  no  explanation
        for why the application was filed late, contains no application for
        extending time, and  contains  a  material  misrepresentation  when
        stating in section 10 that the First-tier Tribunal did  not  refuse
        to admit the application because it was late.  No  explanation  was
        provided for such a misleading statement  being  made  by  Malik  &
        Malik.


     4. In Boktor and Wanis (late application for permission) Egypt  [2011]
        UKUT 00442 (IAC) the Tribunal held that where permission to  appeal
        to the Upper Tribunal has been granted, but in circumstances  where
        the application is out of time, an  explanation  is  provided,  but
        that  explanation  is  not  considered  by   the   judge   granting
        permission, in the light of AK (Tribunal  appeal  -  out  of  time)
        Bulgaria [2004] UKIAT 00201 (starred) and the clear wording of rule
        24(4) of the Asylum and Immigration  (Procedure)  Rules  2005,  the
        grant of permission to appeal is conditional, and the  question  of
        whether there are special circumstances making  it  unjust  not  to
        extend time has to be considered.


     5. I admit the appeal because having considered the guidance  provided
        in the case law, the lack of prejudice to either party, the  merits
        of the appeal and the interests of fairness, it is appropriate  for
        me to do so. This is not challenged by either party.



Discussion



     6. The only ground on which permission was granted relates to  Article
        8 ECHR although Mr Nasim  applied  for  leave  to  raise  an  issue
        relating to the Rules in addition. Permission was granted  for  him
        to make submissions on this issue in the interests of justice as it
        is determinative of the appeal.


     7. The Respondents refusal letter  is  dated  25th  October  2012.  It
        states that on 20th May 2012 the Appellant made an application  for
        leave to remain as the dependant of a PBS Migrant but that the  her
        partner was not included in the application. The challenge to  this
        assertion is based upon the fact  that  the  applications  for  the
        Appellant and her husband were submitted at the same time  and  her
        husband's application granted. The applications were made 'in time'
        and the reference in the refusal to the date  of  submission  being
        20th May 2013 is incorrect. Mr Nasim stated that both  applications
        were made on 30th May 2012 and, I note, that of  the  Appellant  is
        date stamped as having been  received  on  1st  June  2012  by  the
        Respondent.  Mr Melvin accepted  that  on  the  correct  facts  the
        Appellant is entitled to succeed and so I set the determination  of
        First-tier Tribunal Judge Scobbie aside and  allow  the  appeal  on
        this basis under the Rules.

     8. As the appeal has been allowed under the Rules it is not  necessary
        for me to consider Article 8 ECHR or the issues arising from the s.
        47 direction which is now academic.


Decision

     9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is allowed.


   Anonymity.


    10. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make no such order as no application has been made and  the
        need for such an order is not established on the facts


   Fee Award.


   Note: this is not part of the determination.


    11. In the light of my decision to re-make the decision in  the  appeal
        by allowing it, I have considered whether to make a fee award (rule
        23A (costs) of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
        Rules 2005 and  section  12(4)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
        Enforcement Act 2007). I have had regard to the Joint  Presidential
        Guidance Note: Fee Awards in Immigration Appeals (December 2011). I
        make a whole fee award.


          Reasons: The decision to refuse was based upon a mistake  of  fact
   and the             Appellant has succeeded.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 13th January 2014
