

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/25541/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|On 28 April 2015                              |On 1 May 2015                |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  M A KANIA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C McGinley, of Gray & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Poland, born on  1  February  1982.   She
    applied for a registration certificate under the Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as confirmation of a right of residence
    as a qualified person in terms of regulation 6.  On  5  June  2014  the
    respondent issued a notice of refusal of that application,  accompanied
    by a reasons  for  refusal  letter.   The  respondent  found  that  the
    appellant failed to provide sufficient evidence that she was  currently
    a qualified person as a student, or that she was  exercising  her  free
    movement rights as a job seeker, having been in  that  capacity  for  a
    period in excess of 6 months.

 2. Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Murray dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal by determination promulgated on 27 August 2014.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    following grounds:

         "The judge accepted that regulation 6(2)(b)(i) has been  satisfied;
         and that regulation 6(2)(b)(ii) cannot be satisfied "but  there  is
         an alternative".  The  judge  accepted  (at  paragraph  32  of  the
         determination) that the appellant has been  seeking  employment  in
         the United Kingdom, and therefore  the  issue  to  be  decided  was
         "whether she has a genuine chance of being engaged in  employment".
         ... the judge has erred in finding that this  appellant  is  not  a
         qualified person under regulation 6(2)(b).   ... the judge accepted
         that the appellant has been regularly applying for jobs but she has
         been unsuccessful (paragraph 32), and that "the  more  courses  she
         does, the better her chances are of getting employment"  (paragraph
         31).  The judge was aware  that  the  appellant  is  registered  to
         attend a 10 week  course  through  Jobs  and  Business  Glasgow  in
         September 2014.

         In all the circumstances, on a balance  of  probabilities  ...  the
         judge erred in finding that there  is  no  genuine  chance  of  the
         appellant being employed. "

 4. Permission having been refused  by  FtT  Judge  French,  the  appellant
    renewed her application on the following grounds:

         "... the  judge  materially  erred  in  law  in  finding  that  the
         appellant does not have a genuine  chance  of  finding  employment.
         ... given that the appellant provided evidence  of  having  applied
         for various jobs, and that she has been registered to attend  a  10
         week course through Jobs and Business Glasgow, then on a balance of
         probabilities ... the  appellant  is  a  "qualified  person"  under
         regulation 6(2)(b), and ...  there  is  a  genuine  change  of  the
         appellant being employed."

 5. On 8 January 2015 UT Judge Jordan granted permission, for the following
    reasons:

         "1 In paragraph 33, the judge recorded that the appellant had  last
             worked in 2010 and there was  not  a  genuine  chance  of  her
             finding work.  That would have been a good point  to  make  if
             the appellant had been unemployed in the  preceding  4  years.
             However, after leaving work in 2010, she had been studying  up
             until June 2014 and had commenced a further  short  course  in
             September 20104 apparently related to office  work  which  had
             been arranged under the auspices of Jobs and Business Glasgow.
              There was evidence of job applications.   There  was  a  past
             record of her finding work.  There was no  evidence  that  the
             jobs she was looking for were unrealistic bearing in mind  her
             qualifications, skills or circumstances.

         2  In such circumstances, it is arguable that the judge had to have
             some reason for concluding there was not a genuine  chance  of
             her finding work.  She has a son who was  born  on  27  August
             2009 but he did not prevent her from  working  until  2010  or
             studying from 2010 to 2014.  Short of a finding of  fact  that
             she did not have the ability to work or did not have a genuine
             intention to work, (that she was a  malingerer?)  the  judge's
             decision suggests that employment prospects are so poor for  a
             woman able and willing to work at a  level  commensurate  with
             her capabilities that she cannot establish there is a  genuine
             chance of finding work.  There  was  no  evidence  of  a  high
             unemployment rate.  Even  if  the  unemployment  rate  (for  a
             person in her circumstances) was as high as 75%,  there  would
             be a 25% prospect of  finding  work  and,  arguably,  that  is
             enough for there to be a "genuine chance" - note this  is  not
             assessed  on  balance   of   probabilities.    Arguably,   the
             conclusion reached by the judge was not  adequately  supported
             before her."

 6. The Secretary of State filed a response to the grounds of appeal  under
    Rule 24.

         "...

         1  The judge made a careful and detailed consideration of the facts
             of the appellant's case.  The appellant  had  not  worked  for
             over 5 years.  The appellant had limited her  availability  to
             particular hours.  The appellant has applied  for  jobs  at  a
             relatively low level and yet is not successful.

         2  The wording of the regulation  gives  the  judge  a  significant
             degree of flexibility.

         3  The  appellant  was  young,  fit  and  without  any  significant
             impairment yet for over 5 years did not seem able to find  any
             employment in a recovering  economy.   If  the  appellant  was
             wholly unsuccessful in that period it was fully  open  to  the
             judge to conclude that there  was,  for  whatever  reason,  no
             genuine chance of employment."

 7. Mr McGinley's submissions were along the  lines  of  the  grounds.   He
    adopted the terms of the grant of permission, although he accepted  the
    observation that the general rate of employment  does  not  necessarily
    correlate to an individual chance of finding work.  He founded upon the
    appellant's past work history and on her willingness to take posts at a
    suitable level.

 8. Mr Matthews pointed out the appellant was employed in the UK from  2008
    until May 2010, but then unemployed from June 2010 until  August  2012,
    over 2 years.  She appeared to have been a full time student until  May
    2013 and since then attending part time courses while  also  registered
    as unemployed.  Since last being employed she has had a child, and  she
    restricts her hours of availability for employment to 10 am  to  4  pm.
    With that history and restricted availability in mind,  the  judge  was
    entitled to find that she did had not established "a genuine chance  of
    being engaged", the question  of  fact  which  was  agreed  to  be  the
    critical issue.

 9. Mr Matthews also pointed out that although the case  had  so  far  been
    approached on the basis that the appellant had to show only "a  genuine
    chance of being engaged", the Regulations rather  appear  to  impose  a
    test that she should produce "compelling evidence that she  is  seeking
    employment and has a genuine chance of being engaged."  (The regulation
    may conveniently be found in Phelan and Gillespie, 9th ed., pp 1355-6.)
     That appeared to be a higher test.  The appellant,  who  was  present,
    acknowledged through her representative that she has  still  not  found
    work.  Mr Matthews said that it would be difficult for any remaking  of
    the decision to go in her favour.

10. I reserved my determination.

11. It may be that the  criterion  in  the  Regulations  has  been  wrongly
    applied.  I would not find that to be an error  in  the  determination,
    because that is how the criterion is cited in the decision under appeal
    and that was the approach taken  by  both  parties  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

12. The challenge is to a factual finding.  The judge was bound to  resolve
    the issue one way or the other.  In my opinion, the appellant's grounds
    and submissions do not amount to more than re-argument of the case  she
    put.  They do not show that the determination is legally flawed  as  an
    explanation to the appellant of why the judge resolved the point as she
    did.  The factors  which  she  took  into  account  were  relevant  and
    sufficient to support the conclusion reached.

13. In any event, if the decision were to  be  remade,  the  correct  legal
    criterion  as  now  identified  is  a  rather  higher  one,  while  the
    appellant's position on the facts has  become  rather  weaker,  further
    time  having  gone  by  without  finding  a  job.   It  is  practically
    inevitable that any fresh decision would be adverse to her.

14. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



           [pic]


           28 April 2015
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


