
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25166/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5 December 2017                       |On 21 December 2017               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                 MASOODA [B]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. D. Coleman, Counsel instructed by A-R Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr. I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In a decision promulgated on 22 June 2017 the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge R. L. Walker was set aside to be remade.


 2. The appeal came before me on 21 September 2017  when  I  adjourned  the
    hearing.  I was informed  that  the  Appellant  was  receiving  medical
    treatment and  was  not  in  attendance.   It  was  requested  that  an
    adjournment be granted due to the absence of the Appellant and so  that
    further  medical  evidence  could  be  obtained  in  relation  to  this
    treatment.  Mr. Jarvis did not oppose the adjournment, and  the  appeal
    came before me to be remade on 5 December 2017.


 3. I heard oral evidence from the Appellant, from her son Mr.  Ahmad  [M],
    and from her daughter Ms Fatima [T].  The Appellant was assisted by the
    interpreter, Ms Nazia Fazil, who confirmed before proceeding that  they
    both fully understood  each  other.   Both  representatives  made  oral
    submissions.  I reserved my decision.


 4. In addition to the oral evidence, I have taken into account the witness
    statements of the Appellant, her sons Mr. Ahmad [M] and Mr. Ahmad  [B],
    her daughter, Ms Fatima [T], handwritten letters from her grandchildren
    [ZbM], [ZnM] and [ZA], the psychiatric report from  Dr.  Sajid  Suleman
    dated 29 September 2016, further medical evidence in a bundle dated  22
    November 2017, supporting documents and the skeleton argument.


 5. Mr. Jarvis provided the cases of SQ (Pakistan) [2013] EWCA Civ 1251, SS
    (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387, and Britcits [2017] EWCA Civ 368.


Burden and standard of proof


 6. The burden of proof lies on the Appellant to show that, at the date  of
    the hearing, the decision is a breach of the Appellant's  rights  to  a
    family and private life under Article 8 ECHR.  The standard of proof is
    the balance of probabilities.


Findings and conclusions


  7. I make the following general observations.  The hearing in  the  First-
     tier Tribunal was on 25 October 2016.  The error of law hearing in this
     Tribunal was on 8 June 2017.  At the adjourned hearing on 21  September
     2017  I  was  provided  with  three  letters   from   the   Appellant's
     grandchildren.  I  also  received  some  further  medical  evidence  as
     referred to above.  However, I have no  evidence  in  relation  to  the
     medical treatment that the Appellant was receiving  in  September  2017
     when the hearing was adjourned save for mention in a  letter  from  Dr.
     Khan that the Appellant had recently had cataract treatment on her left
     eye (see below).


  8. Further, despite the  passage  of  time,  I  have  no  updated  witness
     statements from the  Appellant  or  from  her  children.   The  witness
     statements before me were prepared for the hearing  in  the  First-tier
     Tribunal in October 2016.  The witness statements of the  children  are
     in substantially the same terms.  Bearing in mind that I am considering
     circumstances at  the  date  of  the  hearing,  and  mindful  that  the
     Appellant is represented, it is significant that I have no up  to  date
     witness statements from the Appellant or from her  children.   This  is
     especially the case in relation to her son, Mr. [B], who wrote  to  the
     Tribunal on 16 November 2017 explaining that he could  not  attend  the
     hearing as he was going on holiday.  He  is  in  Pakistan.   His  short
     letter states that his mother is "totally  dependent  on  us",  but  he
     gives no details, and relies on a witness  statement  prepared  over  a
     year ago.  The financial evidence is that which was  provided  for  the
     hearing in October 2016.


  9. I did not find the Appellant or her children to be honest  or  reliable
     witnesses.   I  found  that  they  were  evasive  when  questioned,  in
     particular when challenged about the claimed lack of  support  for  the
     Appellant  in  Pakistan.   I  find  that  the  evidence  is  vague  and
     inconsistent in a number of key areas, for example in relation  to  the
     Appellant's living arrangements (see [11]  below).   I  find  that  the
     Appellant and her children have exaggerated  the  level  of  dependence
     which the Appellant has on others.


 10. In particular, I did not find it credible that the  Appellant  and  her
     family would be unable to find accommodation for her in  Pakistan.   No
     evidence was provided to corroborate this claim, despite the fact  that
     they had found accommodation for her before without problems.  I  found
     this to be a claim lacking all credibility.  Neither did I accept their
     claims that there would be no family  support  in  Pakistan.   For  the
     first time at the hearing it was claimed that  the  Appellant  did  not
     have a good relationship with her daughter in Pakistan.  This  had  not
     been mentioned before, and the emphasis previously was on the  physical
     distance between the Appellant and her daughter in Pakistan.   I  found
     this to be an attempt to make the Appellant's circumstances in Pakistan
     appear to be worse than they are.


 11. In relation to the Appellant's current living arrangements,  these  are
     not detailed in the witness statements, and the oral  evidence  of  the
     Appellant and her children did not satisfactorily clarify  this  issue.
     In the Appellant's witness statement dated 4 October  2016  she  states
     that she is being looked after by her son Ahmad [M], and that  her  day
     to day care needs are met by Mr. [M].   However,  the  address  on  her
     witness statement is not the same address as Mr. [M], but is  the  same
     address as Mr. [B].  It was  said  in  oral  evidence  that  she  moved
     between the three children's houses, but there was no detail given, and
     it was not clear how often she moved (see further at [40] to [43]).


 12. Further I did not accept the claims of the Appellant  or  her  children
     that they did not consider that she would want to stay here beyond  the
     terms of her visa (see [57] below).


 13. I also take into account the letter from 2015 which  stated  that  that
     the Appellant had heart problems.   The Appellant  said  that  she  had
     written this letter with her sons.  She did not  remember  reading  the
     letter, but she did sign it.  Mr. [M] said that it had  been  explained
     to the solicitor who had written the letter.  He said  that  she  "may"
     have a heart condition, but that it was not  serious.   He  then  said,
     when asked whether there had been any diagnosis of a  heart  condition,
     that the Appellant might have a  diagnosis,  but  it  was  "not  in  my
     notice".  I did not find these explanations satisfactory as to why  the
     letter stated that the Appellant had heart problems when  there  is  no
     reliable corroborative evidence to suggest such problems.  I find  that
     this was an attempt to exaggerate her level of illness.


Medical evidence from Dr. Suleman

 14. I have carefully considered the evidence from Dr.  Suleman.   The  main
     psychiatric report  is  dated  29  September  2016.   The  most  recent
     evidence from him is a letter dated 8 November 2017.  This states  that
     the Appellant suffers from recurrent depression.  She is being  treated
     with Citalopram  and  has  also  received  CBT.   He  states  that  the
     Appellant is "currently feeling much  better".   He  states  that  "she
     feels" she will not be able to cope if forced to  return  to  Pakistan.
     He refers to the support provided by "her sons" who help her to "engage
     in structured activities" and ensure compliance  with  medication.   "I
     feel that this support is essential to keep her well and I  am  worried
     that she will be at high risk of relapse if this support is  withdrawal
     (sic) or if she is removed from the UK."


 15. While I accept Dr. Suleman's expertise as set  out  in  his  report,  I
     place limited weight on this letter for the following  reasons.   There
     is no reference to the Appellant's daughter, yet it is the  Appellant's
     case that her care is spread between her three children, not  just  her
     sons.  Secondly, Dr. Suleman has given no details  of  the  "structured
     activities" in which the Appellant is alleged to engage.  No  reference
     has been made in any witness statement or in oral evidence to me  about
     any "structured activities".


 16. Dr. Suleman states that her depression is "recurrent", and states "when
     unwell", but he has given  no  detail  of  how  often  she  experiences
     periods of being unwell or for how long they last.  It  is  clear  from
     his letter that she has periods when she is better, such as  now,  when
     he describes her as "feeling much better".


 17. Dr. Suleman's report which goes into more detail states  the  Appellant
     started to feel "in low mood" after the death of her husband [4.4].  He
     states that she first became depressed  in  Pakistan  in  October  2012
     [5.1].  She was prescribed Citalopram.  At [5.2] and [5.3] Dr.  Suleman
     states that he first saw her in October  2014.   He  describes  how  he
     started her on 20mg Citalopram.  She improved and by February 2015  her
     symptoms settled and she "recovered  from  depression".   In  September
     2015 her Citalopram was reduced to 10mg.   She  then  remained  settled
     until  November  2015  when  her  symptoms  of  depression  started  to
     reappear.  Her Citalopram was increased to 20mg.  "Her symptoms settled
     quickly and she was recovered in 6 weeks.   She  has  remained  settled
     since then.  She continues to take Citalopram 20mg daily."


 18. There is no evidence in his later letter that the Appellant has had any
     recurrence of her depression between the  report  written  in  November
     2016 and now.  His later letter does not state that he  has  even  seen
     her since November 2016.  Although it states that he has managed her in
     his clinic for the last four  years,  there  is  no  reference  to  her
     needing any treatment in addition to her medication over  the  last  12
     months.


 19. Further, the evidence shows that, even in the UK with  the  support  of
     her children, she has had times where she has been more  depressed  and
     low.  Her evidence is that she started to feel low on the death of  her
     husband in 2004, and that it became worse in 2012,  when  she  received
     treatment in Pakistan.  However, the evidence shows that her  situation
     is stable when she is taking 20mg of Citalopram, as she is  doing  now.
     This medication is available in Pakistan as evidenced by the  Appellant
     herself who received it in Pakistan in 2012.


Letter from Dr. Tasneem Khan


 20. The Appellant provided a letter dated 13 November 2017 from Dr. Tasneem
     Khan at the  South  Woodford  Health  Centre.   This  states  that  the
     Appellant suffers from  depression,  high  blood  pressure,  arthritis,
     hypothyroidism, and "recent complicated left-eye cataract surgery".   I
     have no further evidence relating to the eye surgery, which  was  given
     as the reason for the adjournment being necessary  in  September.   Dr.
     Khan gives no details  of  the  other  conditions  in  terms  of  their
     severity.


 21. Dr. Khan goes on to state that the Appellant is "totally  dependent  on
     her two sons".  As in Dr. Suleman's report, there is  no  reference  to
     her daughter.  This runs contrary to the evidence of  the  family  that
     she is dependent on all three children, and is not "totally  dependent"
     on her sons.  Dr. Khan states that her sons help her with "day  to  day
     living, assisting her  on  having  her  medication  promptly  on  time,
     ironing her clothes, cooking,  doing  shopping,  and  most  importantly
     giving her the support that  she  requires  to  overcome  her  fear  of
     loneliness and depression".  The letter indicates that she is on repeat
     medication for three drugs, which do not include Citalopram.  The  only
     prescriptions provided are for Citalopram and the most recent is  dated
     16/11/2017.


 22. I find that I can place limited weight on this letter due to  the  fact
     that it directly contradicts the evidence of the family which  is  that
     she is as equally dependent on her  daughter  as  her  sons.   I  would
     expect the medical professionals involved in her care to know  on  whom
     she was dependent.


Private life under the immigration rules

 23. I  have  considered  the  Appellant's  claim  that  she  satisfies  the
     requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  In order do to this she  must
     show that there are very significant obstacles to her integration  into
     Pakistan if required to leave the United Kingdom.


 24. I find that the Appellant has lived in Pakistan for the  vast  majority
     of her life.  She has strong social,  family  and  linguistic  ties  to
     Pakistan.


 25. I have considered the care that the Appellant claims to need.   I  find
     that the level of care has been exaggerated by the  Appellant  and  her
     family.  I find that she does not need  assistance  with  her  personal
     care.  There is no evidence that she needs assistance with  washing  or
     toileting.  When the Appellant herself was asked about  her  needs  she
     referred to shopping and visiting hospital.  The report of Dr.  Suleman
     refers to her needing help with cooking,  cleaning,  paying  bills  and
     shopping.  Dr. Khan refers to ironing, cooking and shopping.


 26. It has been suggested that she needs her children to ensure  compliance
     with her medication, but I do not  find  this  credible.   Dr.  Suleman
     states that she requires reminding to take her medication, but he  does
     not indicate that she has a medical problem which  means  that  she  is
     unable to take her medication unsupervised.   He  further  states  that
     "when" she is depressed she needs reminding, but  I  have  found  above
     that there is no  evidence  that  she  has  had  a  recurrence  of  her
     depression in  the  last  12  months,  and  she  has  been  taking  her
     medication during this time.  Neither the Appellant  nor  her  children
     gave any detail as to how they remind her, especially bearing  in  mind
     that she is currently living alone (see [43] below).


 27. I find that when the  Appellant  was  living  in  Pakistan  she  had  a
     helper/carer who assisted her on a daily basis.  I find  that  she  had
     this help from 2004  until  2012.   Despite  the  claims  that  it  was
     impossible to find someone who could be trusted, there is  no  evidence
     that the Appellant had problems previously in  Pakistan.   When  asked,
     she said that security issues were always there,  but  her  mother  was
     alive  and  would  come  and  visit  her.   She  said   that   nowadays
     circumstances were different, and a carer could just go and tell people
     that the Appellant was living alone and "anything could  happen".   She
     said that she did not have a carer continuously and that sometimes they
     would just leave.


 28. I find that the Appellant has family in Pakistan including  a  daughter
     and  three  brothers.   In  her  witness  statement   she   said   that
     unfortunately her daughter is married and lives a considerable distance
     from where the Appellant lives.  In her children's  witness  statements
     the same paragraph is repeated almost word for word,  and  states  that
     the sister lives at a considerable distance and for that reason is  not
     able to provide day to day care.  At the hearing for the first time  it
     was suggested that the Appellant did not have a good relationship  with
     her daughter in Pakistan.  There is no evidence  to  corroborate  this,
     and no reasons were given.  I attach no weight to this claim  and  find
     that it was an attempt to make out that the  Appellant's  situation  in
     Pakistan is worse than it is.


 29. I find that the Appellant has three brothers living in Pakistan.  At F8
     of the Respondent's bundle is a letter from one  of  them,  Mr.  Javaid
     Iqbal,  Director  General  (Debates),  Senate  Secretariat,  Parliament
     House, Islamabad.  This letter is dated 24  March  2015.   This  states
     that the Appellant lives "quite far away" and it is beyond him  to  see
     and look after her in old age.  At the hearing the Appellant was asked,
     given his position, whether he was influential and/  or  wealthy.   She
     said that he was but that "everybody has their  own  priorities".   She
     was asked why he would not able to make arrangements for  her  care  in
     Pakistan, and said that this was the reason she had come to the  United
     Kingdom.  If they could have supported her she  would  be  living  with
     them in Islamabad now.  It was  put  to  her  that  there  was  nothing
     stopping her brother from arranging for someone to help her in  another
     part of Pakistan, and that she did not have to live with him.  She  did
     not answer but replied  that  it  was  difficult  "shopping,  going  to
     hospital", and added that living alone there was lots of stuff to do.


 30. I find that she has many extended family members in Pakistan  who  will
     be able to assist her on her return.  I do not accept the evidence that
     none of these people would assist her.  I find that her three  brothers
     have 12 children between them, many of whom are in  Pakistan.   I  find
     that she would be assisted  by  her  daughter,  brothers  and  extended
     family.  I further find that the Appellant had help with daily tasks on
     and off for a period of some eight years.   I  find  that  she  had  no
     problems during this time.  I find  on  the  balance  of  probabilities
     that, given the family support in Pakistan, if she is not able  to,  or
     chooses not to, live with her family, they will be able to  assist  her
     to find someone to help her with these tasks.


 31. Mr. [M] said in oral evidence that he did not accept that it  would  be
     possible to find somewhere for the Appellant to live.  He was asked if,
     even though  he  had  enough  money  and  his  uncle  in  Pakistan  was
     influential, they not find somewhere for her to live.  He replied  that
     "these  people  were  not  helpful".   He  then  stated  that  she  had
     grandchildren and children here, and that her relatives had  their  own
     families.  They could not help her as her family here  could.   I  find
     that is not what  he  was  asked,  and  it  is  significant  that  when
     challenged about the situation in Pakistan, he instead referred to  her
     family in the United Kingdom.


 32. I do not find it credible that the Appellant would not be able to  find
     somewhere to live.  Mr. [M] was asked if he  had  ever  made  enquiries
     about either her living in a care home or having a carer, and  he  said
     that he had tried to find out in January 2015.  He also made the  claim
     that there was no security in Pakistan and that a carer could just walk
     away.  He said that nobody could be trusted.  I note that no claim  has
     been made relating  to  the  claimed  security  problems  in  Pakistan.
     Especially given the position of her brother, I do not find it credible
     that they would not be able to find  somewhere  for  the  Appellant  to
     live.


 33. In relation to medical treatment, I find that  the  Appellant  received
     treatment for her mental health in Pakistan.  She  was  prescribed  the
     same medication as she receives now.  She said that she  also  received
     the medication  she  receives  for  high  blood  pressure  and  thyroid
     problems in Pakistan.  There is no evidence before me to  suggest  that
     she would not be able to access this treatment again.


 34. I find  that  the  Appellant's  children's  will  be  able  to  provide
     financial support to the Appellant in Pakistan in the same way as  they
     claim to be supporting her here now.  It has not  been  suggested  that
     they would not do so.


 35. Taking all of the above into account, I find  that  the  Appellant  has
     failed to show that there will be very  significant  obstacles  to  her
     integration into Pakistan, and she fails to meet  the  requirements  of
     paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

Family life under the immigration rules


 36. In relation to family life under  the  rules,  the  Appellant  has  not
     claimed that she can meet the requirements of the  rules,  but  I  find
     that the reasons for  this  are  relevant  to  my  consideration  under
     Article 8 more generally.  The Appellant can only make  an  application
     for leave to remain as an adult dependent relative if she has had entry
     clearance as an adult dependent relative.  The Appellant came here as a
     visitor.  To satisfy the requirements for entry clearance as  an  adult
     dependent relative, she would have had to have shown  that  she  needed
     assistance for her personal care tasks and that that such care was  not
     available in Pakistan.  She  has  not  shown  that  she  requires  such
     assistance.


 37. It was submitted that the rules for adult  dependent  relatives,  whose
     lawfulness has been upheld in Britcits, are designed to exclude  people
     for whom essential care can be delivered in their home country.  I  was
     referred to [58] of Britcits.  I find that this is not the case for the
     Appellant as I find that she could obtain the care that  she  needs  in
     Pakistan, and importantly was receiving the care that she needed  prior
     to  coming  to  the  United  Kingdom.   Appendix  FM-SE  requires  that
     independent evidence be provided that the level of care is unavailable,
     and it is clear in the Appellant's case that she would  not  have  been
     able to provide such  evidence.   When  asked  about  whether  she  had
     attempted to obtain any such evidence, the question had to be repeated,
     and she said only that one of the reasons she came here was due  to  it
     being difficult to have a carer.


 38. Mr. [M]'s evidence is that the Appellant's helper was like  a  cleaner,
     not a carer.  I find that this shows that they would not have been able
     to show that the Appellant met the requirements for entry clearance  as
     an adult dependent relative.


 39. I find on the balance of probabilities that  a  decision  was  made  to
     apply for entry clearance as a visitor and then apply  for  settlement,
     knowing that the Appellant would not be able to meet  the  requirements
     of the immigration rules for entry  clearance  as  an  adult  dependent
     relative.  It is clear that her care needs did not approach  the  level
     required for entry clearance as an adult dependent relative.


Article 8 outside the immigration rules


 40. I have considered the Appellant's appeal under Article  8  outside  the
     immigration rules in accordance with the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.
      I find that the Appellant has three children  and  five  grandchildren
     living in the UK.  The evidence is that she stays  with  her  children,
     moving from one house to another, but I  did  not  find  this  evidence
     reliable or consistent.  I have found above that the witness statements
     do not set out her living arrangements.  I do not know if it has always
     been the case that she has moved from one house to  another  since  her
     arrival, but I  have  no  clear  evidence  which  explains  the  living
     arrangements.


 41. The  Appellant  said  that  she  moved  house  when  the  grandchildren
     indicated that they wished her to come and live with them, but this was
     not corroborated by the evidence of the Appellant's son who did not say
     that when she moved depended on the demands of her grandchildren.  I do
     not find it credible that she moves house dependent on the  demands  of
     her grandchildren.  Further, the Appellant's son was very  vague  about
     how much time she spends at each house before moving on.


 42. I have considered the case of Britcits in relation to Article  8  being
     engaged in this situation.  However, in this  case,  the  Appellant  is
     already here and has been here for some four years.   I  have  set  out
     above that I find that the level of dependency  has  been  exaggerated.
     While I find that the Appellant is dependent on them for  somewhere  to
     live, that is because she  came  to  the  UK  to  visit  them,  and  is
     effectively now an overstayer who could not rent in her own right.  She
     stays the homes of her three children.  She does  not  need  assistance
     with her personal care.  Her mental health is stable.  I  find  on  the
     balance of probabilities that she does not need to live with any of her
     children, and could live alone.


 43. Indeed, I find that at the date of the hearing, December 2017, she  was
     living alone.  She gave her address as 98 Cooper Sale Close,  which  is
     the address of her son, Mr. [B], who at the time of the hearing was  in
     Pakistan.  Mr. [M] said that he had gone about two weeks prior  to  the
     hearing, and was returning on 17 December 2017, a period of about  four
     weeks in total.  Mr. [M] confirmed in his evidence that  the  Appellant
     was not living with anyone as at the date of the hearing.   If she  was
     dependent on others for her everyday needs, I find that she would  have
     moved in with her other son or  her  daughter  when  Mr.  [B]  went  to
     Pakistan.


 44. I also find it significant that, when her daughter was asked  what  the
     Appellant did when she spent time at her house, she said that she spent
     time with her grandson, and talked to her.  She not say that she needed
     to do anything for the Appellant.  I find that the Appellant is not  as
     dependent on her children as she would like to suggest.


 45. Further, I find that there is no evidence to suggest that her  children
     are any more dependent on her emotionally than would  normally  be  the
     case between an adult child and his/ her parent.  If any  one  of  them
     were dependent on her above and beyond the  normal  emotional  ties,  I
     find on the balance of probabilities that she  would  live  permanently
     with that child, rather than moving between their homes.


 46. In relation to her grandchildren it was submitted that,  as  they  only
     have  one  grandparent  living  in  the  UK,  this  meant  that   their
     relationship with the Appellant was stronger.  It  was  also  submitted
     that  they  saw  much  more  of  her  than  most  children  see   their
     grandparents.  Not only do I  have  no  evidence  to  corroborate  this
     claim, but the evidence of how often they see her, and  how  often  she
     moves between properties, is not consistent  or  reliable.   There  are
     plenty of children who only see one grandparent  on  a  regular  basis.
     This does not give any greater weight to the  relationship  in  and  of
     itself.


 47. There is  no  evidence  before  me  that  the  Appellant  has  parental
     responsibility for any of her grandchildren.  If this  were  the  case,
     she would not be moving from one house to another, leaving  that  child
     behind.  I have given careful consideration to  the  letters  from  her
     grandchildren.  I accept that her grandchildren love her, and that they
     enjoy her company.  I accept that for the last four years she has  been
     living with or close to them.  However, I find that there is nothing to
     suggest that they have a stronger relationship with  their  grandmother
     than any other children in their situation.  She does not have parental
     responsibility for them.


 48. I find on the balance of probabilities that the Appellant does not have
     a family life in the United Kingdom sufficient to engage the  operation
     of Article 8.  In relation to private life, the Appellant has  been  in
     the United Kingdom since 2012, and given the low threshold, I find that
     she would have built up a private life during this time.  I  find  that
     the decision would interfere with this private life.


 49. In case I am wrong in my  finding  relating  to  family  life,  and  in
     relation to private life, continuing the steps set  out  in  Razgar,  I
     find that the proposed interference would be  in  accordance  with  the
     law,  as  being  a  regular  immigration  decision  taken  by  UKBA  in
     accordance with the immigration rules.  In  terms  of  proportionality,
     the Tribunal has to strike a fair balance between  the  rights  of  the
     individual and the interests of the community.  The public interest  in
     this case is the preservation of orderly and fair  immigration  control
     in the interests of all citizens.  Maintaining  the  integrity  of  the
     immigration rules is self-evidently a very important  public  interest.
     In practice, this will  usually  trump  the  qualified  rights  of  the
     individual, unless the level of interference is  very  significant.   I
     find that in  this  case,  the  level  of  interference  would  not  be
     significant and that it would be proportionate.


 50. In assessing the public interest I have taken into account  all  of  my
     findings above in relation to my consideration of the appeal under  the
     immigration rules, paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), and my finding  as  to  why
     the Appellant could not meet the requirements  as  an  adult  dependent
     relative under Appendix FM.


 51. I  have  also  taken  into  account  section  19  of  the  Nationality,
     Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Section  117B(1)  provides  that  the
     maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the   public
     interest.  There is a strong  public  interest  in  refusing  leave  to
     remain to those who do not meet the  requirements  of  the  immigration
     rules.  I have set out above why I have found that the  Appellant  does
     not meet the requirements of  the  immigration  rules  in  relation  to
     private or family life.  In relation to her private life in particular,
     I have found above that there are no very significant obstacles to  the
     Appellant's reintegration into Pakistan and I find  that  she  will  be
     able to re-establish her private life there.


 52. The Appellant used an interpreter and I have no evidence of her English
     language skills (section 117B(2)).  I find that the  Appellant  is  not
     financially independent (117(3)).  Further, in relation to finance, the
     case of Britcits considered the cost to the public purse.  It states at
     [69] that the material before the court showed that "in  terms  of  the
     NHS alone, the costs of caring for an individual between the ages of 65-
     85 is approximately �75,000".  The evidence of Dr. Suleman was that she
     was a private patient.  However, the prescriptions for  Citalopram  are
     issued by the South Woodford Health Centre, and there  is  no  evidence
     that she has paid for them.  The letter from Dr.  Khan  indicates  that
     she had "recent complicated left-eye cataract surgery" and  I  have  no
     evidence that she paid for this.  The letter from  Dr.  Khan  indicates
     that she is registered at a GP practice, but does not  state  that  she
     pays privately for this.  I was referred to [27]  of  SQ  which  states
     that the UK "is under no obligation to act  as  "the  hospital  of  the
     world"".


 53. Section 117B(4) does not apply as the Appellant has  not  been  in  the
     United  Kingdom  unlawfully.   In  relation  to  section  117B(5),  the
     Appellant's  leave  to  remain  has  been  precarious.   She   had   no
     expectation that she would be able to settle here.  Less weight  should
     be given to her private life.  While this does not  apply  directly  to
     family life, as set out above, the reasons why I have  found  that  she
     came as a visitor, rather than applying under a route which would  have
     enabled her to apply for settlement, are relevant.


 54. Section 117B(6) is not relevant as the Appellant does not have parental
     responsibility for her grandchildren.  However, I have considered their
     best interests in accordance with section 55 of the 2009 Act.  I do not
     find that their best interests would be compromised  if  the  Appellant
     were to return to Pakistan.  She does not have parental  responsibility
     for them.  The evidence is that she moves from  one  house  to  another
     every two or three weeks, and I have not accepted that she  moves  when
     her grandchildren demand it.  They all live  with  their  parents,  and
     there is no suggestion that their parents are  unable  to  provide  the
     care that they need.  There is no evidence that any one of them is more
     dependent on her than would normally be the case between a  grandparent
     and grandchild.


 55. I find that they will be able to keep in touch with her by visiting her
     in Pakistan, and by modern methods of communication.  Indeed,  this  is
     how they keep in touch with their other grandparents who are not living
     in the United Kingdom.  I do not accept the submission  that  returning
     her to Pakistan would sever  "completely"  her  family  life  with  her
     grandchildren.  I do not accept that the families would not be able  to
     visit her in Pakistan.  Her son is there now, although it was stated in
     evidence that the last time had been was two or three  years  ago,  and
     that he could not afford to go every six months/ a  year.   It  is  not
     suggested that they would need to visit that regularly, or that  family
     life would only be maintained by visits, but visits could be made.


 56. In relation to the Appellant's daughter's child it was submitted  that,
     as he had been born after the Appellant arrived, he had no awareness of
     a time without his grandmother.  It is particularly significant,  as  I
     am being asked to give particular weight to this relationship, that the
     Appellant's  daughter  does  not  mention  her  child  in  her  witness
     statement, and I have no updated witness statement before me  to  cover
     how the  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  her  grandson  has
     developed over the last year.  I find that her child's position  is  no
     different to the Appellant's other grandchildren.

 57. I do not make the finding lightly that the  Appellant  and  her  family
     have attempted to get around the provisions for entry clearance  as  an
     adult dependent relative, but I find that this is  the  case.   At  the
     time of her application, she was feeling more unwell, her daughter  was
     making more frequent visits to Pakistan to see her, and  her  claim  is
     that there was nobody to look after her in Pakistan.  Mr. [M] said that
     they applied for her to come here as it was not possible  for  them  to
     keep going to Pakistan.  When asked why she could not return at the end
     of the visa, the first reason he gave for this was that his sister  had
     married in 2014.  I find that when the Appellant came to  the  UK,  the
     family had not yet decided whether the Appellant's daughter's  marriage
     would be arranged in Pakistan or the UK.  However, it was decided  that
     she should marry here.  That in  and  of  itself  prohibited  her  from
     providing assistance to the Appellant in Pakistan, which she  had  been
     providing prior to her marriage when she  had  been  spending  time  in
     Pakistan with her mother.  Having decided that she would marry  in  the
     United Kingdom, the family would have been well aware  that  she  would
     not be able to do this in the same way.  I did not find  the  Appellant
     or her children to be reliable witnesses, and I  do  not  believe  them
     when they state that it was their intention that she  would  return  to
     Pakistan at the end of her visit visa.


 58. I do not accept the Appellant's or her children's evidence that  nobody
     can be trusted in Pakistan, and that the  security  situation  is  such
     that she cannot return.  It was submitted  by  Mr.  Coleman  that  they
     would be able to find somewhere for her to live but that it  would  not
     be adequate or satisfactory.  I have not found  this  to  be  the  case
     given the level of family support that she would have in Pakistan,  and
     given the family's financial situation.  I have found  above  that  she
     will be able to receive medical treatment in Pakistan as she  has  done
     in the past.


 59. Taking into account all of the above, I find  that  the  balance  comes
     down in favour of the Respondent and the public interest in maintaining
     effective immigration control.  I find, in carrying out  the  balancing
     exercise required, that the Appellant has failed to show on the balance
     of probabilities that the decision is a breach of her  rights,  or  the
     rights of any of her family members, to a family or private life  under
     Article 8 ECHR, or indeed any  other  rights  protected  by  the  Human
     Rights Act 1998.


Decision

 60. The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

 61. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 20 December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal, there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 20 December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

