

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25951/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 July 2016                               |On 02 August 2016            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY



                                   Between

                                MR C M PATEL

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the appellant: No appearance by or on behalf of the appellant
For the respondent: Ms Z Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer

                             DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant has permission to challenge the decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Davies dated 26 January 2016 dismissing his appeal against
   a decision made by the respondent on 1 July  2015   to  refuse  leave  to
   remain in the UK as a Tier 4 student migrant. The sole ground  of  appeal
   is that the judge erred in dealing with the case on the papers  when  the
   appellant had submitted a request  on  21  September  2015  for  an  oral
   hearing.


   2. At the hearing before me there was no appearance by or  on  behalf  of
   the appellant and no explanation for such absence. In the circumstances I
   decided to proceed to determine the case in the absence  of  one  of  the
   parties. I heard brief submissions from Miss Ahmed.


   3. The ground of appeal is devoid of merit. It is clear that when lodging
   his appeal the appellant had opted for a paper hearing  (see  page  3  of
   appeal form). Whilst he did send a fax on 21 September 2015 requesting an
   oral hearing, he had no right to an oral hearing unless he had  paid  the
   requisite fee. At best his fax of 21 September was a request to pay  such
   a fee  Despite receiving no response to his request, the  appellant  made
   no further  inquiry over the next months and as such the  legal  position
   as at the date fixed for hearing was that it  was  for  disposal  on  the
   papers.  It does not appear that Judge James's attention was drawn to the
   fax in question but there was no error of law in her failure to refer  to
   it because the appellant did not have an entitlement to an oral hearing.


   4. Even had I considered there was procedural unfairness in the  decision
   to dispose of the case on the papers, I would not have found an error  of
   law. As  emphasised  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:
   fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC), for there to be error of law  it  must
   be material. In the appellant's case it was manifest that  he  could  not
   succeed under the Immigration Rules as he had no valid  CAS.  As  regards
   Article  8  the  appellant's  ground  raising  the   ECHR   were   wholly
   unparticularised,  despite  being  afforded  the  opportunity  to  submit
   further evidence he had not done so, the judge addressed  his  Article  8
   claim in any event and gave cogent reasons for  concluding  that  it  was
   weak, he having only arrived in the UK  in  2009  and  not  produced  any
   evidence of family life or significant private life.


   5. For the above  reasons,  the  grounds  of  appeal  are  rejected.  The
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal must stand






                               Signed


                               Date:        29 July 2016
                                         [pic]


                                Dr H H Storey
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
