
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25197/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 February 2016                  |On 3 March 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr Rafik Hamaimi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Collins, Counsel instructed by BMAP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent is a citizen of Algeria and his  date  of  birth  is  20
    April 1972.  I will refer to him as the appellant as he was before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant's appeal was allowed by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Kanagaratnam in a decision promulgated on 24 August  2015  following  a
    hearing on 5 August 2015.  Permission was granted to the  Secretary  of
    State in a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Frankish on  15
    December 2015 and thus the  matter  came  before  me.  The  appeal  was
    allowed under the EEA Regulations 2006.  The issue turned on whether or
    not the appellant had been working continuously for a  period  of  five
    years and was entitled to permanent residence.

3.   At the start of the hearing the parties agreed that the author  of  the
    grounds did not have before him the appellant's evidence  contained  in
    the appellant's bundle that had been  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge (this evidence was unfortunately not referred to by the judge  in
    his decision).  However, it is conceded  that  the  evidence  that  was
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  supported   the   appellant's
    employment up until 2015 and therefore  the  gap  referred  to  in  the
    grounds of appeal  at  paragraph  8  did  not  accurately  reflect  the
    evidence that was before the judge. It was conceded that there  was  no
    break in continuity. My conclusion inevitably is  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to reach the conclusions  that  he  did  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's employment which would entitles him to permanent  residence
    under the EEA Regulations 2006. Thus there is no error of law.

4.   There is a point raised at paragraph 7 in the grounds of  appeal  which
    asserts that for the  purposes  of  permanent  residence  the  date  is
    calculated from the divorce date.  It is asserted that this is when the
    five year period commences for the  purposes  of  permanent  residence.
    However, as conceded by Mr Kotas, this does not accurately reflects  EU
    law and there is no error of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal relating to this issue.

5.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to  allow  the  appeal  on  the
    basis  that  the  appellant  is  entitled  to  permanent  residence  is
    maintained and as such  is  entitled  to  be  issued  with  a  document
    certifying permanent residence and a permanent residence card.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 26 February 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
