
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/25813/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 4 August 2015                     |on 18 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                             CHIJIOKE UGOCHUKWU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Shoaib, of Shoaib Associates
For the Respondent:    Ms S Aitken, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 4 October 1978.   On  10
    April 2014 he applied for leave to  remain  in  the  UK  as  a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrant under the points based system (PBS).

 2. The respondent refused that application for reasons explained in a  ten
    page  letter  dated  2  June  2014.   The  respondent   found   various
    deficiencies in the evidence submitted by the  appellant  and  was  not
    satisfied that he was a genuine entrepreneur.

 3. In his grounds of appeal  to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  the  appellant
    insisted that  he  is  a  genuine  entrepreneur.   He  also  said  that
    discretion should be exercised in his favour and that the decision  was
    incompatible with the ECHR, particularly  Article  8,  but  neither  of
    those grounds had any  substantial  content  and  they  have  not  been
    further developed.

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-Tier Tribunal.  First-Tier Tribunal
    Judge Boyd heard his case on 15  September  2014.   The  appellant  was
    represented  by  Mr  Shoaib.   He  provided   further   evidence   both
    documentary and oral.  No  objection  was  taken  by  the  respondent's
    Presenting Officer, and the appellant was  cross-examined.   The  Judge
    did not find his oral or documentary evidence persuasive and  expressed
    "severe doubts as  to  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  business
    activities" (paragraph 19).  The appeal was dismissed by  determination
    dated 25 September 2014.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  two
    grounds.

 6. Ground (a) is insufficiency of reasoning and irrationality - no reasons
    at paragraph 16 to support the rejection of the appellant's explanation
    about transfers to his bank account from friends, in light of  exchange
    rate issues; inadequate reasoning for the conclusion at  paragraphs  21
    and 22 that the appellant does not have adequate  business  experience;
    and irrationality in the conclusion  regarding  the  appellant's  part-
    time work at paragraph 22, as it in no way undermines  the  appellant's
    case that he carried on part-time work to gain experience and contacts,
    yet this was held against him.

 7. Ground (b) relies on section 85A of the 2002 Act, which  restricts  the
    evidence to be considered by the Tribunal in an appeal of this  nature,
    and on Ahmed & Another (PBS: admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT  00365  -
    the Judge was "barred from  admitting  into  evidence  (including  oral
    evidence) that was not submitted at the time of the application, yet he
    did so ... a fundamental error of approach which was material".

 8. On 13 November 2014 a First-Tier Tribunal Judge refused  permission  to
    appeal, on  the  basis  that  ground  (a)  amounted  to  no  more  than
    disagreement with adverse findings which were adequately explained, and
    ground (b) was "somewhat  bizarre",  the  appellant  having  chosen  to
    exercise his right of appeal at an oral  hearing,  and  he  not  having
    identified any part of his oral evidence  taken  into  account  by  the
    Judge which amounted to post decision  evidence  rather  than  evidence
    about matters which were before the decision maker.

 9. The appellant renewed his  application,  supplementing  ground  (a)  by
    reference to MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan  [2013]  UKUT00641  and
    acknowledging that although ground  (b)  and  Ahmed  might  lead  to  a
    somewhat bizarre result, nevertheless Ahmed was binding on  the  First-
    Tier Tribunal.

10. On 17 February 2015 a Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge granted permission to
    appeal, on the view that ground (b)  was  arguable,  and  although  the
    other  grounds  were  less  well  founded  in  themselves,  they   were
    inextricably linked to  the  issue  of  what  evidence  the  Judge  was
    entitled to consider, so that all grounds might be argued.

11. In a Rule 24 response to the grant of permission  the  respondent  says
    that in his appeal and by his oral evidence  the  appellant  sought  to
    address  the   respondent's   concerns   regarding   availability   and
    credibility of funds claimed.  If the appellant was not allowed to rely
    on the further evidence he gave there was no means by  which  he  could
    address the respondent's concerns and his appeal would fail.   "Section
    85A(4) is to be interpreted as relating to documentary evidence because
    if the definition were to go further and relate to oral  evidence  then
    if no oral evidence had previously been given none could be  taken  and
    even if oral evidence had been taken into account by the respondent the
    appellant could not expand on it.   Therefore  oral  hearing  would  be
    nugatory."

12. Mr Shoaib submitted that the Judge  gave  inadequate  reasons  for  not
    accepting the appellant's evidence.  For example, at  paragraph  15  he
    described affidavits from two witnesses  as  "self  serving  documents"
    which did not in themselves prove that funds were  available  genuinely
    to the appellant.  The affidavits had been sworn before a notary public
    and signed in presence of the appellant's family members.  The evidence
    the appellant gave at interview went to confirm the source of payments.
     The Judge did not give any sustainable reason for  not  accepting  the
    evidence in the affidavits.  At paragraph 16 the Judge doubted evidence
    relating to a Mr Menuba who had also previously been refused leave as a
    Tier 1 Entrepreneur Migrant.  Mr Shoaib had also represented Mr Menuba.
     He had challenged his adverse decision by way of judicial review.  The
    respondent withdrew the decision and granted  him  a  visa.   His  case
    raised the same issue as the present case.  The appellant had  produced
    cogent  evidence  both  oral  and  documentary  to  address   all   the
    respondent's concerns.  The only point the respondents  made  was  that
    the appellant had no employer's liability  insurance  certificate,  but
    there was no legal requirement for him to have one while working  prior
    to decision  in  accordance  with  permission  and  not  acting  as  an
    entrepreneur.

13. On ground (b) Mr Shoaib  submitted  that  the  Judge  should  not  have
    considered any further evidence either oral or documentary.  I  queried
    whether this was not trying to have matters both ways, asking the Judge
    to consider evidence and then reversing course when it turned  out  not
    to favour the appellant.  Mr Shoaib responded that  the  appellant  had
    been accepted by the respondent to have  all  the  correct  educational
    qualifications required, up to the level of a Masters Degree, and  that
    if he was not able to show that he qualified  under  the  points  based
    system, "How  could  anyone  prove  that  they  are  capable  of  doing
    anything?"

14. Finally, Mr Shoaib submitted  that  the  determination  should  be  set
    aside.  I asked Mr Shoaib to submit on how the case should proceed from
    there, if error were to be found.  He said there  were  three  options,
    but preferred to leave the matter to the Upper Tribunal.

15. Ms Aitken submitted that Section  85A  was  concerned  to  ensure  that
    appeals were to be based only on the evidence before  the  respondent's
    decision maker, subject to certain exceptions.  It  was  the  appellant
    who sought to  give  oral  evidence.   That  was  designed  to  clarify
    material which had been before the decision maker, which was  permitted
    by Section 85A (4).  It was up to the appellant to make  his  case  and
    not open to him to elect to have his evidence disregarded when  it  was
    not found to go in his favour.  The Judge had agreed broadly  with  the
    respondent's assessment of the appellant's evidence.  Even if there had
    been any error in taking account of oral evidence, the decision was not
    based only on that.  The Judge found  that  the  case  failed  even  if
    restricted to the evidence which had been before  the  decision  maker.
    Even if the Judge had considered further evidence in error, the outcome
    would have been the same.  The criticisms of  the  Judge's  conclusions
    were selective and  overlooked  the  several  good  reasons  given  for
    rejecting the appellant's version of his affairs.  The Judge gave  very
    clear reasons for finding the evidence both  oral  and  documentary  to
    fall short of what was required.

16. Mr Shoaib in response reiterated that the  appellant  had  carried  out
    work on a contract, had given evidence of the income derived  from  it,
    had shown that he had the required experience and  qualifications,  had
    worked only in accordance with the leave available to him and not as an
    entrepreneur, and that the Judge failed to give any proper reasons  for
    disregarding the evidence presented.

17. I reserved my determination.

18. It was the responsibility of the appellant in the  First-Tier  Tribunal
    to direct the Judge's attention to the provisions of  Sections  85  and
    85A of the 2002  Act  covering  the  matters  and  evidence  which  the
    Tribunal was to consider.  There appears to have been an entire failure
    to make any submissions to the First-Tier Tribunal about that.  Rather,
    the case was approached as if there were no restrictions on evidence.

19. The respondent's representative was also under  a  duty  to  refer  the
    First-Tier Tribunal to the relevant provisions, and failed  to  do  so.
    However, the primary responsibility was on the appellant as  the  party
    who had to make his case; and any waiver of objection by the respondent
    went in his favour at that stage, not against him.

20. It would be very late in the day now to try to analyse which  parts  of
    the evidence, oral and documentary, tendered by the  appellant  in  the
    First-Tier Tribunal were admissible, and which  parts  were  not.   The
    appellant has not sought to explain the distinction or to apply  it  to
    his case.

21. I do not  have  to  decide  how  far  the  evidence  should  have  been
    restricted or try to disentangle it.  The answer for  present  purposes
    is that the appellant  is  personally  barred  from  running  any  such
    argument.  He placed the evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    asked for it to be considered.  He has waived objection  to  its  being
    considered, and cannot raise that once it is found to go against him.

22. An appellant cannot say to a judge, "Please consider this  evidence  if
    you think it helps me, but you are bound to disregard  it  if  it  goes
    against me".

23. That leaves the criticism of the judge's reasoning.   In  that  respect
    the grounds are no more than a selective disagreement and an attempt to
    rerun the case on the facts.  The determination must be read fairly and
    as  a  whole.   The  phrase  "self  serving"  is  seldom  helpful  when
    explaining why evidence is rejected, but the Judge said much more  than
    that.  He had the advantage of hearing directly from the appellant whom
    he did not find particularly credible or reliable.  He did  not  accept
    that funds were genuinely available to the appellant as claimed, noting
    for example the large number of  transactions  and  the  account  being
    mainly in overdraft despite the appellant claiming  to  have  only  one
    paying customer who was in Nigeria, and that fees paid into the account
    did not correspond with fees stated in the contract or by the appellant
    at interview.  It did not appear to him credible that a firm  based  in
    Nigeria would appoint a business in the UK to  carry  out  a  fire  and
    hazard risk assessment.  It was not credible that there  would  not  be
    similar businesses available at more beneficial rates in Nigeria.   The
    Judge's reasons are to be found at paragraphs 15 and 20 in  particular.
    The Judge  did  not  make  only  negative  findings,  noting  that  the
    appellant did have the appropriate educational experience and  that  it
    was difficult to show business experience.

24. The Judge found that employers liability  insurance  was  required  but
    still had not been produced, although the point is in the  respondent's
    decision.   Mr  Shoaib  said  vaguely  that  there  is  no  such  legal
    requirement  -  perhaps  correctly,  but  no  attempt   was   made   to
    substantiate that either in the First-Tier Tribunal  or  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

25. Vague reference to a similar case where another party  (Mr  Menuba)  by
    another route secured a successful result is also pointless.   It  does
    nothing to advance the contention of  legal  error  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in the present case.

26. In short, ground  (b)  based  on  legal  principle  is  one  which  the
    appellant is barred from  making,  and  ground  (a)  is  no  more  than
    reassertion of the case and disagreement with  adverse  findings  which
    were open to the First-tier Tribunal, and for which a legally  adequate
    explanation has been given.

27. The determination of the First-Tier Tribunal shall stand.

28. No anonymity order has been requested or made.


           [pic]


           6 August 2015
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
