
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25056/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke, Bennett House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd November 2016                          |On 1st December 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                     SAK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Cronin, Counsel, instructed by Legal Rights
Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of South Africa born on 7th July 1983.   The
    Appellant has an extensive immigration history having first entered the
    United Kingdom as a visitor on 10th January 2002.  She last entered the
    UK on 27th November 2013 on a visit visa valid  until  12th  May  2014.
    The Appellant applied for leave to remain under family and private life
    and this was refused on 1st July 2014  with  a  right  of  appeal.   An
    appeal was lodged and the appeal was allowed to be reconsidered on 17th
    March 2015.  This appeal was refused by detailed notice of refusal with
    reasons on 24th June 2015.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Parker sitting at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent  on  23rd
    October 2015.  In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on  10th  November
    2015 the Appellant's appeal was dismissed.

 3. The Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  23rd
    November 2015.  On 5th July 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt sitting as a
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal granted permission to  appeal.   Judge
    Pitt noted that the grounds maintained that the Appellant's account  of
    abuse in South Africa (and that of her mother and siblings),  the  core
    of her case, was not challenged by the Respondent in the refusal letter
    or in cross-examination, nor  questioned  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge at the hearing or otherwise challenged.   Judge  Pitt  considered
    that it was arguable that it was not open to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge to find the account of abuse not credible without  affording  the
    witnesses and Counsel for the Appellant at the hearing  an  opportunity
    to address any concerns.  Further she considered that it  was  arguable
    that the decision did not take into account material  evidence  of  the
    abuse that was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  that  the
    account of abuse underpins the  Article  8  claim  and  that  if  those
    grounds are made out the assessment is arguably unsustainable.

 4. On 9th August 2016 the Secretary of State responded to the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  It is on that basis that the appeal comes before
    me to determine whether or not there is a material error of law in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The  Appellant  appears  by
    her instructed Counsel, Ms Cronin.  Ms Cronin  is  familiar  with  this
    matter, having attended before the First-tier Tribunal.  The  Secretary
    of State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr McVeety.

Preliminary Issue

 5. As a preliminary issue  Ms  Cronin  asked  if  I  would  anonymise  the
    proceedings due to the sensitive nature of the  allegations  and  abuse
    raised by the Appellant.  Mr McVeety does not raise any  objection.   I
    consequently anonymise this matter.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. I am considerably assisted in this matter by the approach adopted by Mr
    McVeety on behalf of the Secretary of State.  He acknowledges that  the
    accounts of severe domestic violence, sexual abuse, incest  experienced
    by the Appellant and mother were not disputed by the Secretary of State
    and were not challenged in the hearing in  cross-examination  nor  were
    the subject of  questioning  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   Mr
    McVeety acknowledges that what the First-tier Tribunal Judge  has  done
    is made a freestanding assessment and  that  the  judge  has  erred  in
    omitting to provide the Appellant and  her  family  witnesses  with  an
    opportunity to respond to this conclusions that  the  account  was  not
    credible.  He acknowledges that such failure is material and  that  the
    Appellant has not consequently had a fair hearing.

 7. Ms Cronin appreciates the stance taken by Mr McVeety and  submits  that
    the evidence is compelling.

The Law

 8.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

10. The allegations made in  this  case  by  the  Appellant  are  extremely
    serious and I am gratefully assisted by the  approach  adopted  by  the
    legal representatives.  I am satisfied that in omitting to provide  the
    Appellant and her family witnesses with an opportunity  to  respond  to
    his conclusions that  the  account  was  not  credible  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's approach was unfair  and  unreasonable  and  that  his
    findings should not stand and that he has committed a material error of
    law.  In addition I note that the judge also only partially  considered
    the South African social work papers and that his conclusion that there
    was  no  credible  evidence  of  abuse  by   the   father/husband   was
    unreasonable and contrary to the evidence  that  was  at  least  to  be
    considered and therefore unsustainable.

11. In all the circumstances the correct approach, which is accepted by  Mr
    McVeety, is to conclude that there is a material error of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and to set aside the decision
    and to remit the matter for rehearing to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision and Reasons

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains material  errors
    of law and is set aside.  The following directions are given:-

 i) That the Appellant's appeal be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    sitting at Stoke-on-Trent (Bennett House) on the first  available  date
    28 days hence with an ELH of two and a half hours.

ii) None of the findings of fact are to stand.

iii) That the appeal be heard before any Immigration Judge other than  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal A J Parker.

iv)  That  there  be  leave  to  either  party  to  adduce   such   further
    subjective/objective evidence upon which they seek  to  rely  at  least
    fourteen days prior to the rehearing of this matter.  Such evidence  to
    be lodged at the Tribunal and copies of the evidence to be served  upon
    the other party.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 1st December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 1st December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
