
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25692/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th August 2016                   |On 27th September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                         JAKVAN TAKUB ABDULLAH KABA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Miah of Counsel instructed by M A Consultants
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the avoidance of confusion and to be consistent, I  shall
    continue to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.



Background

 2. On 3rd June 2016 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Page gave  permission
    to the respondent to appeal against the decision of Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Shimmin in  which  he  allowed  the  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent to refuse leave to remain on  the  basis  of
    family and private life in accordance with the provisions  of  Appendix
    FM of the Immigration Rules.  The application was refused for the  main
    reason that the appellant did not meet the suitability requirements set
    out in paragraph S-LTR.2.2. of Appendix FM. That  was  because  it  was
    alleged  false  information,  representations  or  documents  had  been
    submitted in relation to the application or there had been a failure to
    disclose material facts in relation to the application.  The respondent
    stated  that  the  appellant  had  obtained  an  ETS  English  language
    qualification by deception.

 3.  In  granting  permission  Judge  Page  summarised   the   grounds   of
    application.  The respondent contended that the judge's  reasoning  was
    "entirely  inadequate"  and  failed  to  give  proper  weight  to   the
    respondent's documentary evidence.  In particular objection  was  taken
    to the judge concluding that the respondent could not  hide  behind  an
    "un-evidenced allegation by ETS" to discharge the burden of proof  upon
    her.  Judge Page thought the quoted grounds gave rise  to  an  arguable
    error on a point of law.



Submissions

 4. At the hearing before me Mr Bates confirmed that the respondent  relied
    upon the full grounds.  In these the respondent contends  that  witness
    statements provided to support the allegation of deception,  when  read
    in conjunction with one another, detailed the investigation  undertaken
    by  ETS  in  this  appellant's  case  along  with  thousands  of  other
    applicants.  It was wrong for the judge to rely upon comments  made  by
    one witness, Peter Millington, as to the potential limitations  of  the
    VRS system which had, in fact, been subject to human verification.  The
    judge should have given due  consideration  to  the  specific  evidence
    identifying the appellant as an individual who had exercised deception,
    particularly in the form of excerpts taken  from  the  ETS  spreadsheet
    which  identified  sufficient  irregularities  in   relation   to   the
    appellant's test taking to warrant cancellation of his results.

 5. Mr Bates also handed to me a copy of the Court of  Appeal  decision  in
    Shehzad and Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 61 on the basis that the judge had not
    recognised that the burden of proof shifted to the  appellant  and  the
    assessment of evidence should have been on that basis.

 6. Mr  Miah  submitted  that  the  judge  had  given  cogent  reasons  for
    concluding that the respondent's evidence  coupled  with  that  of  the
    appellant meant that it had not been shown, to the civil standard, that
    the appellant had used deception.  The judge had noted  (paragraph  38)
    that the appellant had already passed an English language test when  he
    had entered the United Kingdom as a student and had  also  spoken  good
    English at the hearing.

 7. I was referred to paragraph 23 of  the  Court  of  Appeal  decision  in
    Shehzad which emphasised that the issue of whether or not an  appellant
    had used deception was likely to be an intensively fact-specific matter
    and the appeal before the Court of Appeal was only concerned  with  the
    initial stage of establishing a prima facie  case  and  the  evidential
    burden on the Secretary of State at that stage.



Conclusions and Reasons

 8. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision and  now  set  out  my
    reasons for concluding that the decision of the First-tier  Judge  does
    not show an arguable error on a point of law and shall stand.

 9. The respondent relies, amongst  other  things,  upon  the  decision  in
    Shehzad.  I conclude, however, that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Judge does not show that there can be any  material  criticism  of  the
    judge's application of the burden of proof.  In paragraph 3 of  Shehzad
    the Court of Appeal stated:

         "It is common ground that for a decision to be made under paragraph
         322(1A) there must be material justifying  a  conclusion  that  the
         individual under  consideration  has  lied  or  submitted  a  false
         document.  It is also common ground that  the  Secretary  of  State
         bears the initial burden of furnishing proof of deception, and that
         this burden is an 'evidential burden'.  This  means  that,  if  the
         Secretary of State provides prima facie evidence of  deception  the
         burden 'shifts' onto the individual to provide a plausible innocent
         explanation, and if that individual  does  so  the  burden  'shifts
         back' to the Secretary of State: ...".

10. Although  the  Court  of  Appeal  was  considering  an  application  of
    paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules  the  deception  alleged  in
    this case under paragraph S-LTR.2.2. of Appendix FM is essentially  the
    same.  It is clear from the findings of the judge  from  paragraph  17,
    onwards, of the decision that the judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    respondent had met the burden of proof upon her  at  the  third  stage.
    That is because the judge gives detailed consideration to the  evidence
    put forward by the appellant to counter the respondent's  evidence  and
    allegations designed to establish a prima facie case.  As Shehzad makes
    clear the evidential burden shifts back  to  the  respondent  once  the
    appellant has provided a plausible innocent explanation.  That was done
    through the evidence produced by the appellant at the  hearing  through
    oral and documentary evidence from both the  appellant  and  his  wife.
    Although the judge does not make specific reference to the shifting  of
    the burden of proof that is not, I conclude, material.  But, even if it
    is said that the judge was only considering the burden of proof at  the
    initial stage of the establishment of a prima facie case then a failure
    to establish such a case would entitle the judge to dismiss the  appeal
    in any event.  Either way I do not see this allegation as amounting  to
    a material error.

11. I view the respondent's criticisms of the conclusions of the  judge  in
    relation to the evidence produced to prove deception as no more than  a
    disagreement with  his  cogently  reasoned  findings.   The  respondent
    complains that the judge was wrong to find that her  evidence  did  not
    put forward the exact reason why ETS had invalidated the certificate of
    the appellant.  This was on the basis that the witness statements  when
    read  in  conjunction  with  one  another  extensively   detailed   the
    investigation undertaken in the appellant's case along with  "thousands
    of other applicants".  However, the judge does  not  reach  conclusions
    about that evidence only on the basis that the evidence was  "generic".
    From paragraph 23 onwards of the  decision  the  judge  makes  specific
    reference to the statements of Mr  Millington  and  Ms  Collings.   For
    example, in paragraph 24, the judge notes that ETS had  confirmed  that
    there were multiple reasons for invalidation of test certificates  some
    of which might or might not involve fraud or deception.  The  appellant
    had not been made aware of the precise  reason  for  his  qualification
    being invalidated.  Further, similar reason is given in the  subsequent
    paragraph where the judge comments that a person's certificate could be
    invalidated simply because the proxy test taker was  there  during  the
    same sitting.  The judge reaches the conclusion, open to him, that such
    evidence would not be enough to show that the appellant knowingly  used
    a proxy test taker or was involved in some other dishonesty during  the
    examination.  Further, as the judge comments in paragraph 26, if a test
    score were to be cancelled that,  of  itself,  would  not  justify  the
    inference of deception as Ms Collings claimed.   Subsequent  paragraphs
    of the judge's conclusions also point to a lack of specificity  in  the
    evidence produced by the respondent.

12. In addition to the evidential defects to which the judge  has  referred
    in relation to the respondent's evidence, the judge also refers to  the
    appellant's evidence, from paragraphs 38 onwards. This gives additional
    reasons for reaching the  conclusion  that  the  respondent's  evidence
    could not be  taken  to  prove  deception.   As  the  Court  of  Appeal
    commented in Shehzad, the question of what evidence would be sufficient
    to enable a Tribunal to conclude that there has been  no  deception  is
    likely to be an intensively fact-specific matter.  This was so in  this
    case where the judge evidently gave careful consideration  to  failings
    in  the  evidence  put  forward  by  the  respondent  in  the  specific
    circumstances of  the  appellant's  case  taking  account  of  all  the
    evidence.  Whilst the  evidence  of  the  respondent  might  have  been
    capable of creating a prima facie case, the  decision  shows  that  the
    judge gave cogent reason  for  finding  that  the  respondent  had  not
    discharged the ultimate burden of proof imposed upon her having  regard
    to  the  explanations  of  the  appellant  and  the  failure   of   the
    respondent's evidence to adequately identify specific deception on  the
    part of the appellant.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show an error  on  a  point
of law and shall stand.



Anonymity

Anonymity  was  not  requested  in  this  appeal  nor  do  I   consider   it
appropriate.




Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt              27th September 2016

