

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25613/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3rd December  2013                         |On 9th December 2013         |
|                                              |                             |

                                     By
                         THE HON. MR JUSTICE MITTING
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                         MR BRIAN EDWARD CUNNINGHAM

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Anzani (Quality Solicitors (AZ Law)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1.  The Appellant before the First-tier Tribunal is a citizen of the United
    States of America born 19th August 1980. He appealed to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State of 5th June  2013,
    refusing to vary his leave to remain on the basis of his marriage  to  a
    British national. The First-tier Tribunal allowed his appeal, on Article
    8  grounds,  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  21st  October  2013.
    Designated Judge Baird granted the Respondent permission  to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Appendix FM applied to the application.   The  decision  does  not  make
    clear which parts of the Rule governing the requirements for  the  grant
    of limited leave to remain as a spouse the Appellant did not meet.   The
    decision referred to the  Appellant  not  meeting  the  requirements  of
    paragraph FM R-LTRP 1.1(d) because EX.1 did not  apply.  However  it  is
    plain that as the Appellant meets the requirements of  R-LTRP  1.1  (c),
    EX.1 is irrelevant.  Mr Duffy  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    accepted  that  was  the  case  and  having  taken  instruction,  sought
    permission to withdraw the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.  Ms  Anzani
    agreed.

 3. Consent of the Upper Tribunal is required for a party  to  withdraw  its
    case. It being plain that the Appellant meets the  requirements  of  the
    Rules for limited leave to remain as a spouse and the Immigration  Rules
    being deemed  Article  8  compliant  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  the
    Appellant is entitled to succeed and so we consent to the  Secretary  of
    State withdrawing her case.

 4. Accordingly with our consent, and pursuant to rule 17(5) of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  this  appeal  is  recorded  as
    "Withdrawn with the consent of the Upper Tribunal."

 5. The effect of the  Appellant's  case  being  withdrawn  from  the  Upper
    Tribunal is that the proceedings before the Upper  Tribunal  are  at  an
    end. There is no appeal before the Upper  Tribunal  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision shall stand.


Signed:


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

Date: 3rd December 2013
