

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)                                    Appeal
Number: IA/25829/2013

                                                         IA/25835/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5th March 2014                             |On 26th March 2014           |
|                                              |                             |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                            OLATUNJI OLADELE ONI
                           OLADIMEJI EMMANUEL ONI
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr V Lovejoy, Samuel & Co solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

     1. The  appellants  appeal  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        promulgated on 30th December 2013 which dismissed an appeal against
        a decision by the respondent dated 9th July 2013 to refuse to  vary
        their leave to remain as Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrants  on  the
        grounds, inter alia that the documents provided by the bank did not
        include the full details of  each  third  party;  that  the  letter
        provided by their uncle had not been counter-signed; that a  letter
        from the lawyer had not complied with the required format; that the
        appellants  had  failed  to  provide  evidence  of  advertising  as
        required.


     2. Permission to appeal was granted on the grounds, in  essence,  that
        the judge had failed to  consider  the  documentation  properly  in
        particular that the relevant documentation had been  provided  with
        the application, contrary to the assertion of the  respondent;  had
        the judge considered the documentary evidence as a whole  he  would
        have seen that there were  regular  payments  in  and  out  of  the
        account  and  that  had  the  evidential  flexibility  policy  been
        applied, any missing documentation would  have  been  supplied  and
        thus the appellants would have met the  relevant  requirements  for
        variation of their leave to remain.

     3. Mr Bramble produced the Immigration Rules and guidance in force  at
        the date of the  decision  and  very  properly  conceded  that  the
        caseworker and the judge had,  unfortunately,  not  considered  the
        application and appeal under the appropriate Rules and guidance. He
        confirmed that in the light of the guidance to caseworkers, missing
        evidence should have  been  sought  and  had  it  been,  given  the
        evidence that was in fact produced the application would have  been
        allowed save for one issue.

     4. Mr Bramble stated that even if the caseworker  and  the  judge  had
        applied the correct Rules and guidance the application would  still
        have failed because the appellants had not  submitted  evidence  of
        advertising as required. The documents in  the  appellants'  bundle
        pages 17-19 were no more than invitations to a trade fair  and  did
        not and could not amount to advertising  material.  The  evidential
        flexibility policy could not  have  availed  the  appellants  given
        those documents. He accepted that the documents from page 21 of the
        bundle would have been sufficient but it was not accepted that  the
        applicants had submitted those documents with their application  as
        claimed. The  evidential  flexibility  policy  did  not  avail  the
        applicants as regards advertising material because the  trade  fair
        invitations  were  plainly  insufficient  to  raise  the  slightest
        argument that the appellants had  advertising  material  available.
        Therefore, he submitted, even thought the judge  was  incorrect  in
        finding against the appellants on other matters, the appellants had
        not met the requirements  of  the  Rules  to  produce  evidence  of
        advertising their business as required; although the judge had made
        errors of law, those errors were immaterial in the  light  of  that
        failure and thus the appeal must fail. Mr Bramble acknowledged that
        the covering letter provided with the  application  referred  to  a
        list of documents supplied and that the list was not in his copy of
        the letter  on  file.  He  acknowledged  that  the  list  indicates
        documents in the appellants' bundle that  include  the  trade  fair
        invitations and that it was possible that other  documents  on  the
        list "might have flagged up for the attention  of  the  case  owner
        that documents relating to advertising were missing.  He  submitted
        however that even if the caseworker had gone through the list,  the
        list  was  insufficient  to  require  the  caseworker  to   request
        additional documents in connection with advertising.

     5. Mr Lovejoy  submitted firstly that the  invitations  to  the  trade
        fair were sufficient evidence of advertising, secondly if not  then
        they were sufficient to initiate enquiries by the caseworker  under
        the evidential flexibility policy particularly when read  with  the
        list of documents provided as per the covering letter which  itself
        appeared  to  include  further  adverting  material.   He   further
        submitted that in any event it had been accepted by the  presenting
        officer before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  that  the  appellants
        had submitted  adequate  evidence  of  advertising  and  thus  this
        element of the refusal fell away.

     6. With the agreement  of  the  parties  I  consulted  the  record  of
        proceedings made by the judge; although typed it  is  unfortunately
        not clear whether there was a concession by the presenting  officer
        or not. There is no reference to a concession in the  determination
        but nor is anything said by the judge about advertising other  than
        setting out that it was one of the reasons for refusal; the bulk of
        the determination deals with shortcomings in the various  bank  and
        other documents which, as has been set out above, Mr  Bramble  very
        properly agreed were in error.

     7. Neither Mr Bramble nor Mr Lovejoy had a copy  of  their  record  of
        proceedings on their files with them before me.  I  agreed  that  I
        would delay writing my determination  to  enable  both  parties  to
        search their records and, if available, they would  file  with  the
        Tribunal and serve upon each  other  a  copy  of  their  respective
        record of proceedings by 4pm  on  Wednesday  12th  March  2014.  Mr
        Bramble confirmed that if the record of proceedings showed that the
        issue of advertising was resolved in the appellants'  favour,  then
        the appeal should succeed.

     8. The  appellants'  solicitors  filed  their  handwritten  record  of
        proceedings at 15.15 on 12th March exhibited to an affidavit  sworn
        by  the  solicitor  and  partner  of  the  appellants'   instructed
        solicitors who represented the appellants before  the  First-  tier
        Tribunal. That  record  of  proceedings  clearly  states  that  the
        presenting officer agreed that the online advertising (included  in
        pages 17-27 of the appellants' bundle of documents) was accepted. I
        also note however that in submissions  the  HOPO  states  that  the
        advertising does not meet the Rules. The appellants'  solicitor  in
        his affidavit states that the Judge advised the  parties  that  the
        website met the Rules and that because the judge indicated he found
        in  favour  of  the  appellants  on  that  point  he  had  made  no
        submissions with regard to advertising.

     9. The records of this hearing are rather inadequate: the judge's  are
        unclear; the appellants' appear on their face to  be  contradictory
        and  the  respondent  does  not  appear  to  have  any.  In   these
        circumstances I have turned to the other documents  before  me  and
        the determination. The determination is silent on any  findings  as
        regards advertising, as oppose to findings  as  regards  the  other
        matters. The application form does not state  that  advertising  or
        marketing material is supplied but states that information  from  a
        trade fair is. The covering letter sent by the solicitors with  the
        application forms clearly refers to a list  of  documents  some  of
        which are identifiable as the trade  fair  invitations  and  others
        "may' be indicative of other advertising material. The  grounds  of
        appeal state that documents enclosed with the grounds of appeal are
        "Details of information from a Trade Fair Business show in lieu  of
        advertising,   Screenshots   of   website   constituting   Internet
        Advertising." The grounds of appeal state "..the  application  form
        provided for the provision of proof of  advertising  as  an  option
        along with OR proof of information from a trade fair....In addition
        the Team Members Company have both  a  national  and  international
        presence through their  website  and  have  also  publicised  their
        business through...."

    10. This is unsatisfactory. The burden of proof is upon  the  appellant
        and the documentary evidence before me, so far as can be seen,  can
        point both ways. Given the detail of the judge's  determination  as
        regards the other documentation (albeit the findings were in error)
        I am however satisfied on  a  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
        appellants did send in details of  their  online  advertising  with
        their application form. I am also satisfied that even if  they  did
        not,  the  list  accompanying  the  covering  letter  was   plainly
        sufficient  to  raise  queries  with  the  caseworker  as  to  what
        documents were there and further  investigation  should  have  been
        carried out.

    11. I therefore find that the First tier judge  erred  in  law  in  his
        assessment of the evidence such as to require the  decision  to  be
        set aside and remade.

    12. Mr  Bramble  had  confirmed  that  if  I  were  to  find  that  the
        advertising material had been provided then the appeal  would  fall
        to be allowed because the appellants met the  Rules.  Both  parties
        accepted that here would be no need to recall for  submissions  and
        were content for me to reach my  decision  on  the  basis  of  such
        evidence as was before me.

    13. In these circumstances and in the light of my  findings,  I  remake
        the appeals by allowing them.




      Conclusions

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

      I set aside the decision

      I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing them.








                                             Date 25th March 2014
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker

