
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/25534/2013
                                                               IA/25535/2013
                                                               IA/25533/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9th June 2014                                |On 16th June 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            VEESANJALEE MOTHOORA
                               MAHESH MOTHOORA
                                    a y m
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr D Ahie, Solicitor on behalf of Wisestep
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Rastogi)  who  in  a   determination
    promulgated on 3rd April 2014 allowed the appeals against the  decision
    of the Respondent to refuse to vary their leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom on the grounds of their family and private life.

 2.   Whilst this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the parties in the determination as they appeared  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 3.  The history of the appeal is as follows.  The Appellants are  citizens
    of Mauritius aged 37, 42, and 6 respectively and form  a  family  unit.
    The first Appellant, her husband and daughter  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in 2004 under a student and dependant visa  respectively.   The
    Appellant and her family members have lived in the United Kingdom since
    arrival, her daughter, the third Appellant, being born whilst  resident
    in the United Kingdom.  They applied to vary their leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom on the grounds of their  family  and  private  life.
    The applications were made on 20th April  2012  and  accompanied  by  a
    letter from Talk Visa Immigration Specialists setting out the basis  of
    their applications for further leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 4. On 4th July 2013 the Respondent refused the  application,  pursuant  to
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  HC  395  (as
    amended) on the grounds that the Respondent was not satisfied that  the
    Appellants were able to meet any of the Appendix  FM  requirements,  as
    neither of the parents were either  British  citizens  or  present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom; the  residence  was  not  of  sufficient
    length, they had not lost all their ties to Mauritius, and  there  were
    no exceptional circumstances justifying their application being granted
    and that there was no breach of their Article 8 rights.  It recorded in
    the decision that the Appellants had no right  of  appeal  against  the
    refusal decision as their applications were made when they had no valid
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 5. The Appellants appealed that decision and the matter  came  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Rastogi) on 21 March 2014 at  Hatton  Cross.
    The judge had the opportunity of  hearing  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    parties and also  other  witnesses  including  the  Appellant's  family
    members [see 29] and the character referees attended  the  hearing  but
    were not the subject of cross-examination at the hearing their evidence
    being agreed [32].

 6.  In a determination promulgated on 3 April 2014 the First-tier Tribunal
    allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

 7.   The findings of fact are set out in  the  determination  at  [37]  to
    [60].  The judge recorded at [37] that it was not disputed that  family
    life existed between the  various  Appellants  but  that  there  was  a
    dispute as to whether or not family life for Article 8 purposes existed
    between the Appellants and Ms  Verasamy  and/or  Miss  Thlamany,  other
    family members.  The judge observed that  with  the  exception  of  the
    third Appellant, the remaining family members were all adults  and  the
    judge directed himself to  the  appropriate  authorities  dealing  with
    family  life  between  adults  at  [39].   The  judge  considered   the
    credibility of the witnesses and the Appellants and observed  that  the
    Respondent  had  not  challenged  their  credibility  and  reached  the
    conclusion at [42] having considered the evidence before the First-tier
    Tribunal that the evidence demonstrated family life  not  only  between
    the Appellants  themselves  but  also  between  Ms  Verasamy  and  Miss
    Thlamany.

 8.   At paragraph [43] dealing with the issue of private life,  the  judge
    found that the Appellants had developed  a  private  life  since  their
    arrival in 2004 and the third Appellant's birth  in  2007  outside  the
    scope of  their  family  life.   The  judge  recorded  that  the  first
    Appellant had studied for a number of years but had not done  so  since
    2008 and had worked prior  to  that  time.   Evidence  had  been  given
    concerning her involvement with her daughter's education and  that  the
    second Appellant was in employment as a bus driver.  The judge recorded
    evidence given by Ms Henry, a family friend relating  to  a  friendship
    that had been established in the United Kingdom.  Other witnesses  were
    referred to at [43] whose evidence was accepted by the judge.

 9.   As to the circumstances of the third appellant, a  minor  child,  the
    judge dealt with that separately later on in the determination at  [49]
    onwards.  The judge had regard to the third  Appellant's  age,  namely,
    that she was about to attain the age of 7 in a few weeks, that she  was
    born in the United Kingdom and had lived here throughout her  life  but
    also observed that she was not a British national.  She had lived  with
    her parents, grandmother and maternal aunt and had done  so  throughout
    her life.  The judge applied the decision of Azimi-Moayed at [49].   In
    reaching the decision as to her best interests,  the  judge  considered
    that it was in her best interests to remain with both her  parents  and
    gave consideration to the effect upon the third Appellant if  separated
    from her grandmother and her aunt with whom it was said she had a  very
    close bond.  The judge considered the evidence as  to  the  impact  the
    separation would have upon the child concerned and the judge  found  at
    [53] that she inferred  from  the  evidence  the  importance  that  her
    grandmother and aunt attach to the third Appellant in their  lives  and
    that she received from them a high degree of

         "love, support and companionship.  I have no reason to believe  for
         a child of her age that the affection is not reciprocated.  I  find
         that she has been used to being an integral part of  this  extended
         family throughout  her  life  to  date.   Whilst  I  do  not  place
         significant weight upon, I noted during the hearing that the moment
         her grandmother concluded her evidence the  third  Appellant  moved
         immediately from the seat next to her father to  her  grandmother's
         lap in what seemed a perfectly spontaneous and sincere move."

    The judge considered the evidence in relation to Mauritius at [54].  At
    [55] the judge gave further  consideration  to  the  third  Appellant's
    young age and that  in  general  terms  "most  children  that  age  are
    adaptable and if they remain in their parents' care they will  continue
    to thrive."  However  the  judge  found  at  that  paragraph  from  the
    evidence  that  he  was  satisfied  that  the  third  Appellant's  best
    interests are

         "served by remaining within the extended family in  which  she  has
         lived throughout her life.  I am satisfied that removing  her  from
         the wider family with whom I accept that was  such  a  strength  of
         bond is likely to cause her such disruption and emotional harm that
         it would be contrary to her best interests.   Whether  she  remains
         with them in the United Kingdom or in Mauritius I do not feel it is
         a matter which is decisive (albeit  it  is  relevant  to  note  the
         inevitable disruption to  her  education  and  her  own  ties  here
         outside of the family) as I find that providing she remains in that
         loving and nurturing environment her welfare is protected."

10. The proportionality balance was considered by the judge  at  [56]-[60].
    The judge found that the "legitimate aim being pursued in the  case  to
    be the need for effective  immigration  control"  and  noted  that  the
    Appellants had no other  lawful  basis  for  remaining  in  the  United
    Kingdom and did not claim to be able to meet the  requirements  of  the
    Rules in force at the date of the application.   The  judge  took  into
    account that their family lives have developed whilst their stay was  a
    temporary one although the judge agreed with submissions made on behalf
    of the Appellants that there existed  family  life  between  the  first
    Appellant, her mother and sister prior to  her  moving  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  The judge noted that  the  extent  of  contact  between  them
    whilst family life existed over a distance was  considerable  and  this
    had been developed since her arrival in 2004 at a time  when  she  only
    had temporary permission to stay in the United Kingdom thus  the  judge
    placed weight on this factor in the Respondent's favour.

11.   The judge had regard at [57] that the application was made  prior  to
    the introduction of Appendix FM (the application being made before  9th
    July 2012) and noted that "the significance of this is that  Article  8
    considerations did not inform the drafting of the Rules in force at the
    time the applications were made."

12.   At [58] the judge placed significant weight on the fact that were the
    Appellants to be removed, in order to maintain their family lives  with
    Ms Verasamy and Ms Thlamany, it would require two British  citizens  to
    leave the United Kingdom and maintain their family life  in  Mauritius.
    The judge  considered  their  circumstances  including  the  length  of
    residence of 25 years for Ms Verasamy,  her  British  citizenship,  her
    contributions to the British economy and also her fragile mental state.
     The judge found as a fact that he was satisfied that her  family  life
    with the Appellants is a factor which stabilises her mental health  and
    would be concerned of the impact separation would have upon  her.   The
    judge considered the alternative of uprooting her from her home in  the
    United Kingdom for 25 years of which she was a national and found  that
    the factors outlined at [58]  are  ones  that  the  judge  accepted  as
    "genuinely held" and as of "sufficient  significance"and  that  if  the
    Appellants were to return to Mauritius she would  face  "an  unenviable
    choice of separating from those whose presence is integral to her  life
    and wellbeing and  leaving  her  home  with  the  consequences  I  have
    referred to and the likely impact of that upon her mental health."

13.   At [59] the judge found the above factors with the third  Appellant's
    best interests, the extent of ties the first and the  second  Appellant
    had [see paragraph 43] and observed that those facts were not  weakened
    by a poor immigration history or a criminal record, the judge took into
    account that there was a pre-existing family  life  between  the  first
    Appellant, her mother and sister before arriving in the United Kingdom,
    the inevitable disruption to the third Appellant's  education  and  the
    beginnings of her independent roots within the community.

14.   The judge concluded therefore  that  those  factors,  taken  together
    outweighed the importance  to  be  attached  to  the  justification  of
    immigration control and thus allowed the appeals.

15.  It is plain from the determination that a decision as to the  validity
    of the appeal had been made by Immigration  Judge  Burrell  before  the
    matter came before the First-tier Tribunal.  That decision had not been
    challenged before the First-tier Tribunal and  as  noted  at  [17]  the
    judge treated the appeal as being a valid appeal.

16.   The second issue that is plain from the  determination  is  that  the
    applications were made before the change in the  Immigration  Rules  on
    9th July 2012 and the judge applying the Statement of  Changes  HC  194
    which were the transitional provisions required the judge  to  consider
    the appeals pursuant  to  the  Rules  in  force  at  the  date  of  the
    application.  That was conceded by the Respondent at the  hearing  [see
    paragraph 9] and therefore whilst  there  had  been  reference  in  the
    refusal  letter  to  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE,  the   judge
    considered the appeal on the "classic "Article 8 basis.

17. The Respondent sought permission to appeal  that  decision  and  it  is
    important to set out the grounds given for seeking permission.  I quote
    them in full;-

         "The Immigration Judge allowed the appeal on the basis of Article 8
         outside the Immigration Rules in relation to  all  the  Appellants.
         The Immigration Judge notes  [paragraph  44]  that  the  Appellants
         cannot satisfy the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules.   This
         case concerned the Immigration Rules prior to the implementation of
         HC 194 Statement of Changes on 9th July 2012.

         The Immigration Judge has not considered the guidance in  the  case
         of Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach)  [2013]  UKUT
         640 (IAC) namely if there are arguably good  grounds  for  granting
         leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules is it  necessary  for
         Article  8  purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are
         compelling circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the
         Rules.

         The Immigration Judge has not identified any case specific arguably
         good grounds for granting leave outside of the Rules and compelling
         circumstances not recognised under the  Rules,  per  Gulshan.   The
         Immigration  Judge  simply  undertook  a  freestanding  Article   8
         assessment (45 onwards).

         It is submitted without making findings as to arguably good grounds
         and compelling circumstances not recognised  under  the  Rules,  an
         Immigration  Judge  cannot  undertake  a  freestanding  Article   8
         assessment.  Permission is sought  on  the  basis  the  Immigration
         Judge has not considered the case specific  guidance  on  departing
         from the Immigration Rules and further considering Article 8."

18. Permission was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  23rd
    April 2004 solely on the basis  that  "it  is  arguable  that,  in  not
    considering Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) there was a material error of
    law."

19. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.  At the outset  of  his
    submissions, Mr Deller conceded that the grounds as they  were  drafted
    were in his description "bare" and that the only challenge made to  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal was that the judge  failed  to
    have regard to the new Rules in considering Article 8 and did not apply
    the guidance in Gulshan.  However he pointed to the concession made  by
    the Presenting Officer at [9]  that  this  was  a  case  in  which  the
    applications were made before the change in the Rules on 9th July  2012
    and that the transitional provisions of HC 194 required  the  judge  to
    consider the appeals pursuant to the Rules in force at the date of  the
    application.

20.   An issue that was not  set  out  in  the  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal related to jurisdiction,  and  that
    had there been a decision for removal,  the  Appellants  would  have  a
    right of appeal exercisable in country but it appeared that an  earlier
    decision had been made as to the validity of  the  appeal,  namely  the
    decision of Immigration Judge  Burrell,  which  had  put  the  decision
    before the First-tier Tribunal and that no issue had  been  taken  with
    that at the hearing but furthermore and importantly whilst it  was  not
    pursued at the hearing by the Presenting Officer, it was not raised  as
    a ground of challenge against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and there has been no application to amend those grounds and  thus  the
    sole ground remains as drafted.

21.   Mr Deller further conceded that the application was made  before  9th
    July 2012, he did not seek to go behind the concession at paragraph [9]
    of the determination in which it was accepted by  the  Respondent  that
    the transitional provisions applied and that the Rules in force at  the
    date of the application were the relevant criteria.

22.   In summary then the grounds as drafted did not seek  to  resile  from
    the concession at [9] nor was there any ground raised or  challenge  to
    the jurisdiction of the Tribunal either before the First-tier  Tribunal
    or in the grounds which left the only ground relating to  the  decision
    of Gulshan which in the light of the concession at  [9]  did  not  mean
    that the judge was not entitled to consider the  case  on  the  classic
    Article 8 principles.  Thus he submitted that unless there was anything
    obvious or manifestly  wrong  in  terms  of  the  judge's  approach  to
    proportionality that  it  was  difficult  to  see  what  challenge  the
    Secretary of State could mount against the decision in the light of the
    way the grounds had been drafted.

23. Mr Aihe submitted that the decision was one that was sound and safe and
    that the concession given at [9] remained and that Mr Deller on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State did not seek to resile from  that  concession
    and that the judge considered all the factors  in  the  proportionality
    balance under those circumstances the grounds are specifically  drafted
    did not demonstrate an error of law in the judge's decision.  In  terms
    of the validity argument,  it  had  been  found  by  Immigration  Judge
    Burrell that there was a right of appeal and thus the matter  had  come
    before the First-tier Tribunal and  that  the  issue  of  validity,  as
    stated by Mr Deller had  not  been  challenged  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal nor had it been challenged in the  grounds.   Looking  at  the
    history of the application originally  an  application  had  been  made
    during the time they had leave but there was an issue relating  to  the
    application having been made and it was returned which he described  as
    an "Basnet" issue.  The grant of permission did  not  engage  with  the
    determination and thus it had not been demonstrated  in  any  error  of
    law.

24. I have set out earlier in this determination the findings of fact  made
    by the judge.  None of those findings of fact have been  challenged  by
    the Secretary of State in the grounds  for  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  Indeed as fairly observed  by  Mr
    Deller, the grounds upon  which  permission  are  sought  relate  to  a
    specific point only on the basis that the judge did  not  consider  the
    guidance  in  Gulshan  (as  cited)  and  that  the  judge  undertook  a
    freestanding Article 8 assessment rather than considering whether there
    were arguably good grounds for granting leave outside of the Rules.  As
    Mr Deller observed also, it was conceded  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    before the First-tier Tribunal at [9] that  as  the  applications  were
    made before the changes in the Rules on 9th July 2012, the Statement of
    Changes HC 194 which were  the  transitional  provisions  required  the
    judge to consider the appeals pursuant to the Rules  in  force  at  the
    date of the application.  Mr Deller did not seek to  resile  from  that
    concession made by the Secretary of State and it is consistent with the
    decision of Edgehill v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 402 as per  Jackson  LJ  at
    part 3 of his judgment.  Therefore as  Mr  Deller  fairly  accepts,  it
    cannot be said that the judge was wrong to consider the appeals on  the
    basis of a freestanding Article 8 as the grounds  submit  because  that
    was conceded by the Secretary of State at [9].

25.   No other issue has been identified in the grounds.  There has been no
    amendment sought at any time before the Upper  Tribunal  to  amend  the
    grounds  of  permission  and  as  Mr  Deller  observed  the  issue   of
    jurisdiction of the appeal had not been challenged  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal nor has it been challenged by way of an  application  for
    permission before the Upper Tribunal.

26.   There has been no amendment either in relation to the grounds to deal
    with any points raised from the decision in Edgehill.

27.  The only point raised by Mr Deller is that as the judge was  therefore
    entitled on the concession of the Respondent at [9] to carry  out  what
    can be described as an "classic" Article 8 assessment, was whether  the
    judge correctly carried out a proportionality balance.

28.   There has been no challenge in the grounds to the  findings  of  fact
    made and it is plain from the determination at paragraphs [56] to  [60]
    that the judge, drawing together all  of  the  issues,  carried  out  a
    careful proportionality balance and  gave  appropriate  weight  to  the
    balance on the side of the Respondent where the judge took into account
    that they had no other lawful basis for remaining in the United Kingdom
    (other than their claim to Article 8 grounds), that their  private  and
    family lives have been developed whilst their stay  was  temporary  and
    placed weight upon the legitimate aim being pursued by the  respondent.
    On the other side of the balance, the judge identified at  [59]  taking
    into account the best interests of the child, the extent of  ties  that
    the first and second Appellant had in the United Kingdom, the fact that
    the positive factors in  the  balance  were  not  weakened  by  a  poor
    immigration history, or criminal record, taking into account there  was
    a pre-existing family life between the first Appellant, her mother  and
    sister before arriving in the United Kingdom, taking into  account  the
    inevitable disruption  to  the  third  Appellant's  education  and  the
    beginnings of her independent roots within the community.  Thus  it  is
    demonstrated that the  judge  carried  out  a  proportionality  balance
    taking into account all relevant factors and therefore it was  open  to
    the judge when conducting such a balance to reach the conclusion as the
    judge  did  at  [60]  that   a   decision   of   the   Respondent   was
    disproportionate.

29. For those reasons, it has not  been  demonstrated  on  the  grounds  as
    presented by the Secretary of State that there is an error  of  law  in
    the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision therefore stands.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


