
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25548/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7 June 2013                                  |On 24 June 2013            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         Mr Rolando Clifford Pyanee
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Tanner
For the Respondent:    Mr A Miah


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The parties are hereafter referred to as they were  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal so that Mr Pyanee is the appellant and the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department is the respondent.

 2. Part of the immigration history of the appellant is that  on  5  August
    2010 he was granted leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  until  16
    April 2012 as a student dependant.  Prior  to  the  expiration  of  his
    leave the appellant made a further application for leave to remain as a
    Tier 2 (General) Migrant.  That application was refused and a  decision
    was also made  to  remove  him  from  the  United  Kingdom  by  way  of
    directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006.  Although the application was made on 21 November 2011 it was
    almost a year before the decision to refuse the application was made on
    1 November 2012.

 3. The appellant appealed that decision under the Rules and also  included
    the claim that his removal would disproportionately interfere with  his
    and his family's Article 8 right to private life.

 4. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ian  Howard.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 10 April 2013  the  appeal  was  dismissed
    under the Immigration Rules but allowed under  Article  8.   The  judge
    found furthermore that the removal decision under Section 47 was not in
    accordance with the law.  There is no challenge to  that  part  of  the
    decision.

 5. The respondent sought permission to appeal the decision  and  this  was
    granted.  The judge  granting  permission  noted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and
    therefore it was not relevant that the respondent took issue with  part
    of his reasoning for so doing.  However, the judge granting  permission
    had this to say in relation to the other ground seeking  permission  to
    appeal:-

         "...

         3.   The grounds also contend that the judge's Article  8  decision
             was flawed.   This  was  because  the  judge  failed  to  give
             consideration to the new Immigration Rules before allowing the
             appeal.   It  is  also  argued  that  the  appellant  had   no
             legitimate expectation to remain in the United Kingdom and the
             best interests of his children would always be served by  them
             being with their parents.

         4.   The determination makes no reference to  the  new  Immigration
             Rules introduced on 9 July 2012 in HC 194 nor  does  it  apply
             the guidance of the Upper Tribunal set out in MF (Article 8  -
             new Rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393  (IAC)  relating  to  the
             consideration of the new Rules.  Therefore it is arguable that
             the determination does not  show  that  the  judge  considered
             whether the application could succeed or fail  under  the  new
             Rules.  Even if the application  would  have  failed  and  the
             judge was right to assess whether the decision was contrary to
             the appellant's Article 8 rights generally, the decision  does
             not show that the judge  considered  the  greater  specificity
             which the new Rules give to the importance  the  Secretary  of
             State attaches to the public interest.  It is not possible  to
             say  that,  if  the  judge   had   given   the   matter   such
             consideration, his decision would have been the same."

 6. I heard submissions from both parties, made full notes in  relation  to
    them and have taken them into account in  this  determination.   I  add
    that the appellant's solicitors lodged a reply to the  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal.  However, the matters raised in the reply  merely
    seek to uphold the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  without
    referring to any fresh issues that need to be considered by me.

 7. For the first time in this appeal Mr Miah raised the  point  before  me
    that because the application was made prior to 9 July 2012 when the new
    Immigration Rules (setting out a number of mandatory requirements) came
    into  force  those  Rules  did  not  apply.  There  was  therefore   no
    requirement for the Ftt Judge to refer to them.  This was not an aspect
    that Ms Tanner was  able  to  address,  particularly  given  no  notice
    whatever, but having briefly considered the situation I decided that  I
    did not need to come to a conclusion on that point for the reasons  set
    out below.

 8. Although the appellant in  this  appeal  has  not  specifically  raised
    Article 8 in the Tier 2 application form - indeed there appears  to  be
    no invitation for him to do so - there is reference in the form to  his
    current status being that of a Tier 4 dependant, and also  a  reference
    to his wife and children. Article 8 was thereafter raised in the Notice
    of Appeal.

 9. The judge nowhere referred to the new Rules and nor, seemingly, was  it
    argued before him that they  either  did  or  did  not  apply  to  this
    application.  If they applied then it was an error for the judge not to
    consider them and how their applicability impacted upon this appellant.
    As is set out in the head note to MF as a result of the introduction of
    the new Rules  (assuming  for  the  moment  that  they  apply  to  this
    application) consideration by judges of Article  8  outside  the  Rules
    must be informed by the greater specificity  which  they  give  to  the
    importance that Secretary of State attaches to the public interest.  An
    example is then given of  the  new  Rules  setting  out  thresholds  of
    criminality by reference to terms of imprisonment  so  that  Article  8
    private life claims can only succeed if  the  applicant  not  only  has
    certain periods of residence but can also show that  their  criminality
    has fallen below the thresholds.

10. It is difficult to compare such a scenario with the one in this appeal.
     If the judge erred did he do so in such a way that his decision should
    be set aside and a fresh one substituted for it?  It appears  that  the
    appellant cannot benefit under the new  Rules,  but  the  Secretary  of
    State has not  considered  Article  8  ECHR  at  all  and  whether  her
    discretion should be exercised in relation to it.  I have come  to  the
    conclusion that in the circumstances of this appeal and  even  assuming
    that the new Rules apply  to  this  application  those  Rules  are  not
    conclusive of the Article 8 assessment. As the judge did in this appeal
    a fact sensitive enquiry was conducted by him following which the judge
    concluded, as he was entitled to do, that the proposed interference  in
    the life of the applicant was disproportionate to the legitimate public
    end sought to be achieved. This is for the reasons given in  paragraphs
    29-37 of the determination.

11. It is my finding therefore that whether  or  not  the  judge  erred  in
    failing to take into account the new  Rules,  and  I  am  by  no  means
    certain that he did so, this is an appeal where the judge was  entitled
    to conclude that the appellant should  succeed  under  Article  8  ECHR
    nevertheless. Even  on  the  assumption  that  the  judge  should  have
    considered the greater specificity which the  new  Rules  give  to  the
    importance the Secretary of State attaches to the public interest  that
    interest would not have required a different decision to be substituted
    for the original one.

12. The decision of the Ftt Judge is upheld.

13. No anonymity direction is made. None was sought and in  the  particular
    circumstances I see no need for one.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton

