
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/25065/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 July 2014                               |On 08Th Aug 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MR K M
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr A Melvin a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Ms F Shaw of counsel instructed by Shanaz & Partners
solicitors


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department. I will
   refer to her as the Secretary of State. The respondent is a citizen of
   Bangladesh who was born on 24 May 1971. I will refer to him as the
   claimant. The Secretary of State has been given permission to appeal the
   determination of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Majid. I will refer to him as
   the FTTJ. The FTTJ allowed, on Article 8 human rights grounds, the
   claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decisions of 3 June
   2013 to refuse to vary his leave to remain in the UK and that he should
   be removed from the country by way of directions under s 47 of the
   Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

2. The claimant was given leave to enter as a spouse on 22 August 2007 for
   a period expiring on 22 August 2009. On 3 September 2008 this leave was
   curtailed because the marriage had broken down and was no longer
   subsisting. On 21 August 2009 the claimant applied for leave to remain on
   compassionate grounds outside the Immigration Rules. This application was
   refused on 9 January 2010, but on 1 March 2010, the claimant was granted
   leave to remain outside the provisions of the Immigration Rules until 1
   September 2010 in order to await the outcome of court proceedings to
   determine the question of access to his children.

3. On 21 October 2010 the claimant was served with a notice of liability to
   removal and a decision to remove him from the UK, after having been found
   allegedly working illegally in a restaurant. A further human rights claim
   was submitted by his representatives but rejected by the Secretary of
   State in a letter dated 9 January 2010.

4. On 2 February 2011 the Family Court made a residence order in respect of
   the three children of the family in favour of the mother.

5. On 21 March 2011 the appellant was detained pending removal to
   Bangladesh and the following day was served with a notice that his
   removal was due to take place on 26 March 2011. On 24 March 2011 the
   claimant's solicitors submitted a letter requesting temporary admission
   and leave to remain. The application was rejected by the Secretary of
   State and a notice of decision to remove was served on 3 May 2011. The
   claimant appealed against that decision and his appeal was heard by First-
   Tier Tribunal Judge Cooper on 7 July 2011. The judge allowed the
   claimant's appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds.

6. On 26 April 2012 the Family Court granted the claimant indirect monthly
   contact with the children. On 4 October 2012 the claimant was granted
   discretionary leave until 4 January 2013. On 23 October 2012 the Family
   Court continued the order for the claimant to have indirect monthly
   contact with the children recording that direct and telephone contact was
   not in their best interests at that time.

7. On 2 January 2013 the claimant applied for further leave to remain. On
   24 April 2013 the Family Court continued the order for monthly indirect
   contact and the mother was ordered to provide the claimant with school
   reports and photographs.

8. Following the Secretary of State's decision of 3 June 2013 the claimant
   appealed to the FTTJ who heard the appeal on 30 April 2014. Both parties
   were represented and the claimant gave evidence. The FTTJ allowed the
   appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds outside the Immigration Rules
   for reasons which are not entirely clear.

9. The Secretary of State applied for and was granted permission to appeal,
   submitting that the FTTJ erred in law by failing to take into account the
   claimant's lack of progress in obtaining access to his children following
   the decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Cooper, the fact that he could
   exercise the contact order from Bangladesh and had provided no
   documentary evidence of his claimed ability to obtain public funding in
   order to seek mediation. Furthermore, there were no exceptional or
   compelling circumstances which would justify considering the appeal on
   Article 8 human rights grounds outside the Immigration Rules.

10. Ms Shaw accepted that the FTTJ erred in law and that the decision
   should be set aside for the reasons set out in the grounds of appeal. She
   also accepted that there were no findings of fact which could be
   preserved. She asked that the appeal be sent back to the First-Tier
   Tribunal. Mr Melvin suggested that I should rehear the appeal on the
   basis of the evidence before the FTTJ. However, in response to my
   question, he was not able to point to any record of the oral evidence
   given by the sponsor or any clear findings of credibility or fact.

11. I find that the FTTJ erred in law. In paragraph 29 he made reference to
   the referral for mediation of the claimant's wish to have more access to
   his children as if the referral had taken place. However, at that stage,
   there had been no referral for mediation nor had the claimant claimed
   that there had been. His evidence was that he was trying to obtain
   funding in order to seek mediation. There was no documentary evidence of
   this. There was no evidence to support the FTTJ's conclusion that there
   was the possibility of a further County Court hearing. In the same
   paragraph the FTTJ said that the decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge
   Cooper allowing the claimant's appeal "remains unimplemented". That was
   not correct. Following First-Tier Tribunal Judge Cooper's decision the
   claimant was granted further leave.

12. The FTTJ also erred in law by failing to consider the claimant's
   Article 8 human rights grounds under the Immigration Rules before
   deciding whether they needed to be considered outside the Immigration
   Rules following the principles set out in Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules
   - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC). The FTTJ should have
   considered whether there were arguably good grounds for granting leave
   outside the Immigration Rules and, if so, whether there were compelling
   circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Immigration Rules.
   This is the point raised in paragraph 2 (b) of the Secretary of State's
   grounds.

13. I find that there are other errors of law not raised in the grounds of
   appeal. I cannot find in the determination any record or even a summary
   of the claimant's oral evidence given at the hearing. There is no finding
   as to his credibility or findings of fact in relation to his evidence.
   The FTTJ's reasons for his conclusion are not clear.


14. I have not been asked to make an anonymity direction but I consider it
   necessary to do so in order to protect the interests of the mother and
   the children.


15. I make  an  order  under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
   Tribunal) Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of  any
   matter likely to lead members of the public to identify any member of the
   claimant's family

16. Having found that the FTTJ erred in law I set aside his decision. There
   are no clear findings of fact which can be preserved. The appeal should
   be reheard in the First-Tier Tribunal.

DIRECTIONS

1) A hearing date has been fixed in the First-Tier Tribunal at Taylor House
   on 16 December 2014.


2) Time estimate - one hour 30 minutes

3) The hearing is with all issues at large. No findings of credibility or
   fact are preserved

4) Bengali Sylheti Interpreter required.





Signed:........................................
    Date:  30 July 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

