
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  IA/25577/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 19 April 2018                    |On 04 May 2018                        |
|                                             |                            |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                            muhammad junaid ahmad
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr Z Mian of Counsel instructed by Diplock
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a Pakistani national born on 12 November 1982  who
         appealed the decision of the respondent dated 24 June 2016 by which
         she refused to grant Tier  4  leave  and  set  directions  for  his
         removal under s.47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act
         2006. On 1 December 2017 the matter came before me at a hearing  at
         Field House and, on 5 December 2017, I set aside the  determination
         of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Walters.

      2. The application had been refused because the respondent  considered
         that the appellant had relied on a false letter and CAS  from  West
         City College and because the appellant's new sponsor was not listed
         on the sponsor register when checks were made  in  June  2015.  The
         appellant failed to attend the hearing but the judge was  satisfied
         that the Notice of Hearing was sent to him on 30 August  2016.  The
         judge noted  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  comply  with  a
         direction for further evidence made by a judge on 25 May  2016.  He
         found that the respondent had failed to  provide  any  evidence  to
         show that the supporting documents were false but as there  was  no
         valid CAS with  the  application,  he  dismissed  the  appeal.  The
         appellant was notified of the decision on 7 October 2016.

      3. On 8 December 2016, the appellant instructed Diplock solicitors. In
         an undated letter to the Tribunal (received on  12  December  2016)
         they put themselves on record and maintained that the appellant had
         not received the notice of hearing or  determination.  A  copy  was
         then sent to the solicitors on 21 December 2016.

      4. On 4 January 2017, an out of time  application  for  permission  to
         appeal was filed and a copy of a  CAS  covering  a  course  from  6
         January 2014 - 6 January 2015 was attached. The grounds argued that
         the judge had wrongfully considered the CAS letter from  West  City
         College rather than the new sponsor,  London  College  of  Business
         Management and Technology. It is maintained that the course at  the
         latter institution covered the period January 2015-January 2015. It
         is argued that the appellant did not receive notification of the re-
         listed hearing and that had he done so he would have  attended  and
         provided relevant documentary evidence. The  judge  was  criticized
         for proceeding in the appellant's absence. The grounds also  argued
         that the appellant should have been given 60 days  to  find  a  new
         sponsor.

      5. Time was extended by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Osborne  but  he
         refused the application on  9  August  2017.  The  application  was
         renewed to the Upper Tribunal and permission was granted  by  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Hanson on 2 October 2017 on the CAS issue.

      6. The matter came before me on 1 December 2017 and, as stated, I  set
         aside the decision on the  basis  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
         consider whether the  60  day  policy  applied  to  the  appellant.
         Directions were issued and the matter came back before me  for  the
         resumed  hearing  on  15  February  2018.  On  that  occasion,  the
         respondent adduced fresh documentary evidence  purporting  to  show
         that deception had been used in  an  earlier  application.  It  was
         admitted but as the appellant had not had time to  consider  it,  I
         adjourned the hearing.

      7. The Hearing

      8. At the commencement of the  hearing  on  19  April  2018,  Mr  Mian
         submitted that the Tribunal did not have jurisdiction  to  consider
         the issue of false representations. He criticized my  admission  of
         the further evidence. He submitted that as the respondent  had  not
         filed a cross appeal on that issue, she could not argue it at  this
         time.

      9. Mr Wilding submitted that this matter had already been resolved. As
         Judge Walter's decision had been set aside, and as the Tribunal was
         remaking the decision, further documentary evidence was admissible.



     10. I confirmed to the parties that the matter was already  settled  at
         the last hearing and invited Mr Mian to proceed.

     11.  The  appellant  was  in  attendance  and  gave  oral  evidence  in
         reasonable English. He adopted his witness statement and  confirmed
         his personal details. He stated that he had submitted two documents
         with his application; a CAS and an enrolment letter. He had  relied
         on several "proofs" that he was a genuine student and  he  obtained
         leave on that basis to attend a course  of  studies  at  West  City
         College. On his return to the UK following a visit to  Pakistan  in
         November 2012, he was stopped at the airport and checks  were  made
         of the college which confirmed he witness statement enrolled there.



     12. The appellant stated that the college licence had been  revoked  at
         the time the college sent its email to the respondent  and  he  did
         not know who had sent it. He stated that despite having leave until
         June 2014, he had paid �500 for an enrolment  letter  in  September
         2013 because he had decided to change his sponsor. This was because
         his college had not been  serious  about  lessons;  there  were  no
         proper arrangements and no teachers at classes. He then went to the
         London College of Business Management and  Information  Technology.
         He was issued with a CAS in December 2013 and he then submitted  an
         application for leave that was refused in June 2015.

     13. The appellant said that he had completed his  studies  at  the  new
         college. He achieved a level 7 diploma and marketing. He obtained a
         degree in 2015. That completed examination in chief.

     14. In cross examination, the appellant agreed  he  had  submitted  the
         letter of 20 September 2013 with his application. He confirmed that
         he had seen the email from the college to the  respondent.  He  was
         asked to comment on the assertions by the college that it  did  not
         issue the letter, that the registration number was wrong, that  the
         course number was wrong and that the college  stamp  differed.  The
         appellant replied: "there were two different persons when I got  my
         CAS". He was reminded that this was the enrolment  letter  and  not
         the CAS. He stated that it had  been  previously  accepted  by  one
         Jawad Hassan that he was a genuine student.

     15. The appellant was asked again  for  his  comments  on  the  college
         email. He replied that it was a genuine letter.  He  was  asked  to
         look at the registration number which differed from that on another
         document. He did but  had  no  comment.  He  was  asked  about  the
         different course dates. He said they  changed  the  dates.  He  was
         asked about the different stamps. He agreed they were different but
         suggested that the college had changed the stamp. He then said that
         the registration number may have been misprinted. He maintained the
         letter was genuine. He obtained it from the college. He stated that
         when the college emailed  the  respondent,  the  licence  had  been
         revoked. He was asked why that made any difference. He replied that
         he was a genuine student. That completed cross examination.

     16. In re-examination Mr Mian produced the applicant's original student
         card showing his registration number as  299.  This  was  seen  and
         returned to the appellant. He was asked whether he had noticed that
         the registration number was incorrect on the letter. He said he had
         not; if he had, he would have asked the college to correct  it.  He
         did not know who had signed the letter. It had not been  signed  in
         his presence. He did not know if the  college  had  more  than  one
         stamp. That completed  the  oral  evidence.  There  were  no  other
         witnesses.

     17. I then heard submissions. Mr Wilding relied on the decision letter.
         He submitted that the burden was on the respondent to show that the
         appellant has used deception by relying on  a  false  document.  He
         pointed out that there was no such thing as  a  higher  balance  of
         probabilities as had been  argued  in  the  skeleton  argument.  He
         submitted that the case  was  straightforward.  The  appellant  had
         applied to attend another college. He had no valid CAS at the time.
         He argued that he should have been given 60 days to  obtain  a  CAS
         but he had submitted the document of 20  September  2013  with  his
         application and that transpired to be a false letter  according  to
         information  received  from  the  college  itself.   Although   the
         appellant had studied there, the college pointed out three problems
         with the letter. That evidence was sufficient for the respondent to
         show that a false document had  been  relied  on.  Nothing  in  the
         appellant's evidence resolved the issue.

     18. Mr Wilding submitted that if it were  found  that  the  letter  was
         false, then that was the end of the matter. The rules provided  for
         a mandatory refusal even if the appellant was not aware the  letter
         was a forgery.

     19. Mr  Wilding  said  that  he  had  not  seen  the  letter  from  the
         receptionist relied on by the  appellant.  he  submitted,  however,
         that it was not the respondent's case that the appellant had  never
         studied at that college. The issue was that  he  had  relied  on  a
         false letter. The appeal should be dismissed. Should  the  Tribunal
         disagree with those submissions, then the respondent had no defence
         to the criticism that the 60-day policy had not been applied.

     20. Mr Mian relied on his skeleton argument. He submitted that the  DVR
         was dated 28 January 2014 and the decision was made in August 2015.
         He submitted that had  the  respondent  been  confident  about  the
         response from the college, she would  have  made  her  decision  in
         January 2014 and the appellant would have been in a better position
         to show whether or not the letter had been genuinely issued.

     21. That completed the submissions. At the conclusion of the hearing, I
         reserved my determination which I now give with reasons.

     22. Conclusions

     23. I have regard to Mr Mian's submissions on my decision to admit  the
         respondent's further evidence. When adjourning the hearing  on  the
         previous occasion to allow the  appellant  time  to  consider  that
         evidence, I observed that although this evidence could  and  should
         have been adduced at an earlier stage, it could not be  right  that
         the appellant should benefit from deception, if there had been any,
         simply because of the respondent's inefficiency. I note  that  this
         is strongly resisted by Mr Mian for the appellant but  he  had  the
         opportunity to consider the evidence and to provide evidence of his
         own to rebut it in the  two  months  that  have  passed  since  the
         adjournment. Moreover, if he has nothing to hide then he should not
         be worried.

     24. I would emphasise that I am not  revisiting  the  findings  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge in respect to the deception issue. On the
         evidence, or rather the absence of evidence,  before  him,  he  was
         entitled to make the finding he did and I have upheld that part  of
         the determination. However, on remaking the decision, I am  obliged
         to look at all the evidence before me and  there  is  now  evidence
         from the respondent that a false letter was  allegedly  relied  on.
         Pragmatically, I cannot overlook that evidence and send the  matter
         back to the respondent to apply her policy as with the evidence she
         has  the  appellant  could  not  expect  to  succeed  in  a  future
         application. It seems to me, therefore, that I  must  consider  the
         evidence before me and I am satisfied that the  appellant  has  had
         ample opportunity to respond to that evidence.

     25. It is accepted by the respondent that the appellant  attended  West
         City College (WCC) although it is  difficult  to  see  how  he  can
         maintain he was a genuine student when by his own  evidence,  there
         were no teachers at classes and no  proper  arrangements.  However,
         that aside, it has not been alleged that he  did  not  attend  that
         institution and the confirmation  from  Mr  Hussain  and  from  the
         college itself (in correspondence with the respondent) that he  was
         registered there does not advance matters.

     26. The appellant relied on  a  letter  of  enrolment  from  West  City
         College dated 20 September 2013 when he made  his  application  for
         leave. The respondent made enquiries  of  the  college  and  on  24
         January 2014 received this response from WCC: "...  After  detailed
         analysis of the provided letter, we can  confirm  that  the  letter
         provided is fake and is not issued by  the  college".  The  college
         went on to confirm that the appellant had studied  at  the  college
         and  that  the  course  matched  college  records.   However,   the
         registration number was incorrect and  the  signature  and  college
         stamp had been fabricated.

     27. The respondent also points to the differences  between  the  course
         dates on the enrolment letter (21 January 2013 - 27 June 2014)  and
         the CAS (13 August 2012 - 28 February 2014). Neither fits with  the
         issue of the student card on 15 November 2012 and expiry on 31  May
         2013. The appellant maintained that the course had started late but
         there is no evidence of this and the appellant does not provide the
         amended dates in his witness statement.

     28. Mr Mian's skeleton argument refers to the email of 24 January  2014
         as being "purportedly" from  the  college.  I  have  no  reason  to
         disbelieve the respondent when  she  maintains  the  correspondence
         came from the college and I note the college email address  in  the
         correspondence. I do not accept the inference, if that is  what  is
         intended, that the respondent concocted this evidence. I also  have
         regard to the fact that the author of the email was clearly able to
         check the college records and to confirm  that  the  appellant  had
         studied there  and  to  confirm  the  course  he  had  taken.  That
         demonstrates that the person who  sent  the  email  had  access  to
         college records even if the licence  had  been  suspended  by  that
         time. I note in passing  that  I  have  not  seen  any  independent
         evidence of when the college ceased to operate.

     29. A further point made in the skeleton argument  is  that  the  email
         does not clarify which letter (the enrolment or the CAS) s said  to
         be fake. That is, however, obvious. As  the  registration  is  only
         incorrect on the enrolment letter  (209  instead  of  299),  it  is
         plainly that document which is in issue. Mr Mian's  own  submission
         (at paragraph 14) that a CAS document cannot be forged  because  it
         requires  access  to  the  sponsorship  management   system,   only
         reinforces my finding that the enrolment letter is the  one  deemed
         to be a forgery.

     30. I find no merit in the submission that the  respondent  would  have
         made a refusal decision in January 2014 had she been  confident  of
         the college response. The reply was received on 24 January 2014. It
         would be extremely unusual for this to have  been  considered  with
         such speed as to lead to a decision within  a  matter  of  days.  I
         cannot speculate on why it took time to issue a decision but  given
         the extent of student refusals  that  this  Tribunal  has  seen  in
         recent years, pressure of work may be the  simple  reason  for  the
         delay.

     31. Going back to the letter said to emanate  from  WCC,  the  evidence
         clearly shows that it bears a different registration number to that
         on the CAS and on the student card. This is unexplained. It is also
         the case that the college stamp differs from that on the  CAS.  The
         appellant suggested that it may have changed and in  re-examination
         Mr Mian asked the appellant if  there  was  more  than  one  stamp.
         Neither explanation overcomes this problem: the  college  maintains
         the stamp was a forgery and surely it would know whether there  was
         more than one stamp in use or whether the stamp had changed.

     32. No explanation is provided to address the college confirmation that
         the principal's signature was a forgery.

     33. The appellant does not explain how he was able to  track  down  the
         college administrator, Mr Khalid, in 2017 given  that  by  his  own
         evidence the college ceased to operate in 2013. Nor is it explained
         how that gentleman is able to recall events from several years  ago
         when the appellant was one student amongst many. Nor does Mr Khalid
         seek to engage with  the  difficulties  arising  from  the  college
         enrolment letter. His letter is therefore of limited value.

     34. For all these reasons, therefore, I find that  the  respondent  has
         discharged  the  burden  upon  her  to  show  on  the  balance   of
         probabilities that the appellant relied on a  false  document  when
         making an application for leave.  It  follows  that  refusal  under
         paragraph 322(1A)  is  mandatory  and  that  the  appellant  cannot
         benefit from the respondent's failure to apply the 60-day policy.

     35. In reaching my decision I  have  had  careful  regard  to  all  the
         evidence. No questions were put to the appellant as to  his  claims
         to be married to an EEA national  and/or  engaged  to  a  Pakistani
         woman  contained  in  the  respondent's  notes  (pp  61-69  of  the
         appellant's bundle) but these matters are not directly relevant  to
         the issue of whether or not a false document was relied on. I  also
         note that at the first hearing before me Mr Mian confirmed that the
         appellant wished to leave the UK and was simply  waiting  to  clear
         his name. Plainly then, there is no matter of  private/family  life
         to consider and indeed  no  submissions  have  been  made  in  this
         respect.

     36. Decision

     37. The appeal is dismissed.

     38. Anonymity

     39. No request for an anonymity order was made and I see no  reason  to
         make one.




    Signed










           Upper Tribunal Judge


           Date: 30 April 2018


