



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: IA/25432/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14 April 2015                           |On 27 May 2015             |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DRABU CBE

                                   Between

                                   Ms H C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



    Representation:
    For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma of Counsel  instructed  by  Malik  &
Malik, Solicitors.
    For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1.       The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, was  granted  permission
       to appeal to this Tribunal by Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein against
       the decision of Judge Trevaskis, a Judge of the First tier  Tribunal
       who had dismissed  her  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision
       refusing her leave to remain as a  partner  under  Appendix  FM  and
       Paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.

    2.       In granting permission to appeal Judge Goldstein noted that  a
       First Tier Tribunal Judge had refused permission to appeal  in  this
       case. He said in his decision, "Without wishing to unduly raise  the
       Appellant's hopes, but having considered the handwritten grounds  of
       this unrepresented Appellant....... In conjunction with the original
       Judge's determination,  I  am  (just)  persuaded  that  the  renewed
       application demonstrates that the Tribunal may have made an error of
       law in its approach to Article 8 and proportionality, not  least  in
       light of the positive findings made by the Judge at paragraphs 32 to
       36 of the determination, that rejected much of the basis upon  which
       the Respondent refused the  Appellant's  application,  refusing  her
       leave to remain as a parent/partner."

    3.  Material facts in this application before me are  not  in  dispute.
       The appellant is an unmarried mother of an  infant  and  has  sought
       leave to remain here as a parent to look after her  baby  since  her
       removal to her country of origin is most likely to cause  her  grave
       hardship due to social and religious norms. The  appellant's  mother
       lives in the UK and the appellant claims to  be  dependant  on  her.
       The respondent was not satisfied that she is the mother of an infant
       child and that she has sole parental responsibility for  the  child.
       The respondent was also not satisfied that the child is not  British
       and has not lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at  least  7  years
       immediately preceding the date of the application i.e. 20 May 2014.

    4. The appellant has been in the United Kingdom since 17 December 2005.
       She came on a student visa and has remained here  since  that  date.
       She has two brothers in the United  Kingdom  and  her  mother  is  a
       British citizen present and settled here  since  the  death  of  her
       husband. The appellant has a Masters degree and intends to study for
       a Ph.D. During the course of her studies she formed  a  relationship
       with a man and gave birth to their child when they were not married.
       The father has not  been  in  touch  once  he  found  that  she  was
       pregnant. She did not know of his immigration status. She knows that
       he is a Pakistani national and his name is A S K. He  had  seen  his
       son in March or May of 2014. The appellant's  son  was  born  on  12
       November 2013. The appellant is dependant on her mother.

    5.  In  determining  the  appeal  Judge  Trevaskis  made  a  number  of
       findings. The Judge found that the infant  Suleman  lives  with  the
       appellant; there is no continuing relationship between the appellant
       and A S K; the appellant is taking and intends to continue  to  take
       an active role in the upbringing of her child. The Judge,  based  on
       these findings concluded that the appellant meets  the  requirements
       of E-ETRPT.2.3 and LTRPT.2.4 of the  Immigration  Rules.  The  Judge
       again correctly concluded that because of  the  requirements  of  E-
       LTRPT.2.2 are not met and therefore the appellant does  not  qualify
       for leave under Appendix FM as a parent.

    6. The Judge then went on to consider whether the appeal  could  engage
       Article 8 and concluded that it did for reasons set out in Paragraph
       41 of the determination. The Judge was of the view that the decision
       of the respondent is likely to have  a  significant  impact  on  the
       private or family life continuing. Analysing the facts on the  basis
       of structured approach enjoined in the  decision  in  R  (Razgar)  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27, the Judge
       upon a full appraisal of all the relevant facts  as  is  evident  in
       paragraphs 46 to 53,  the  Judge  came  to  the  decision  that  the
       Respondent's decision amounts to a proportionate  interference  with
       her rights under Article 8.

    7. In her handwritten grounds of appeal the appellant has said that she
       had not intended to pursue her case as mother of a child born in the
       UK but as a dependant of a British citizen mother who cannot  return
       to Pakistan due to her medical conditions, employment and length  of
       residence in the UK. She also contends that the Judge did not engage
       properly with her claim that her life as an unmarried  mother  would
       be at severe risk in Pakistan.

    8. I heard submissions from Mr Sharma. He said that the  matter  raises
       three issues.  The  first  issue  is  that  in  giving  insufficient
       consideration to the stigma caused on the appellant due to being  an
       unmarried mother was a material error in  law  as  was  the  Judge's
       failure to give due weight  to  the  appellant's  lack  of  familial
       connections  with  Pakistan.  Thirdly  the  Judge   had   given   no
       consideration to the ability of the son to obtain a passport. As the
       appellant was unrepresented, the Judge should have gone  further  in
       exploring all relevant facts and by so doing, the Judge had erred in
       law.

    9.  I did not see the need to call upon Mr Nath to make submissions, as
       I was satisfied that the Judge had made no material error of law  in
       dismissing the appeal. The criticisms  made  of  the  Judge  in  the
       grounds of appeal are wholly unjustified and have arisen because  as
       I suspect the appellant failed to seek proper  legal  advice  before
       making her application for further leave to remain in May  2014.  In
       my judgement the appellant's claim under the  Immigration  Rules  as
       well as  under  Article  8  have  received  a  very  fair  and  full
       consideration. The points taken in the grounds of appeal as well  as
       those made by Mr Sharma during the hearing have little or  no  merit
       in the context of the nature of the application that the  respondent
       had to decide. The appellant did not  present  an  asylum  or  human
       rights claims under Articles 2,3 and 8 and therefore the  respondent
       was under no obligation to consider the  appeals  on  the  basis  of
       claims not presented to  her.  As  far  as  the  issue  of  being  a
       dependant of a British citizen mother is concerned, the  Judge  took
       all the evidence relevant to that aspect into account and given  the
       relevant jurisprudence in that area of law, the claim had little  or
       no chance of success based  on  facts  which,  were  presented.  The
       determination of Judge Trevaskis in this case is exemplary. I  agree
       with the  decision  of  Judge  Simpson  who  in  refusing  to  grant
       permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal said, In a careful,  well
       reasoned and sympathetic decision the Judge correctly  followed  the
       approach recommended in MM v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 985  when  dealing
       with the issue of Article 8...






10   As I have found no material error in the decision of  Judge  Trevaskis,
       the decision to dismiss the appeal against the respondent's  decision
       must stand.






K Drabu CBE
Date:    18 May 2015
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.


Anonymity Direction:
On the facts of this case anonymity direction is appropriate.


Having dismissed the appeal no fee award can be made.




K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
