
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/25195/2013,
                                                               IA/32799/2013
                                                               IA/32800/2013
                                                               IA/32801/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Promulgated on               |
|On 14 February 2014                           |On 13 March 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         THE HON. MR JUSTICE R W JAY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                     and


                          PRITHIVEESING GOPALA (1)
                             SHARMILA GOPALA (2)
                            NIVERDITE GOPALA (3)
                              KAPIL GOPALA (4)
                                                                   Claimants


Representation:

For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Seddon, Counsel, instructed by Farani Javid
Taylor Solicitors




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals   with   permission   against   the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lagunju  promulgated  on  3
    December 2013 in which she allowed  the  appeals  of  Mr  Prithiveesing
    Gopala, Mrs Sharmila Gopala, Miss Nivedeita Gopala  and  Kapil  Gopalad
    ("the claimants") against the decisions made on 3 June 2013  to  refuse
    to grant them leave to remain on human rights grounds.

 2. The first claimant was born on 5 May 1964, and the second claimant  was
    born on 15 May 1972. They are married and are the parents of the  third
    and  fourth  claimants  born  on  25  August  1996  and  13  July  1999
    respectively.  All  of  them  are  citizens  of  Mauritius.  The  first
    claimant arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  27  August  2005  and  was
    granted leave to enter as a visitor. He applied for  further  leave  to
    remain as a student on 17  February  2006,  but  that  application  was
    refused on 13 March 2006. On 23 November 2006,  the  second  to  fourth
    claimants entered the United Kingdom to join him.  The  claimants  have
    remained in the United Kingdom since.

 3. On 31 March 2010 an application was made for further leave to remain on
    human rights grounds. That application was refused on 28 January  2011.
    Further representations were made, but the decision was maintained  and
    removal directions were made. The subsequent appeal to  the  First-tier
    tribunal was dismissed on 30 April 2012. There was no onward appeal.

 4. On 7 August 2012, a further request that the matter be reconsidered was
    made.  It is the  claimant's  case  that  the  children  have  attended
    school, have become accustomed to life here, and that, given they  have
    seven years of their life here at a period  of  central  importance  to
    their development and the ties they have  developed  to  this  country,
    that it would not be reasonable nor in their best interests to  require
    them to return to Mauritius. It  is  also  argued  that  their  parents
    should in consequence, and as a result of the ties they have  developed
    to this country, also be permitted to remain.

 5. The respondent treated the letter of 7 August 2012  as  an  application
    for further leave to remain, and  on  3  June  2013,  refused  it.  She
    considered that:

          i) the first and second claimants were not entitled  to leave  to
             remain as partners (E-LTRP) as both are citizens of  Mauritius
             and neither have leave to remain;

         ii) the first and second claimants were not entitled to  leave  to
             remain as parents (E-LTRPT and EX. 1) as their  children  were
             not British Citizens and had not been  living  in  the  United
             Kingdom continuously for the seven years preceding the date of
             application, or preceding the decision.

        iii) none of the claimants met the requirements  of  paragraph  276
             ADE of the immigration rules;

         iv) Although time had passed  since  the  determination  of  their
             appeal  in  2012,  the  removal  of  the  claimants  would  be
             proportionate, even given the interference  with  the  private
             lives of all the claimants, it being noted that they  had  all
             remained here unlawfully; that the first claimant  had  worked
             unlawfully and appeared not to have paid tax or NI,  and,  had
             taken advantage of state-funded education for his children;

          v) there were no exceptional circumstances such that  removal  of
             the claimants was no longer appropriate.

 6. The claimants appealed against these decisions, electing not to have an
    oral hearing,  but  submitting  a  bundle  of  witness  statements  and
    supporting documents of 339 pages in length. In accordance with  normal
    practice within the First-tier Tribunal, on 2 October 2013 all  parties
    were notified that the appellant  had  requested  that  the  appeal  be
    decided without a hearing. It is not suggested that the respondent  was
    unaware of or sought to object to this proposed course of action.

 7. The appeals then came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lagunju  who
    allowed the appeals under the immigration rules, and  on  Human  Rights
    Grounds, finding that:

          i) the second claimant did not meet the requirements of E-LTRP of
             appendix FM and EX 1.1 did not apply [11];

         ii) at the date of application, neither of  the  third  or  fourth
             claimants had achieved 7 years continuous residence  [10]  and
             that therefore neither the first  or  second  claimants  could
             meet the requirements of E-LTRPT;

        iii) the first claimant did not meet the requirements of  paragraph
             276 ADE of the immigration rules [12];

         iv) as at the date of hearing, the third and fourth claimants  had
             both been in the United Kingdom for seven years [13] and  have
             established significant private lives here;  and, that it  was
             not reasonable to expect them to leave the UK [17], given  the
             need to promote the welfare and best interests of a child  who
             has lived here for 7 years;

          v) as the third and fourth claimants  meet  the  requirements  of
             paragraph 276 ADE of the immigration rules [13],  they  should
             remain in the UK with their parents;

         vi) the claimants have established a significant private lives  in
             the UK, and that their removal  would  be  a  disproportionate
             interference with their rights to respect for that [18];

 8. The respondent sought permission to appeal against that decision on the
    grounds that:

          i) Decisions pursuant to  the  lawful  operation  of  immigration
             control will be proportionate in all save a small minority  of
             exceptional cases, identifiable on a case by  case  basis,  as
             confirmed by MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and R (Nagre  v
             SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 [1];

         ii) The judge had failed to identify any exceptional circumstances
             which would result in an unjustifiably  harsh  outcome,  given
             that they cannot meet the  immigration  rules  [1  e)],  there
             being no disruption to family life [1.b)],  the  children  not
             being denied the opportunity to grow up in  their  country  of
             nationality [1 d)];

 9. On 20 December 2013, Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Appleyard
    granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

The hearing on 12 February 2014

10. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal challenge only the  judge's
    finding that the appeal was to be  allowed  on  human  rights  grounds;
    there is no challenge to her allowing the appeal under the  immigration
    rules.

11. Paragraph 276 ADE of the immigration  rules  provides,  so  far  as  is
    relevant,

       276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
       remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date
       of application [emphasis added], the applicant:

       ...
        (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
       UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) and
       it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the UK;
       or ...

12. We drew the attention of both representatives to  the  judge's  finding
    that the third and fourth claimants met the requirements  of  paragraph
    276 ADE proceeds from a finding that as at the date of determining  the
    appeal [13] they had accrued 7 year's residence, although she had noted
    [10] that as at the date of application, they  had  not  done  so.  The
    finding that the requirements of the immigration  rules  were  met  was
    thus based on an error of law.

13. Ms Holmes sought permission to amend the grounds of appeal  to  reflect
    this. Mr Seddon did not  resist  this  application,  despite  it  being
    raised only at the  last  minute,  accepting  that  the  error  we  had
    identified was readily apparent.  We therefore permitted the grounds of
    appeal to be amended to include the following ground:

         That the judge erred in failing properly to apply the provisions of
         276 ADE. Although she had directed herself correctly regarding  276
         ADE  at  paragraphs  [9]  and  [10],  she  misdirected  herself  at
         paragraphs [12][,[16] of the decision.

14. We find that ground of appeal is made out. On a proper  application  of
    paragraph 276 ADE the third and fourth claimant could not  come  within
    that provision as they had not accrued 7 years'  residence  before  the
    date of application; they had arrived here on 25 November 2006 and  the
    application was  made  on  7  August  2013.    The  appeals  could  not
    therefore have been allowed under the immigration rules.

15. Ms Holmes sought to persuade us that this error  was  material  as  the
    judge should not have allowed the appeal on human rights  grounds.  She
    submitted that the judge had, in effect, not attached proper weight  to
    the public interest, and had  failed  to  identify  what  circumstances
    applied to the claimants such that exceptionally, they succeeded  under
    article 8 although not meeting the requirements of the rules.

16. Mr Seddon, relying on his skeleton  argument,  submitted  that  as  the
    judge had directed herself in line with Azimi-Moayed and others  [2013]
    UKUT 00197 (IAC) [16] and as to the need  to  balance  public  interest
    considerations, including the maintenance of immigration control  [17],
    it could not properly be argued that she had misdirected herself as  to
    the law, and that her conclusions with respect to the  children's  best
    interests were a sufficient basis on which she was  entitled  to  allow
    the appeal.

17. It is established by Gulshan and Nagre that if it is  necessary  for  a
    judge to go on to consider article 8, the fact that the rules have  not
    been met is a factor to which significant weight must be attached  when
    assessing proportionality;  we  do  not  understand  Mr  Seddon  to  be
    submitting to the contrary.

18. In this case the judge proceeded on the basis that the requirements  of
    the rules had been met.  We  are  therefore  drawn  inevitably  to  the
    conclusion that in assessing article 8, the judge did not attach weight
    to the claimants' failure to meet the requirements of the rules, and on
    that basis, she erred in law.

19. While Mr Seddon submitted that the decision  to  allow  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds was one open to the judge, and that the  challenge
    of the secretary of state is simply a "reasons" challenge, we  are  not
    persuaded that is so. The judge's error is material as the her analysis
    of proportionality was inevitably flawed, given that  she  cannot  have
    attached  weight  to  the  inability  of  the  claimants  to  meet  the
    requirements of the rules. Accordingly, we consider that  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal is to be remade.

20. We are satisfied  that  as  the  claimants  will  now  be  giving  oral
    evidence, it will be necessary to undertake a   further,  judicial-fact
    finding of all relevant matters in order for the decision in the appeal
    to be re-made. Having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2  and
    Senior President of the Tribunals' Practice Statement of 25th September
    2012, we consider that it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
    tier Tribunal for determination of the claimant's appeal.

    Directions

    1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


    2. The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
       determination on all the issues.

Signed                                  Date: 11 March 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

