
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25840/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th October  2015                |On 3rd November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                          MR Jorge Lombana Jimenez
                          (ANONYMITY NOT RETAINED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Norman of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Fijiwala


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 9th February 1989 is a citizen of Colombia.   The
    Appellant who was present was represented by Miss  Norman  of  Counsel.
    The Respondent was represented by Miss Fijiwala, a Presenting  Officer.





Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application for a residence card as confirmation
    of his right to reside in the United Kingdom as the spouse  if  an  EEA
    national under the 2006 Regulations.  The Respondent had  refused  that
    application.  The Appellant had appealed that decision and  his  appeal
    was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana sitting at Hatton Cross on
    18th February 2015.  The judge had dismissed the appeal.

 3. Permission to appeal was sought by the  Appellant  and  permission  was
    firstly refused by Designated Judge McClure  on  19th  May  2015.   The
    judge had noted that the Grounds of Appeal seeking permission were that
    the judge had made factual errors as to how long the Appellant had been
    in the United Kingdom, the assessment under Article 8  was  flawed  and
    the judge had given weight to irrelevant information and failed to give
    weight to relevant information.   The  decision  to  refuse  noted  the
    Grounds of Appeal did  not  challenge  the  substance  of  the  judge's
    findings namely that this was a marriage of convenience and accordingly
    the appeal must by necessity have failed under  the  2006  Regulations.
    It was further noted that the judge was  entirely  right  not  to  have
    considered Article 8.  Permission to appeal was renewed and granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Storey on 31st July  2015.   The  judge  made  the
    somewhat curious comment:

         "Whilst I doubt the Appellant can succeed on the merits  it  is  at
         least arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  the
         reasons she gave for finding certain documents unreliable and  that
         this impacted on her findings as to the credibility of the couple's
         claim to have entered into a genuine marriage."

    The matter comes before me firstly to decide whether an  error  of  law
    had been made by the First-tier Tribunal.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 4. It was conceded by Miss Norman that the judge was correct not  to  have
    considered the case under Article 8 of the EHCR given the  recent  case
    law in such respect.  It was submitted however that the judge had  made
    findings that were not open to him concerning  the  solicitor's  letter
    within the Appellant's bundle and failed to  have  taken  into  account
    other documents appearing at pages 53 to 56 of the Appellant's  bundle.
    It was submitted the finding on forgery  affected  the  whole  decision
    regarding credibility.  It was  further  submitted  that  the  marriage
    interview  record  whilst  it   may   have   contained   one   or   two
    inconsistencies noted by the judge contained as substantial  number  of
    consistencies that the judge had simply failed to take into account.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 5.  It  was  submitted  that  the  question  of   the   consistencies   or
    inconsistencies within the marriage interview record were  not  matters
    that had been raised before within  the  Grounds  of  Appeal.   It  was
    submitted that the judge was entitled to make the findings that she had
    made  regarding  the   documents   presented   and   indeed   lack   of
    documentation.

 6. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision to consider the
    submissions and documents in this case.  I now provide a decision  with
    my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 7. I  have  concerns  in  this  case.   The  Respondent  had  refused  the
    Appellant's application to be granted a residence  card  on  the  basis
    that the Respondent viewed this as  being  a  marriage  of  convenience
    between the Appellant and Sponsor.  As clear from page 1 of the refusal
    letter that was based exclusively upon the marriage interview conducted
    by the Respondent on 14th May 2014.

 8. The judge had acknowledged that fact at paragraph 30 of  the  decision.
    Furthermore the judge had correctly  identified  at  paragraph  29,  in
    accordance with IS Serbia [2008] UKAIT 603, the fact  that  whilst  the
    burden of proving a marriage is not one of convenience  lies  with  the
    Appellant, there  must  be  initially  some  evidence  supporting  such
    suspicion and therefore there is an initial burden upon the Respondent.



 9. The judge at paragraphs 31 to 32 had highlighted inconsistencies within
    the marriage interview.  In reality those inconsistencies  amounted  to
    two separate matters relating to dates and location.  The  judge  noted
    the Appellant and Sponsor conceded  in  the  interview  they  had  lied
    concerning when the Sponsor had been in the UK or Spain and the  reason
    for that.  The judge was entitled to highlight those inconsistencies as
    a means of  demonstrating  that  the  Respondent  had  discharged  that
    initial burden of proof i.e. there was some evidence that gave rise  to
    suspicion that  this  may  be  a  marriage  of  convenience.   However,
    thereafter the judge does not appear to  have  looked  further  at  the
    interview record to establish whether when examining that record  as  a
    whole the Appellant had then discharged the burden of  proof  that  the
    marriage was  not  one  of  convenience.   That  interview  record  was
    lengthy.  It was not of assistance perhaps to the Appellant and Sponsor
    that they were  not  always  asked  the  same  questions  or  questions
    covering the same topics so  that  a  comparison  was  not  necessarily
    available across the board.  However it is  clear  that  there  were  a
    range of topics and questions where the Appellant and Sponsor  provided
    consistent  evidence  and  consistency  in  details.    It   does   not
    necessarily follow that the judge would have found that  the  Appellant
    had discharged the burden of proving that this was not  a  marriage  of
    convenience but it was a material error  for  the  judge  not  to  have
    examined that document carefully in order to reach that  conclusion  as
    the document formed the totality of the Respondent's case and the  core
    of the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.

10. Rather the judge appears to have dwelt at some length on the  issue  of
    whether or not the solicitor's letter was genuine or not (paragraphs 35
    to 39).  The judge's findings that the letter was essentially a forgery
    is in my view speculative.  I accept the enclosures referred to in  the
    letter were not before the First-tier Tribunal, whereas I have now seen
    those enclosures that support the Appellant's  case.   Those  documents
    were not before the  judge  and  therefore  there  is  and  can  be  no
    criticism of  the  judge  but  it  tends  to  underscore  the  somewhat
    speculative approach to the solicitor's letter which in itself was  not
    really a central feature of this case.

11.  The  Grounds  of  Appeal  do  not  properly  engage  with  where   the
    difficulties lie  in  this  decision  namely  the  failure  to  examine
    properly the interview record to decide  whether  having  accepted  the
    Respondent discharged the initial burden of proof, thereafter  did  the
    Appellant on balance show that this was not a marriage of  convenience.
    That failure together with an over emphasis on a speculative matter has
    led in my view to a material error of law.  A close examination of  the
    interview record may have led the judge to reach a different conclusion
    particularly if that had been coupled with only looking at  what  could
    be  properly  inferred  from  the  solicitor's   letter   rather   than
    speculating upon that letter.

Notice of Decision

12. I find that the judge made a material error of  law  such  that  I  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

13. Anonymity not retained.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
