
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/25567/2015
     IA/25568/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 5th December 2016                 |On 24th January 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

     LACHHMAN SINGH    First Appellant
     NAVJOT SINGH Second Appellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    In person
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The first appellant is the father of the second  appellant.   They  are
    both citizens of India born, respectively, on 1st January 1971 and 18th
    July 1997.  They appealed against the decisions of the respondent  made
    on 29th June 2015 to revoke the first appellant's residence card and to
    refuse to grant a residence card to the second appellant  applying  the
    provisions of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006.

 2. The respondent revoked the  residence  card  for  the  first  appellant
    because it was considered that  he  had  entered  into  a  marriage  of
    convenience with his wife, a citizen of Portugal, on 1st October  2012.



 3. In a renewed application for permission, Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
    gave permission to the appellants to appeal  against  the  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lambert in  which  she  dismissed  the
    appeals against the  decisions  of  the  respondent  to  which  I  have
    referred.

 4. In granting permission Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington  noted  that  the
    grounds of application asserted that the judge had misapplied the  case
    law culminating in Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ 14 (burden of proof) and failed
    to  take  into  account  material  evidence  and  considerations.   She
    considered that, although the judge had referred  to  the  adducing  of
    evidence of the parties' intentions at the time of the marriage, it was
    arguable that over emphasis was placed  on  events  subsequent  to  the
    marriage and also there was a failure to address the maternity evidence
    showing the first appellant to be the partner of the sponsor  and  HMRC
    evidence in relation to the sponsor which had been acknowledged by  the
    respondent.  Further, Judge Rimington noted that  no  formal  interview
    record was produced only minute notes which should have been considered
    following the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Miah  (Interviewers
    comments: disclosure: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00515 (IAC).

The Hearing

 5.  At  the  hearing  the  appellants  were  unrepresented.   I  therefore
    explained the purpose of the hearing to them and assisted them to  make
    comment, initially, about the existence or otherwise of an error  on  a
    point of law in the First-tier Judge's decision.  The  summary  of  the
    comments made by the first appellant are set out, below.

 6. Mr Bates argued that the  judge  had  adopted  the  right  approach  to
    assessment of the  marriage  of  convenience  issue  acknowledging  the
    burden of proof placed upon the respondent.  He referred  to  paragraph
    3.5 of the decision in which the judge also makes reference to relevant
    case law.  He thought that the reasoning set out in paragraph  3.7  was
    both cogent and adequate to reach the conclusion that the  parties  had
    entered into a marriage of convenience.  As to the  suggestion  that  a
    proper record of interview had not been produced, he thought the  judge
    had carefully evaluated the minute sheets produced  by  the  respondent
    even if these did not amount to a formal interview record.  Whilst  the
    judge had considered evidence relating to  events  after  the  date  of
    marriage she was not wrong to conclude that  such  evidence  undermined
    the intentions of the parties at the time of marriage.

 7. The first appellant drew attention to the  evidence  which  showed  his
    wife had two  unfortunate  miscarriages  during  the  course  of  their
    relationship.  He submitted that the judge was  wrong  to  dismiss  the
    photographic evidence to which she  refers  in  paragraph  3.8.   These
    photographs were shown to me and were stated to show the parties before
    and after marriage. He said that some had been sent with  the  original
    application.  He also emphasised that there was evidence to  show  that
    he and his wife had spent two years together  living  in  Spain  before
    they married.  He  further  submitted  that  the  judge  had  not  paid
    attention to the evidence of an EEA family permit granted to the  first
    appellant from 20th February 2014  and  his  possession  of  a  Spanish
    residence card valid to 30th September 2017.

 8. The first appellant also referred to an  alleged  incident  during  the
    hearing when the judge had cause to reprimand his  Counsel.   Mr  Bates
    confirmed that the respondent's record also showed that there had  been
    an occasion when Counsel had interrupted the judge in  an  "aggressive"
    manner.  However, as I indicated to both parties, there was no evidence
    before me to suggest that this incident had in  anyway  influenced  the
    judge in reaching her reasoned findings.  In particular, there had been
    no formal complaint made about Counsel's behaviour.

 9. The first appellant concluded his submissions by  emphasising  that  he
    believed the judge had plenty of evidence  of  a  genuine  relationship
    between him and his wife both before  and  after  their  marriage.   Mr
    Bates also indicated that there was no intention on  the  part  of  the
    respondent to remove the parties at present.

Conclusions

10. In Rosa, at paragraph 41, the Court of Appeal made it  clear  that,  in
    marriage of convenience cases, the Tribunal is able to look at evidence
    concerning the relationship between appellant  and  husband  after  the
    date of marriage as any evidence from that time is capable  of  casting
    light on the intentions of the parties at the time  of  marriage.   The
    judge was, therefore, not wrong to  adopt  that  course.  However,  the
    decision suggests that  the  judge  did  not  take  into  consideration
    significant   and   relevant   evidence    which,    despite    claimed
    inconsistencies in evidence during interview, tended to show  that  the
    parties were not involved in a marriage of convenience.

11. Paragraph 3.8 reveals that the judge  was  offered  sight  of  original
    photographic prints of the parties together said to have been  sent  to
    the respondent. It appears that copies of such  photographs  were  not,
    otherwise, before her. That evidence  should  not  have  been  rejected
    without examination.  Whilst that evidence, alone, might not have  been
    adequate to displace the  respondent's  conclusion  of  a  marriage  of
    convenience, there was other evidence which the judge appears  to  have
    either ignored or inadequately considered that also suggested that  the
    respondent's allegations might not be made  out.   In  particular,  the
    judge acknowledges in paragraph 3.1, but  does  not  give  reasons  for
    rejecting, evidence that the first appellant had been granted a Spanish
    residence card valid to 30th September 2017  based,  I  infer,  on  his
    marital relationship. There was also evidence before the judge  of  the
    unfortunate miscarriages suffered by the first appellant's  wife  which
    occurred whilst the parties were living together in Spain and Portugal,
    the first of such taking place  in  January  2012  before  the  parties
    married in the following October.  Further, although  the  judge  fully
    comments on the  format  of  the  minute  sheets  said  to  record  the
    interviews with the first  appellant  and  sponsor,  they  are  not  in
    question and answer format so do not record the actual  issues  put  to
    the interview subject enabling the  relevance  of  the  answer  to  the
    question to be evaluated. Thus, the judge wrongly  placed  considerable
    emphasis on the minute sheet records  to  reach  the  conclusion  that,
    despite the existence of evidence to show that the parties had been  in
    a  relationship  before  getting  married,  the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience.

12. At paragraph 3.5 of the decision the judge refers to the nature of  the
    burden imposed upon the respondent to prove a marriage  of  convenience
    on the basis that it is a marriage "entered into  for  the  predominant
    purpose of securing  residence  rights"  [my  emphasis].   However,  In
    paragraph 10 of Rosa, the Court of Appeal applied the definition  of  a
    marriage of convenience used  in Article 1  of  EC  Council  Resolution
    97/C 382/01 of 4th December 1997 (which was adopted  by  the  House  of
    Lords in R (Baiai) [2008] UKHL 53) which  defines  it  as  "a  marriage
    concluded ... with the sole aim of circumventing the Rules on entry and
    residence  of  third  country  nationals  ..."  [my  emphasis].    This
    definition is again referred to and approved in  paragraph  40  of  the
    judgment.  There is a difference between  "predominant  purpose"  which
    allows for other intentions and "sole aim" which  does  not.   Applying
    the accepted definition was particularly relevant in  a  case  such  as
    this where there was evidence, acknowledged by the judge,  that  showed
    that the parties were in a relationship before the  date  of  marriage.
    It might be difficult to conclude that the marriage, in this case,  was
    entered into for the sole purpose of circumventing the  EEA  Rules  for
    entry and residence of third country nationals.

13. For the reasons I have given I have reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows errors on points of law  such
    that the decision should be set aside  and  re-made.   As  it  will  be
    necessary for the evidence to be re-examined I conclude that the matter
    should be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  hearing  a  fresh.
    This accords with paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice  Statements  of  the
    Senior President of Tribunals of 25th September 2012.

DIRECTIONS

14.   The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
    Manchester.

15. The remitted hearing should not be before Judge Lambert.

16. The time estimate for the hearing is two hours.

17. A Portuguese interpreter will be required for the hearing.

18. The hearing will take place on a date to be specified by  the  Resident
    Judge.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction nor was  such  a
direction requested before me.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
