
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: ia/25943/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Birmingham & Field House          |Decision signed: 18.03.2015          |
|on 08.12.2014 & 03.02.2015           |sent out: 23.03.2015                 |


                                   Before:

                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN


                                  Between:

                                   yi cao
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:  Shaheen Haji  (on 8 December) and Rashid Ahmed (on 3
                    February) - both counsel instructed by Aughton
                    Ainsworth, Manchester
For the respondent: Mr Neville Smart (on 8 December) and Mr Sebastian
                    Kandola (on 3 February)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal, by the , against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Hariqbal Sangha), sitting at Birmingham on  22  January
    2013, to  a long residence  appeal  by  a  citizen  of  China,  born  9
    October 1983. The case has since been to the Court of Appeal, and  back
    again, by way of a consent order; but there is no need to go  into  all
    of that for the moment. The permission judge also granted permission to
    appeal out of time, for reasons he gave.

 2. The original challenge to the judge's decision was  not  on  the  basis
    relied on by Mr Smart case  before  me,  as  set  out  in  his  written
    submissions, prepared on 21 June 2013 for  a  previous  Upper  Tribunal
    hearing. The  point  taken  is  that  the  appellant  had  only  s.  3C
    embarkation  leave,  following  the  refusal  of  a  previous   student
    application, but before its dismissal on appeal, at the  time  he  made
    his present long residence application. This is not relied on by way of
    asserting that his s. 3C leave did  not  count  towards  the  necessary
    period of residence; but that it didn't give him the  necessary  status
    to make an application, which  could  be  treated  as  if  it  were  an
    application for a variation of his previous one.

 3. This case is based  on  JH  (Zimbabwe)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  78,  and  in
    particular the following passage from  the  judgment  of  Richards  LJ,
    effectively the only reasoned one, and worth setting out in full, as Mr
    Smart did in his submissions.

         35. The key  to  the  matter  is  an  understanding  of  how  s.3C
             operates.  I have set the section out at para 10  above.   The
             section  applies,  by  subs.(1),  where  an  application   for
             variation of an existing  leave  is  made  before  that  leave
             expires (and provided that there has been no decision on  that
             application before the leave expires).  In  that  event  there
             is, by subs.(2), a statutory extension of the  original  leave
             until (a) the application is decided or withdrawn, or (b),  if
             the application has been decided  and  there  is  a  right  of
             appeal against that  decision,  the  time  for  appealing  has
             expired, or (c), if an appeal has been brought, that appeal is
             pending:  I paraphrase the statutory language, but that  seems
             to me to be the effect  of  it.   During  the  period  of  the
             statutory extension of the  original  leave,  by  subs.(4)  no
             further application for variation of that leave can  be  made.
             Thus, there can be only one application for variation  of  the
             original leave, and there can be only one decision (and, where
             applicable, one appeal).   The  possibility  of  a  series  of
             further applications leading to an indefinite extension of the
             original leave is  excluded.    However,  by  subs.(5)  it  is
             possible to vary the one permitted  application.    If  it  is
             varied, any decision (and any further appeal) will  relate  to
             the application as varied.  But once a decision has been made,
             no variation to the application is  possible  since  there  is
             nothing left to vary.

         36. Once the operation of s.3C is understood, the concern  of  the
             tribunal in DA  Ghana  about  nullifying  the  prohibition  in
             subs.(4) if a second application is treated as a variation  of
             the first can be seen to lose its force.  A second application
             can be treated as a variation of the  first  only  up  to  the
             point when the Secretary of States makes  a  decision  on  the
             application.   There  is  nothing  surprising  about  subs.(4)
             having only a limited impact during that period, given that it
             is qualified by subs.(5) which expressly permits  a  variation
             of the first application.  Thereafter,  however,  subs.(4)  is
             effective to  prevent  any  further  application  which  might
             otherwise have been made right up to the time when  an  appeal
             in relation to the first was no longer pending, and to prevent
             a succession of such applications.  Far from being  nullified,
             it retains an important function  in  avoiding  abuse  of  the
             system.

 4. What happened in this case was as follows:

    06.10.2011      appellant's student application refused

    21.04.2012      appellant makes long residence application

    22.05.2012      dismissal of  his  student  appeal  (by  Judge  Malcolm
                  Parkes) becomes final, on finding false documents used  in
                  his student application

    30.10.2012      removal decision

    11.02.2013      Judge Sangha allows long residence appeal

    18.07.2013      deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Satvinder  Juss  re-makes
                  decision and dismisses appeal

    27.08.2013      Upper Tribunal Judge Hugh Macleman  refuses  permission
                  to appeal

    05.12.2013      Sir Stanley Burnton refuses permission to appeal

    19.09.2014      consent order sealed in Court  of  Appeal,  'remitting'
                  appeal to Upper Tribunal

 5. It might well be wondered, considering that permission  to  appeal  had
    been refused, first over a year before by a judge of this Tribunal; and
    then nearly nine months before by a judge of the Court of  Appeal,  why
    the Treasury Solicitors should have consented to such a  course.  I  am
    not here to read minds; but I have to  do  whatever  it  was  that  the
    consent order, taken with the statement of  reasons  attached,  said  I
    must.

 6. The statement of reasons  itself  was  not  particularly  illuminating:
    parties who file, or consent to the filing of  such  documents,  should
    remember that Lords  Justices  asked  to  sign  consent  orders  cannot
    possibly be expected to read and consider all the material  themselves.
    It is  the  parties'  responsibility  to  make  sure  that  the  terms,
    preferably set out in the consent order itself, but if not, then in the
    statement of reasons, should make it quite clear  exactly  what  it  is
    that the Upper Tribunal has been asked to re-decide.

 7. That was certainly not done in this case: the closest the statement  of
    reasons came to that aim was to refer to the terms of Judge  Macleman's
    refusal of permission: "Judge Sangha should perhaps  not  have  allowed
    the appeal, on the findings reached, "under the Immigration Rules", but
    on the basis only that the decision under appeal was not in  accordance
    with the law". That was a perfectly clear basis  for  Judge  Macleman's
    decision, where he refused permission, as in due course did Sir Stanley
    Burnton, on the ground that the appellant  had  no  real  case  on  the
    merits; but very much  less  satisfactory  as  a  foundation  for  this
    Tribunal re-deciding, if possible, what the real position on its merits
    might be.

LONG RESIDENCE

 8. I have to do the best I can with that task. Judge Sangha was faced with
    an appeal by a man who had had leave to remain as a student from  2002,
    but with significant gaps, including one of 88 days in 2009 - 10,  till
    30 August 2011. On that day he applied for further leave to remain as a
    student, but was refused on 6 October. It followed (see JH  (Zimbabwe))
    that he  had  not  the  necessary  status,  as  a  person  with  s.  3C
    embarkation leave only, for his long residence application on 21  April
    2012 to be considered as a variation of his student application.

 9. Only if that application should have  been  considered  at  that  point
    would this appellant have been entitled to be treated, subject  to  the
    necessary continuity of residence, as a person with ten  years'  lawful
    stay under the 'old Rules', in force before 9 July 2012; or to have any
    realistic prospect of getting indefinite leave to remain on that  basis
    [ie paragraph 276B (i) (a)] under the transitional provisions  set  out
    at paragraph 7 of  Edgehill  &  another  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  402.  Those
    provisions require a valid application made before 9 July,  which  this
    was not. It follows that the appellant was equally not entitled to  the
    benefit of paragraph 276B (ii), dealing with  public  interest  reasons
    for someone to be allowed indefinite leave to remain.

10. It must equally follow that the question, raised at some length in  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal to the Court of Appeal, about whether the
    Home Office should have considered whether to use their  discretion  to
    disregard the gaps in the  continuity  of  his  lawful  residence,  was
    entirely irrelevant, because he had no legitimate expectation  when  he
    made his application on 21 April 2012 that it would be considered under
    the 'ten-year rule' at all. Nor did any of the points made there or  in
    the appellant's skeleton argument before me about  his  position  under
    276B (ii) help him, for the same reason.

11. The argument raised before the judge for  the  appellant  by  his  then
    counsel (not Miss Haji) rested on a misconception as to the  effect  of
    JH (Zimbabwe) on the position of someone with s. 3C  embarkation  leave
    only. It was plainly an error of law on the part of the judge to  allow
    the appeal on that basis, and that part of his decision cannot stand.

12. The judge also allowed the appeal under article 8,  without  doing  any
    more than referring back to the reasons he had given  for  allowing  it
    under the Rules. If those had been sustainable, then there  would  have
    been nothing much wrong with that, except that it would have been quite
    unnecessary to refer to article 8 at all. However,  the  judge's  Rules
    reasons were wrong, on the basis already explained, and his  article  8
    decision needs to be re-made.

ARTICLE 8

13. That leaves  for  consideration  the  proportionality  decision  to  be
    reached on the balancing exercise between the public  interest  in  the
    enforcement of immigration  law,  and  the  appellant's  own  right  to
    private  and  family  life,  carried  out  in  terms  of  the   general
    jurisprudence on article 8 (see MM & others [2014] EWCA Civ  985).  The
    question was  whether  or  not  the  result  of  that  exercise  showed
    'exceptional' or 'compelling' reasons for  allowing  the  appeal  under
    article 8. The parties were  told  that,  if  there  were  any  further
    submissions about that, then I should be prepared to consider them at a
    short further hearing at Field House on 3 February.

14. On 3 February Mr Kandola referred to

      a) notice of a further decision, served on 13 October 2013, to  remove
         the appellant as an illegal entrant; and

      b) s. 117B of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, added by s.  19  of
         the Immigration Act 2014.

    These were of course new  points;  but,  in  re-making  the  article  8
    decision, I have to consider the facts and the law as they now stand.

15. On (a), Mr Kandola's submissions were made on the basis of the  version
    of s. 10 of the Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999  available  in  court
    (Phelan 11th  Ed.).  This[1]  was  also  the  version  cited  by  Helen
    Mountfield QC in her judgment in Shahbaz Ali [2014] EWHC  3967  (Admin)
    [hearing 5 and 6 November 2014];  but she was dealing with the legality
    of decisions served on 11 August 2014, before the relevant part of  the
    Immigration Act 2014  was brought into force in October. I on the other
    hand am dealing with the merits of this appellant's article 8 case,  as
    they stand on the facts and law now.

16. S. 10 (8) as it stood before  last  October  provided  that  a  removal
    decision under the provisions then in force should invalidate, not only
    any period of leave affected by the breach of conditions  or  deception
    which had led to the decision to remove, but any leave previously given
    to the person to be removed. It may be that Parliament came to consider
    that provision unnecessarily draconian; but, for whatever  reason,  the
    only equivalent, in the present version of s. 10, is s. 10  (6),  which
    applies only to family members of the person to be removed: s.  10  (8)
    deals with another point entirely.

17. It follows that Mr Kandola's argument on s. 10 (8) of  the  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999 must fail; and with it, as will  shortly  be  seen,
    part of his argument on s. 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002. He might have argued, if it had been  clear  that  the
    former 10 (8) had been replaced by the Immigration Act  2014,  that  it
    nevertheless invalidated, once  for  all  and  at  the  date  when  the
    decision to remove the appellant was served on him, any previous  leave
    he had had. I should not have been in the least sympathetic to such  an
    argument, however, since an elementary sense of justice suggests, that,
    just as the appellant has to take the rough side of the 2014 Act, so he
    is entitled to the smooth[2].

18. That part of Mr Kandola's argument was based  on  s.  117B  (4),  which
    provides for little weight to be given to private life established at a
    time when the person concerned had been here unlawfully;  so  it  could
    not succeed in this case, without s. 10 (8) operating to invalidate all
    the periods of leave the  applicant  had  had  to  date.  Mr  Kandola's
    alternative submission was based on s. 117B (5): "Little weight  should
    be given to a private life established by a person at a time  when  the
    person's immigration status is precarious."

19. This point requires consideration of the meaning of 'precarious': it is
    not defined in the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, nor in
    any other statute of which the parties were aware. Used in a very loose
    sense in ordinary life, it is a common English word, whose meaning must
    be a question of fact: often, for example, it has the sense of  someone
    having a precarious hold on life, or on a rock-face (which may come  to
    the same thing, if he is unlucky).

20. On the other hand, in legal language 'precarious' is  a  term  of  art,
    probably best known as referring to the maxim 'Nec vi,  nec  clam,  nec
    precario', about the necessary qualities of adverse possession of land,
    if it is  to  found  a  claim  by  prescription.  There  it  means  'by
    permission'. I put these alternatives to the parties, who  were  unable
    to offer any further aid to construction.

21.  Mr  Kandola  did  think  there  might  be  one  of   the   Immigration
    Directorates' Instructions [IDIs] dealing with the point, though he was
    unable to refer me to it in court.  On  principle,  I  should  be  very
    reluctant to take the definition of a word in a statute from that  used
    internally by one party to litigation arising under it. However, I  had
    given an opportunity for further  submissions,  and  indicated  that  I
    should not be unwilling to look at the IDI in question, if it could  be
    found.

22. Following the hearing, Mr Kandola e-mailed me and the other  side  with
    the following extract from the IDIs:

         3.6. Overview of the 10-year private life route

         Consistent with the  public  interest  considerations  set  out  in
         section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014  that  provide  that  little
         weight should be given to a private life established  by  a  person
         who is in the UK unlawfully or with precarious immigration  status,
         the private life rules provide a stringent set of  requirements  to
         be met by applicants. A person  is  in  the  UK  unlawfully  if  he
         requires leave to enter or remain in the UK but does not  have  it.
         For the purposes of this guidance, a person's immigration status is
         precarious if he is in the UK with limited leave to enter or remain
         but without settled  or  permanent  status,  or  if  he  has  leave
         obtained fraudulently, or if he has been notified that he is liable
         to deportation or administrative removal.

23. One reason for my willingness is that  'precarious'  is  a  word  which
    appears quite often in the European jurisprudence on  this  subject.  I
    assume it, or the local equivalent, is in common use on  the  Continent
    in the sense concerned: at least I have not so far seen a case where it
    is defined. Again, I should still be reluctant  to  take  a  definition
    used in a United Kingdom statute  from  foreign  jurisprudence,  though
    that time may be coming, where European courts are concerned.

24. Mr Kandola went on to argue that someone who, like this appellant,  has
    been here all along, so far as he has had leave at all, on a  temporary
    basis as a student, does indeed have a status  which  is  'precarious'.
    The word is used in the sense that, each time his leave  runs  out,  he
    needs to get it renewed; in ordinary language, to ask for permission to
    stay. Mr Ahmed, on the other hand, maintained first that, so far as the
    appellant had had leave, his status was not 'precarious' at all.

25. It is worth looking at the relevant sub-sections together:

         (4) Little weight should be given to-

         (a) a private life, or

         (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established  by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.

26. There is a distinction made there, both in terms of definition  and  of
    consequences, between 'precarious' and  unlawful  status.  'Precarious'
    clearly means some status more secure than that of a person  unlawfully
    here, but less than that of someone with indefinite leave to remain, or
    other long-term leave, in a category capable of leading to  settlement.
    The question is whether it includes short-term, such as student  leave,
    which is renewable only on application; or whether  it  is  limited  to
    those here with temporary admission or pending an appeal.

27. I have considered the view taken in the IDIs (see 22), but reached  the
    conclusion that it is wrong. The meaning of 'precarious' status set out
    there includes that belonging to some  categories  of  people  who  are
    unlawfully here (with leave  obtained  by  fraud),  some  whose  lawful
    status still stands, but on  a  knife-edge  (those  notified  of  their
    liability to deportation or removal); and some who are  unarguably,  if
    impermanently in this country (without settled or permanent status). It
    partly overlaps, and partly supplements the separate provision  in  the
    Rules for people unlawfully here.

28. On the other hand, if the view is taken that someone with limited leave
    is neither unlawfully here, nor  with  'precarious'  status,  then  the
    legislative scheme in ss. 117 (4) - (5) of  the  Immigration  Act  2014
    becomes clear and rational. The 'precarious' status in question may  be
    reserved for those here on temporary admission, or  pending  resolution
    of an asylum or other claim, whose presence is tolerated,  rather  than
    allowed as a right. Whether that conclusion makes any difference to the
    result of this case remains to be seen.

29. Mr Ahmed's next submission, and the only other point of law he was able
    to make in the appellant's favour, was that, as someone who should have
    been treated as already here with leave for ten years by the  time  the
    'new Rules' came into  force  on  9  July  2012),  this  appellant  was
    entitled to the benefit of the decision in Edgehill  &  another  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 402.  However, while the appellant had been here since 16  May
    2002, he made the application whose refusal  is  the  subject  of  this
    appeal on 21 April 2012, at a time when he had only s. 3C leave, and  I
    have already dealt with and rejected Miss Haji's submissions for him on
    that point, for reasons given at 8 - 11, including (at  10)  the  point
    made on the gaps in his residence.

30. Furthermore, this appellant was only here in the first place with short-
    term student leave, for which he would have had to  persuade  the  Home
    Office that he intended to leave at the end of his course. He  has  put
    forward, not so much an explanation for the false document  finding  by
    Judge Parkes, as his own account of taking the ETS  test  himself,  and
    not by proxy. This is supported by no  more,  by  way  of  claimed  new
    material, than a letter from the director of studies  at  his  college,
    identifying him as taking the test by his passport number and  date  of
    birth.

31. It has to be said that those  details,  and  if  necessary,  documents,
    would have been available to any well-briefed proxy; but what is  more,
    the letter (dated 13 October 2011) was before Judge Parkes,  who  dealt
    with it at paragraphs 13 - 22, giving cogent reasons for rejecting  the
    evidence relied on by the appellant. Judge Parkes' decision  was  never
    challenged  on  appeal  (again  the   appellant   blames   his   former
    representatives), and there is no basis  for  re-opening  his  findings
    now.

32. The only feature of this appellant's case very much in his favour  lies
    in the good works he has done within his own Chinese  community.  While
    these of course were praiseworthy  in  themselves,  there  was  nothing
    about them to  raise  any  possibility  of  a  finding  of  exceptional
    circumstances for allowing his appeal under article 8, taking  all  the
    evidence on both sides  of  the  balance  into  account.  Even  if  the
    appellant is not to be regarded as someone who established the  private
    life on which he relies while his status here was  either  unlawful  or
    precarious, that in my view is the only conclusion to be reached.



Home Office appeal allowed: article 8 decision re-made

Appellant's appeal dismissed



                                             (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                                                                    APPENDIX


       (Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 s. 10, as previously in force)


   (1) A person who is not a British citizen may be removed from the United
   Kingdom in accordance with directions given by an immigration officer,
   if

       (a) having only a limited leave to enter or remain, he does not
       observe a condition attached to the leave or remains beyond the time
       limited by the leave;

       (b) he uses deception in seeking (whether successfully or not) leave
       to remain;

   ...

   (8) When a person is notified that a decision has been made to remove
   him in accordance with this section, the notification invalidates any
   leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom previously given to him
   ...
-----------------------
[1]    See appendix
[2]    or, more elegantly, to adapt the well-known maxim "Qui  sentit  onus,
    sentire debet et commodum"

