
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/25526/2012
     IA/25532/2012
     IA/25533/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19 August 2013                               |On 27 August 2013          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                              MRS JASPREET KAUR
                            Mr JASVIR SINGH THIND
                        Mr PRABHNEER SINGH (a minor)

                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Rahman, with Mayfair Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are a wife, her husband, and their  four-year  old  son.
    They appeal with permission against  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Symes on 20th  January  2013  dismissing  their  appeals
    against the Secretary of State's refusal pursuant  to  paragraph  245ZW
    and 322(3) of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended),  to  vary  the
    principal appellant's leave to remain to enable  her  to  study  for  a
    postgraduate diploma in Hospitality and Tourism Management  (Level  7),
    and to refuse the second and third appellants leave to remain  pursuant
    to paragraphs 319C and 319H respectively.  The outcome of their appeals
    depends on that for the principal appellant.

 2. The first and second appellants have had a further child while  in  the
    United Kingdom, who is not an appellant in these proceedings but  whose
    status depends on that of his parents.  He is Jasneer Singh Thind, date
    of birth 20th December 2012.

 3. The course the principal appellant now wishes to pursue is provided  by
    West City College Limited, and runs from  16th  July  2012  until  13th
    December 2013.  She produced a CAS in relation to  that  course,  about
    which there is no dispute.

 4. This appeal was previously heard before another  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    but it has been necessary for there to be a transfer order and  for  it
    to be heard again before me.

Background

 5. These appellants came to the United Kingdom  on  5  October  2010  with
    entry clearance giving them leave to remain until  22  July  2012.  The
    principal appellant  had  leave  to  study  at  the  London  School  of
    Management Studies (LSMS) and the First-tier Tribunal judge found  that
    she had done so until its closure by the UKBA in June 2012.

 6. At paragraph  [21],  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  noted  that  the
    appellant had studied at a second college, The Lord's College 'at least
    in parallel' to the course for which she had leave to enter, during the
    period for which she had leave  to  enter  for  the  LSMS  course;  the
    appellant's case is that those were supplementary studies as  permitted
    in paragraph 246ZW(7C)(iii) of the Rules.

 7. The appellant obtained no  qualification  from  the  London  School  of
    Management Studies because of its closure. When closing the school, the
    Secretary of State did not write to the principal appellant giving  her
    the usual 60 days  within  which  to  find  an  alternate  course.  The
    appellant did find an alternate course at West City  College  and  made
    the present application within the 60-day period.

The paragraph 322(3) issue

 8. The condition attached to the grant of leave  to  enter  or  remain  at
    245ZW(7C)(iv), so far as relevant, says as follows:

         "245ZW(c) entry clearance will be granted subject to the  following
         conditions: ... no study except:

          i) Study at the institution that the Confirmation  of  Acceptance
             for Studies checking service records as the  migrant  sponsor.
             ...

         ii) Until such time as a decision is received from the  UK  Border
             Agency on an application which is supported by a  Confirmation
             of Acceptance for Studies signed by a highly  trusted  sponsor
             and which is made while the applicant has extant leave and any
             appeal against that decision has been determined, study at the
             highly trusted sponsor institution which the  Confirmation  of
             Acceptance for Studies  checking  service  records  as  having
             signed the Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies to the  Tier
             4 Migrant; and

        iii) Supplementary study."

 9. It is clear therefore that there is a condition attached to  the  grant
    of entry clearance, requiring the appellant to study only at the Highly
    Trusted sponsor college, or to undertake 'supplementary study'.

10. The appellant's case has always been  that  her  study  at  The  Lord's
    College was parallel or supplementary study  and  was  not  alternative
    study which she had entered into at an  institution  which  was  not  a
    Highly Trusted sponsor and for which she had not sought permission.  It
    remains unclear how that study  is  supplementary  to  the  course  she
    undertook and for which she was granted leave to enter.

11. I have been directed to the guidance given by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    UKUS (Discretion:  when  reviewable)  [2012]  UKUT  00307  (IAC)  which
    directs the Tribunal as follows:

         "2.  Where the decision maker has failed to exercise  a  discretion
             vested in him the Tribunal's jurisdiction on appeal is limited
             to a decision that the failure renders the  decision  'not  in
             accordance  with  the  law'  (Section  86(3A)).   Because  the
             discretion is vested in the executive the  appropriate  course
             will be for the Tribunal to  require  the  decision  maker  to
             complete his  task  by  reaching  a  lawful  decision  on  the
             outstanding application along the lines set out  in  SSHD  and
             Abdi [1996] ImmAR 148."

12. The respondent refused the variation application under paragraph 322(3)
    of the Rules, 'failure to comply with any conditions  attached  to  the
    grant of leave to enter or remain', which is a discretionary  provision
    for which leave to remain and variation of leave to enter or remain  in
    the  United  Kingdom  'should  normally  be  refused',  based  on   the
    appellant's study at The Lord's College, which, it is accepted, is  not
    a Highly Trusted Tier 4 sponsor.  The provision is not mandatory:   the
    Secretary of State has a discretion under  paragraph  322(3)  which  Mr
    Tufan accepts  has  not  been  exercised  in  the  present  case.   The
    Secretary of State's present decision therefore is  not  in  accordance
    with the law.

13. In the light of the UKUS decision, it  remains  for  the  Secretary  of
    State to exercise her discretion and the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in
    law in  not  so  finding.   Accordingly  I  set  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision in this appeal and substitute a  decision  allowing
    the appeal to the extent that the Secretary of  State  is  required  to
    complete her task by reaching a  lawful  decision  on  the  outstanding
    application for variation of her leave to enter.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it to the extent  that  the
application remains before the Secretary of State for a lawful decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   There  is
nothing in the materials  before  me  to  suggest  that  such  an  order  is
appropriate here.

Signed                              Date



Judith Gleeson
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
