



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25436/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12th March 2014                              |On 04th April 2014         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                                Mrs nosha bi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Holt
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is a review of an appeal against the Respondent's decision made on
    3rd July 2013 to refuse the Appellant's application to vary  her  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom as the dependant relative of her second
    cousin Mohammed Jahangir Khan. It was accepted at  the  appeal  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal, that the Appellant's  claim  could  not
    meet the Immigration Rules, but in essence was a claim that  to  return
    her to Pakistan would amount to a breach her protected rights under the
    ECHR (Articles 3 and 8).

History of the Matter

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born 1st January 1931. She is  a
    widow and has one son living in Pakistan, whom it is said is  unwilling
    to provide care for her. She seeks to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    (having entered as a visitor) under  the  care  of  her  second  cousin
    Mohammed Jahangir Khan. He is able and willing to  care  for  and  look
    after her.

 3. The Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's refusal came before the
    First-tier Tribunal at North Shields  (Judge  Manchester).  During  the
    course of the hearing the Judge heard oral evidence from the  Appellant
    and her United Kingdom based Sponsor. A  cousin  of  the  Sponsor  also
    attended to give evidence. The Judge having correctly  identified  that
    the Appellant could not meet the Immigration Rules, went on to consider
    whether the refusal decision, would breach the  Appellant's  Article  8
    protected rights. He dismissed the appeal under  Article  8  ECHR.  The
    Appellant had also claimed that the refusal decision would  breach  her
    Article 3 rights but there was no recorded decision on whether  Article
    3 was engaged.

 4. The Appellant sought and was granted permission to  appeal  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision. In granting permission Judge Keane said,

         "The judge made an arguable error of law in failing  to  arrive  at
         findings of fact in respect of material  matters.  Central  to  the
         appellant's contentions was a  contention  that  in  the  past  the
         appellant has been witnessed in a neglected condition. It  was  the
         appellant's contention,  by  reference  to  the  sponsor's  witness
         statement, particularly at paragraphs 28, 29, 34, and 35  that  the
         appellant has been witnessed in a neglected condition, has not been
         fed on time, has  not  been  bathed,  has  been  the  recipient  of
         humiliating behaviour from her own family  and  has  been  clad  in
         smelly clothes. A careful perusal of the judge's determination  did
         not reveal  a  finding  made  by  the  judge  in  respect  of  such
         contentions  which  were  central  to   the   appellant's   overall
         contentions. At paragraph 51 of his determination the  judge  found
         that it had not bee (sic) shown that the appellant would "not  have
         adequate care and support available to her". If the judge had  made
         a finding in respect of (the  apparently  uncontradicted  evidence,
         there being no cross-examination at the  hearing)  of  the  sponsor
         that the appellant had been witnessed in a neglected  condition  in
         the past he might well have  arrived  at  a  different  finding  in
         respect of her prospect of receiving adequate care and  support  at
         the date when the Respondent made the decision  under  appeal.  The
         judge made an arguable error of law but for which  the  outcome  of
         the  appeal  might  have  been  different.  The   application   for
         permission to appeal is granted".

    Thus the matter comes before me to decide whether the determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains an error of law  such  that  the
    decision needs to be set aside and remade.





Error of Law Hearing

 5. Mr Holt on behalf of the Appellant submitted that the determination  of
    the Judge could not stand because the Judge's approach to the  evidence
    was flawed. The Judge had asked himself the wrong question. Looking  at
    paragraph 51 of the determination the Judge had concluded by saying,

         "I do not find that it has been established,  taking  into  account
         the concerns highlighted above, that it is  more  likely  than  not
         that, if she were returned to Pakistan with the  financial  support
         available from the Sponsor, the Appellant would not  have  adequate
         care and support available to her".

    That was the wrong approach. What the Judge should have been evaluating
    was the evidence of the apparent lack of care  and  neglect  which  the
    Appellant had suffered in Pakistan and should have made a clear finding
    on that part of the evidence.

 6. He further submitted that it  was  case  that  the  Appellant,  despite
    receiving financial remittances from her UK Sponsor had  been  observed
    in the neglected condition and it had always been the Appellant's  case
    that adequate care was not provided for her in Pakistan in the past and
    therefore if returned there now nothing would have changed.  She  would
    still suffer the same neglect. The lack of clear findings on that point
    alone meant  that  the  decision  could  not  stand.  In  addition  the
    Appellant had claimed that a return  to  Pakistan  would  constitute  a
    breach of her Article 3 ECHR rights but there was no finding at all  on
    that ground.

 7.  Mrs Pettersen on  behalf  of  the  Respondent  sought  to  defend  the
    determination.  She  referred  me  to  paragraphs  21  and  22  of  the
    determination and submitted that it was clear that the  Judge  was  not
    under any illusion that the Appellant had been taken  away  from  where
    she was being neglected but had nevertheless  come  to  the  conclusion
    that she could be returned  to  Pakistan  with  the  financial  support
    available from the Sponsor. The Judge had found that  support  for  the
    Sponsor would be available and had weighed up all the relevant  matters
    and reached a proportionate decision.

Has the Judge Erred?

 8. I find that that Judge Manchester's determination should be  set  aside
    for legal error on this basis.  The  core  of  the  Appellant's  claim,
    revolves around a contention that in the past the  Appellant  has  been
    witnessed in a neglected condition and there is no-one in Pakistan able
    or willing to provide adequate  care  for  her.  This  is  despite  the
    Appellant having a son and  daughter-in-law  living  in  Pakistan.  The
    Respondent's case is that the Appellant's position does not  amount  to
    sufficient  compelling  or   compassionate   circumstances   justifying
    granting leave to remain exceptionally. The  Judge  needed  to  make  a
    clear finding, based on all the relevant evidence, on  whether  he  was
    satisfied or not that he accepted the evidence of the Appellant and her
    witnesses that she was found in a neglected condition  and  no-one  was
    available or willing to provide adequate  care  for  her  in  Pakistan.
    Dependent upon those findings, the Judge would  be  in  a  position  to
    determine whether a return to Pakistan would constitute a breach of the
    Appellant's protected rights under Article 3 and Article 8 ECHR. Such a
    finding would then enable the  Judge  to  dispose  of  the  Appellant's
    appeal.

 9. I find that the lack of a clear finding on this central issue, alone is
    sufficient to render the determination unsatisfactory.

10. I set aside the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal.  I  consider
    that the failure to make clear findings means that it is possible  that
    the Judge's approach to the evidence is flawed.  Therefore  I  consider
    that nothing can be saved from the determination. Therefore this is  an
    appropriate case to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  (not  Judge
    Manchester) to hear the evidence afresh and make full findings of  fact
    on those matters in contention.

DECISION

11. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    19th November 2013 is set aside. The appeal is remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made


Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


