
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25000/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 January 2017                            |On 24 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR MICHAEL CLOTTEY MARTEY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Akohene, Afrifa and Partners Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is the Secretary of State and the respondent
    is Mr Martey.  However for the purposes of this decision I refer to the
    parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal where Mr Martey was
    the appellant.  Mr Martey is a citizen of Ghana  born  on  21  November
    1973.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  decision  of
    the respondent dated 27 July 2015 to  refuse  to  grant  him  leave  to
    remain in the UK on human rights grounds.  In a decision promulgated on
    26 July 2016 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Callow  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission on the grounds that  the
    judge, at paragraph 15 of  the  determination,  followed  the  case  of
    Treebhawon and Others (Section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 674 which  detailed
    that Sections 117B(1) to (3) do not apply to  this  appellant  and  the
    fact that his private life in the UK has been  established  at  a  time
    when he had no leave to  reside  qualifies  for  little  weight  to  be
    attributed.  The respondent relied on the Court of Appeal decisions  in
    MA (Pakistan) EWCA Civ 705 [2016] and  Rhuppiah  EWCA  Civ  803  [2016]
    where the immigration status of the appellant has been found to  be  an
    important factor in considering the reasonableness test.  The Secretary
    of State further submitted that the judge was required to consider  the
    appeal through the prism of the Immigration  Rules  and  then  identify
    what compelling circumstances are which warrant  consideration  outside
    of the Rules and that he erred in not doing so.

 3. Mr Walker on behalf of the Secretary of State, although  he  relied  on
    the Secretary of  State's  grounds  did  not  do  so  with  any  force,
    indicating that it was difficult for him to argue given the age of  the
    children.  Mr Walker also conceded that the  judge  had,  at  paragraph
    [15] of the decision and reasons, taken  into  consideration  that  the
    appellant had  been  unlawfully,  contrary  to  the  assertion  in  the
    Secretary of State's grounds.

 4. As I indicated at the hearing, I am satisfied that the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge was one that was open to him and shall stand.
     In relation to the failure of  the  First-tier  Immigration  Judge  to
    consider the Immigration Rules and then identify  what  the  compelling
    circumstances were, it was not disputed that the  appellant  could  not
    meet the Immigration Rules under Appendix FM.  The judge,  at  [10]  of
    the decision and reasons, set out the facts in the case and it was  not
    disputed  that  the  parties  were  all  in  genuine   and   subsisting
    relationships and that the children were British citizens aged  13  and
    11 at that time who had lived all their lives in  the  UK.   The  judge
    found that "the findings of fact are such that  the  appeal  falls  for
    consideration under Article 8 outside the Rules".  The  fact  that  the
    judge did not use the terminology or  expressly  discuss  the  relevant
    case law including SS (Congo) & Ors  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  is  not  a
    material error.  Indeed, Mr Walker conceded that it would have  been  a
    material error for the judge not to consider Article 8 outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules given the children in this case.

 5. At paragraph [3] of the decision and reasons the judge noted  that  the
    appeal was only on Article 8  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  and  at
    paragraph [6] had summarised the respondent's refusal  in  relation  to
    the appellant not meeting the requirements for  a  grant  of  leave  to
    remain as a partner under Appendix FM of the Rules and that in relation
    to private life  he  failed  to  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii)  to  (vi)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   It  was  clear
    therefore that the judge did  have  in  mind  the  relevant  test.   No
    material error is disclosed, which although not expressly conceded, was
    essentially not disputed by Mr Walker.

 6. In relation to the remaining grounds, that the judge did  not  properly
    apply the Court of Appeal jurisprudence in MA (Pakistan) and  Rhuppiah,
    inter alia,  that  the  immigration  status  of  the  appellant  is  an
    important factor in considering the reasonableness test, again I am not
    satisfied that the judge fell into any material error.  As set  out  at
    paragraph 114 of MA (Pakistan) Lady Justice King  confirmed  that  "the
    application of the reasonableness  test  requires  the  judge  to  have
    regard to the wider public interests, and they require consideration of
    the immigration history  and  status  of  the  parents".   Judges  must
    therefore consider the immigration status of the parents.  There was no
    error in applying Treebhawon and  Others.   The  judge  considered  the
    appellant's status including setting out at [15] that the appellant has
    been in the UK for the most part unlawfully.  The judge made  a  number
    of significant findings  including,  as  set  out  at  [14],  that  the
    children have lived all their lives in the UK which have:

         "been totally informed by  UK  culture,  values,  pastimes,  living
         standards, language  and  the  current  education  system.   School
         reports show that they are both making progress.  Their integration
         in UK society and culture is complete.  Beyond the mere  fact  that
         they were  of  Ghanaian  nationality  their  connection  with  this
         country is non-existent.  Their best interests will  be  served  by
         remaining in the UK.  As to family life, there are obvious bonds of
         affection, respect and dependency between them, the  appellant  and
         their mother".

    The judge also correctly directed himself in  relation  to  whether  it
    would be 'reasonable' to expect the children to leave the UK, including
    reminding himself of the presidential guidance in PD and Others  [2016]
    UKUT 108 (IAC):

         "The longer the child has resided in the UK, the more  the  balance
         will begin to swing in terms of it being unreasonable to expect the
         child to leave the UK and strong reasons will be required in  order
         to refuse a case with continuous UK residence of  more  than  seven
         years".

 7. I am satisfied however that the appellant's immigration history  was  a
    factor in his  consideration  of  the  reasonableness  test,  including
    finding as he did that the appellant, despite being  in  the  UK  since
    1999, has been here "for the most part  unlawfully."   As  held  in  MA
    (Pakistan):

         "The fact that the parents are overstayers and  have  no  right  to
         remain in  their  own  right  can  thereafter  be  weighed  in  the
         proportionality balance against allowing the child to  remain,  but
         that is after recognition that the child's seven years of residence
         is a significant factor pointing the other way".

 8. As not materially disputed by Mr Walker in  any  substantive  way,  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal was one that was  plainly  open  to
    the judge and must stand.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of  law
and is maintained.  The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

No anonymity direction was sought or is made.



Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award application was sought or is made.



Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


