
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Numbers: IA/25481/2013;
                                                   IA/25475/2013;
                                                   IA/25454/2013;
                                                   IA/25427/2013;
                                                   IA/25449/2013;
                                                   IA/25441/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 November 2014                            |On 18 December 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

             MR MOHAMEDSAJID MOHAMEDSAFI MANIA (first appellant)
              MRS SUMAIYA MOHAMEDSAJID MANIA (second appellant)
             MR SAHEJADBHAI MOHAMEDSAFI MANIA (third appellant)
                      MRS FAIZA SHAH (fourth appellant)
                MASTER SAIHAN SAHEJAD MANIA (fifth appellant)
                MISS SEHREEN SAHEJAD MANIA (sixth appellant)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R Pennington-Benton, instructed by Farani Javid
                    Taylor Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The appellants are nationals of India. The first and third appellants
       are brothers, the second and fourth appellants are  their  wives  and
       the fifth and sixth appellants are the  children  of  the  third  and
       fourth appellants. The appeal of the child of the  first  and  second
       appellants was determined to not be valid upon receipt of the  appeal
       notice and did not proceed. The appellants appealed to the First-tier
       Tribunal against the decisions of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse
       the first and third appellants' applications for leave to  remain  as
       Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrants under the Points Based System  and  to
       remove them from the  UK  and  to  refuse  the  remaining  appellants
       applications for leave to remain as dependants.  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Traynor dismissed the appeals and  the  appellants  now  appeal
       with permission to this Tribunal.

    2. At the outset of the hearing before me Mr  Pennington-Benton  applied
       for an adjournment so that the appeal could be considered by a  panel
       because the arguments he was  putting  forward  in  relation  to  the
       evidence as to the third party's funds,  challenge  the  decision  in
       Durrani (Entrepreneurs: bank letters; evidential flexibility)  [2014]
       UKUT  00295  (IAC).  In  the  alternative  he  submitted  that  these
       proceedings should be stayed until the Court of Appeal considered the
       appeals in the cases of Secretary of State for the Home Department  -
       v - AI (Pakistan) and Others [2014] EWCA Civ 17 and  UT  (India)  and
       Another  -  v  -  Secretary  of  State  for   the   Home   Department
       C5/2014/0212. Mr Parkinson submitted that there is clear case law  in
       relation  to  this  issue  from  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  that  the
       circumstances of this case were not such that it should be  adjourned
       to be heard by a panel. I refused  to  grant  the  adjournment  as  I
       considered that I should firstly consider the sixth ground of  appeal
       which contends that the First-tier Tribunal erred in determining that
       the respondent was entitled to ignore the  evidence  submitted  after
       the application but before the decision. I further note that,  whilst
       not refusing permission on the other grounds  of  appeal,  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Pirotta granted permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal on the ground  that  it  is  arguable  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge erred in deciding to exclude cogent evidence submitted
       before the date of decision.

    3. I therefore deal firstly with ground 6. It  is  the  appellants  case
       that they submitted the applications on 12  December  2012  and  that
       they did not have all of the required documents. They say  that  they
       sent further documents to the respondent as  follows  -  letters  and
       bank statements from Syndicate Bank  and  Indian  Bank,  third  party
       letter and a legal letter on 4 February 2013; a further  third  party
       signature letter and a copy of an affidavit on 20 May  2013;  further
       bank letters from Syndicate Bank and Indian Bank on 24 May 2013 and a
       final set of documents including further letters from Syndicate  Bank
       and Indian Bank on 31 May 2013. The respondent made her decisions  on
       5 June  2013.  According  to  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  letter  the
       appellants were awarded 0 of the required 75 points under Appendix  A
       (Attributes) because the bank letters do not state the names  of  the
       applicants or the third party details as required.  It  appears  from
       the Reasons for Refusal letter that the respondent did  not  consider
       the evidence submitted after the application was made.

    4. At paragraph 44 of his determination the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       said that section 865A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
       2002 precluded him from taking into account  the  evidence  submitted
       after the application and that there  was  nothing  unlawful  in  the
       respondent's decision not to take that evidence into account.

    5. It is contended in the grounds of appeal that it  is  only  where  an
       applicant is required to  possess  a  quality  at  the  date  of  the
       application that post-application evidence cannot be  considered.  It
       is contended however that the respondent may consider  evidence  that
       the application possessed that quality at the date of the application
       at any time up to the date of decision. The grounds of appeal rely on
       AQ (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2011]
       EWCA Civ 833. Mr Parkinson accepted that there is nothing to indicate
       that all of the documents must be  submitted  with  the  application.
       However he submitted that there is nothing on his file to  show  that
       any further evidence reached the file by the date of the decision.

    6. Mr Parkinson submitted that, even if the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       had erred in not returning the case to the Secretary of State to make
       a decision based on all of the evidence said to have been  submitted,
       such an error was not material because the Santander letter was fatal
       to the application. The letter from Santander, the  UK  bank  of  the
       third party funder, states that the information requested  could  not
       be provided. The appellants contend that  the  information  requested
       was that required by the Immigration Rules to be provided by a  third
       party funder to confirm that the sponsor intended to make  the  money
       available to the appellants.

    7. However Mr Pennington-Benton submitted that it was not  certain  what
       the respondent would have done had she considered all of the evidence
       submitted.  She  could  have  relied  on  paragraph  245AA   of   the
       Immigration Rules and sought further information in relation  to  the
       letter from Santander.

Error of law

    8. The Tribunal in Nasim and  others  (Raju:  reasons  not  to  follow?)
       [2013] UKUT 00610(IAC) summarised the decision in Khatel in the  head
       note as follows;

           "(4) As held in Khatel and others (s85A;  effect  of  continuing
           application)  [2013]  UKUT  00044  (IAC),  section  85A  of  the
           Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  precludes   a
           tribunal, in a points-based appeal, from considering evidence as
           to compliance with points-based Rules, where that  evidence  was
           not before the Secretary of State when she  took  her  decision;
           but the section does not prevent  a  tribunal  from  considering
           evidence that was before the Secretary of State  when  she  took
           the decision, whether or not  that  evidence  reached  her  only
           after the date of application for the purposes of paragraph  34F
           of the Immigration Rules."

    9. The appellants' bundle contains copies of the letters  said  to  have
       been submitted by the appellants' solicitors  to  the  respondent  in
       February and May 2013. Each letter has a copy of  a  sticker  with  a
       recorded delivery number thereon and I am satisfied on the balance of
       probabilities that these letters with enclosures  were  sent  to  the
       respondent as claimed. It is not in dispute that the  respondent  did
       not consider  the  evidence  submitted  with  these  applications  in
       reaching the decisions made on 5 June  2013.  Section  85A  does  not
       preclude the Tribunal from taking these documents into account as  at
       least some, if not all, of them relate to the situation at  the  date
       of the applications and were  submitted  before  the  decisions  were
       made. The Judge therefore erred at paragraph 44 in deciding  that  he
       could not take account of evidence submitted after the  date  of  the
       application  in  December  2012.  I  accept  Mr   Pennington-Benton's
       submission that it is not a certainty that, had  the  respondent  had
       these documents, she would not  have  sought  the  further  specified
       evidence in relation to the  Santander  letter  in  exercise  of  her
       discretion under paragraph 245AA (b) of the Immigration Rules.

   10. I am satisfied on this basis that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  made
       a material error of law and that his decision should be set aside. In
       remaking the decision I decide that the  respondent's  decisions  are
       not in accordance with the law as the respondent did not consider all
       of the documents before her and failed to consider  the  exercise  of
       her discretion under paragraph 245AA.

   11. I am satisfied that the proper approach in the circumstances of  this
       case is to return  the  application  to  the  respondent  to  make  a
       decision based on the evidence before her at the date of the decision
        in accordance with the Immigration Rules.

Conclusion:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on point of law.

I set the decision aside and remake it by allowing it  only  to  the  extent
that the application remains outstanding before the Secretary of State.



Signed      Date: 17 December 2014

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


