

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25048/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court             |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 3 February 2015                            |On 5 February 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                                manifa islam
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance by or for the appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal against  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Kempton that was promulgated on 7  October
    2014.  Judge Kempton  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    immigration decision of 31 May 2014  refusing  to  vary  her  leave  to
    remain as a tier 4 (general) student migrant and at the  same  time  to
    make a decision to remove her by way of directions.

 2. Judge Kempton dismissed the appeal because the appellant had failed  to
    show that she had provided adequate evidence to  meet  the  maintenance
    (funds) requirements of paragraph 245ZX of the immigration rules  (with
    reference to appendix C) and because she had failed to provide evidence
    that she had a valid CAS number or authorisation to change college.

 3. The grounds of appeal argue that the judge failed to make a finding  as
    to whether the appellant had actually submitted relevant bank documents
    with her application.  The appellant contended that she  had  submitted
    such documents but had not retained copies.  In her second ground,  the
    appellant argues that the Secretary of State had caused confusion as to
    whether the course provider's sponsorship licence had been suspended or
    withdrawn.  The appellant submitted that the licence was only suspended
    and therefore  she  had  continued  to  study  at  the  named  college.
    Although  she  admitted  to  pursuing  additional  courses  at  another
    college, there was no need for her to have prior  authorisation  to  do
    so,  as  confirmed  in  Home  Office  guidance.   The  grounds  end  by
    identifying  that  the  judge  made  no  findings  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's private or family life rights as protected by article 8  of
    the human rights convention.  No other grounds have been provided.

 4. Mr McVeety relied on the rule 24  response  of  3  December  2014  that
    opposed the appeal and had no submissions other than to  say  that  the
    judge's decision and reasons were sound.  He mentioned  that  the  Home
    Office records contained details that the appellant had sought to  make
    a "voluntary departure" to Bangladesh but this had been refused because
    the appellant had a pending criminal matter, although  that  is  wholly
    unrelated to the immigration appeal.

 5. I take no regard of the issues mentioned by Mr McVeety  except  to  the
    extent that they confirm the appellant is still in the UK and that  her
    address is the same as the one to which the  Tribunal  sent  notice  of
    hearing.  Mr McVeety did not provide any evidence to  confirm  what  he
    mentioned.  I also take into account the fact that  since  the  grounds
    were  settled   the   appellant   no   longer   benefits   from   legal
    representation.  In light of these facts and having identified that the
    appellant was properly served with  notice  of  hearing  I  decided  to
    proceed in her absence as the issues arising in the grounds  of  appeal
    could be dealt with in her absence.

 6. Turning to the grounds, I make the following findings.

 7. I find there is nothing in the first ground.  The issue the  judge  had
    to consider was whether  the  appellant  had  had  the  required  funds
    available.  She provided no evidence of  her  funds.   She  could  have
    obtained duplicate bank statements from her bank, an obvious action for
    anyone in such a situation.  Doing so might have added credence to  her
    claim that it was not her fault that she did not have copies.  However,
    her failure to provide any financial evidence meant even if she were to
    be believed in respect of having submitted documents to the Home Office
    with her application her appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was bound to
    fail.

 8. The second issue is misguided.  It was for the appellant  to  establish
    the facts and she provided no evidence from either college  to  confirm
    the issue regarding the sponsorship licences.  Mere  assertion  is  not
    enough to establish the facts.

 9. The third issue is without merit as although  the  appellant  mentioned
    human rights in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal,  she
    provided no  evidence  to  indicate  how  her  private  life  might  be
    affected.  She provided nothing to show that the  immigration  decision
    would undermine her moral or physical integrity.  Even though the judge
    may have technically erred by failing to address the ground of  appeal,
    it is understandable that he did not since it was not  pursued  at  the
    hearing and in the absence of any evidence on the point.  Any error  is
    immaterial to the outcome.



Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed because there is no  error  on
a point of law in Judge Kempton's determination.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.




                               Signed                     Date


                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
