

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/25631/2014
                                                               IA/25632/2014
                                                               IA/25633/2014
                                                               IA/25634/2014
                                                               IA/25635/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Field House               |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 11th February 2015               |On 2nd March 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                            Justina Obeng Anaafi
                             Obeng Isaac Anaafi
                          Abra Obenewa Obeng Anaafi
                         Abrainna Ansaa Obeng Anaafi
                        Justy Nana Amfua Obeng Anaafi
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Blundell, Counsel instructed by Maliks and Khan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. The Appellants are all nationals of Ghana. They  are  respectively  a
       mother,  father  and  their   three   minor   children.   They   have
       permission[1] to  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal (Judge Somal)[2] to dismiss their linked appeals against the
       Respondent's  decisions  to  remove  them  from  the  United  Kingdom
       pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999[3].

    2. The basis of the appeals was the long residence/Article 8  rights  of
       the family. The First and Second Appellants  averred  that  they  had
       lost all ties to Ghana and  that  it  would  be  disproportionate  to
       remove them there now. Particular reliance was  placed  on  the  fact
       that the  Third  and  Fourth  Appellants,  twins  born  on  the  25th
       September 2006, had by the date of the Respondent's decision lived in
       this country for more that seven years.

    3. Some issue is raised in the grounds, and in the grant of  permission,
       as to whether the Tribunal was correct to have proceeded as it did on
       the basis that these were simply Razgar Article 8  appeals.  Although
       none of the children had accrued seven years residence  at  the  date
       that the family made their applications for leave to remain in  April
       2013, by the  date  of  decision  in  May  2014  they  had,  and  the
       Respondent acknowledges that in  the  refusal  letter  by  addressing
       paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules. It is accepted in  that  letter
       that the twins had accrued seven years residence but leave under that
       provision was refused on the basis that it was reasonable  to  expect
       them to go to Ghana.  I need not deal with whether the Respondent was
       correct to have taken that approach,  or  whether  the  Tribunal  was
       correct in thinking that the Appellants' representative had  conceded
       that the Rules could not be met. Before me Ms Everett and Mr Blundell
       agreed that these were indeed Razgar Article 8 appeals: 276ADE(1)(iv)
       should however have been the starting point of the  enquiry:  if  the
       requirements therein were met at the date of appeal that would almost
       certainly have been determinative of the Article 8 question, at least
       insofar as it applied to the Third and Fourth Appellants.

    4. The matter in issue in this appeal is whether the First-tier Tribunal
       did take the correct approach. Did the Tribunal begin by  considering
       whether the Third and  Fourth  Appellants  met  the  requirements  of
       paragraphs 276ADE(1)(iv) and was that Rule,  and  in  particular  the
       requirement that they show their removal to be unreasonable, properly
       construed?

  Error of Law

    5. The answer to both of those questions is no.

    6. It is apparent from the "consideration and findings" section  of  the
       determination and in particular paragraphs 13-15  that  the  Tribunal
       began its assessment of the facts through  the  prism  of  Article  8
       proportionality, directing itself [at 12] that the Appellants had  to
       show "exceptional circumstances" and [at 15] that  the  interests  of
       the individual protected by Article 8 "would  not  normally  prevail"
       over the interests of immigration control.  That  language  indicates
       that the Tribunal's starting point was the very great  weight  to  be
       attached to the public interest in maintaining  immigration  control,
       and the fact that the number of cases likely to succeed on Article  8
       grounds after a failure to meet the Rules is likely to be small.   As
       the parties agree,  the  case  for  the  Appellants  was  that  these
       children did meet the requirements of the Rules at the  date  of  the
       appeal. The assessment of whether that was so did not require, at the
       outset,  the  Tribunal  to  remind  itself  of  the   principles   of
       proportionality. The Tribunal was  required  first  and  foremost  to
       consider whether the Third and Fourth Appellants could succeed  under
       paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv). If they could, the Respondent would,  as  Ms
       Everett conceded, be in some difficulty in showing  the  decision  to
       remove them to be proportionate.   Although  the  determination  does
       refer  to  the  'reasonable'  test   it   has   conflated   it   with
       'proportionality'. That was the first error of law.

    7. The answer to the second question - whether  the  Tribunal  took  the
       correct approach to whether it was reasonable that the children leave
       the UK - is not easy to disentangle from the reasoning. The  Tribunal
       certainly identifies a number of very good reasons why  it  might  be
       thought that it was reasonable for this family to  return  to  Ghana.
       The parents were found to be "untrustworthy and unreliable" and their
       evidence that they had little to return to in Ghana  is  specifically
       rejected. It is found that they  deliberately  obfuscated  about  the
       extent to which they have worked illegally in the UK  and  that  they
       were not telling the truth when they claimed, at  hearing,  that  the
       church had been paying their rent all this time. It is found that the
       children would be able to adapt to life in Ghana with the  assistance
       of their parents who are  clearly  resourceful  and  skilled  people.
       Consideration is given to  the  children's  medical  and  educational
       rights. All of these were relevant factors and Ms  Everett  is  quite
       right to defend the findings as rational and open to the Tribunal  on
       the evidence before it.  The problem, again,  lies  in  the  approach
       taken to what 'reasonable' actually means in the context of paragraph
       276ADE(1)(iv).    As  I  note  above  the  determination  appears  to
       conflate that test with the proportionality balancing  exercise;  the
       parties before me are in agreement that the two are  quite  different
       things.

    8. The genesis of this provision was the  concession  known  as  DP5/96.
       That policy,  and  those  which  followed,  created  a  general,  but
       rebuttable,  presumption that enforcement action would "not normally"
       proceed  in  cases  where  a  child  was  born  here  and  had  lived
       continuously to the age of 7 or over, or where, having  come  to  the
       United Kingdom at an  early  age,  7  years  or  more  of  continuous
       residence had been accumulated[4].   As the policy statement[5] which
       accompanied the introduction of paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv) put  it:  "a
       period of 7 continuous  years  spent  in  the  UK  as  a  child  will
       generally establish a sufficient level of integration for family  and
       private life to exist such that removal would normally not be in  the
       best interests of the child" [my  emphasis].   The  current  guidance
       reaffirms that this is the starting point for  consideration  of  the
       rule.   The Immigration Directorate  Instruction  'Family  Migration:
       Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family Life (as a  Partner  or  Parent)  and
       Private Life: 10-Year Routes' gives the following guidance:

          11.2.4. Would it be unreasonable to expect a non-British Citizen
          child to leave the UK?

          The requirement that a non-British Citizen child has lived in the
          UK for a continuous period of at least the 7 years immediately
          preceding the date of application, recognises that over time
          children start to put down roots and integrate into life in the
          UK, to the extent that being required to leave the UK may be
          unreasonable. The longer the child has resided in the UK, the more
          the balance will begin to swing in terms of it being unreasonable
          to expect the child to leave the UK, and strong reasons will be
          required in order to refuse a case with continuous UK residence of
          more than 7 years.

          The decision maker must consider whether, in the specific
          circumstances of the case, it would be reasonable to expect the
          child to live in another country.

          The decision maker must consider the facts relating to each child
          in the UK in the family individually, and also consider all the
          facts relating to the family as a whole. The decision maker should
          also engage with any specific issues explicitly raised by the
          family, by each child or on behalf of each child.

    9. In his submissions Mr Blundell  drew  my  attention  to  the  Hansard
       record of the debate in the House of Lords  on  the  introduction  of
       section 117B (6) NIAA 2002 (as amended by the Immigration  Act  2014)
       in which Home Office Minister Lord Wallace  of  Tankerness  explained
       the government's thinking on the significance of the seven year mark:

          "we have acknowledged that if a  child  has  reached  the  age  of
          seven, he or she will have moved beyond simply having his  or  her
          needs met by the parents. The child will be part of the  education
          system and may  be  developing  social  networks  and  connections
          beyond the parents and home. However, a child who  has  not  spent
          seven years in the United Kingdom either will be relatively  young
          and able to adapt, or if they are older, will be  likely  to  have
          spent their earlier years in their country of  origin  or  another
          country. When considering the best interests  of  the  child,  the
          fact of citizenship is important but so is the fact that the child
          has spent a large part of his  or  her  childhood  in  the  United
          Kingdom"[6].

   10. All of this guidance recognises that after a period  of  seven  years
       residence a child will have forged strong links with the  UK  to  the
       extent that he or she will have an established private  life  outside
       of the immediate embrace of his parents  and  siblings.  It  is  that
       private life which is the starting point of consideration under  this
       Rule. The relationships  and  understanding  of  life  that  a  child
       develops as he grows older are matters which  in  themselves  attract
       weight. The fact that the child  might  be  able  to  adapt  to  life
       elsewhere is a relevant factor but it cannot be determinative,  since
       exclusive focus on that question would obscure the fact that for such
       a child, his "private life" in the UK is everything he knows.    That
       is the starting point, and the task of the Tribunal is to  then  look
       to other factors to decide whether, on the particular facts  of  this
       case, these displace or outweigh the  presumption  that  interference
       with that private life will normally be contrary to the child's  best
       interests. Those factors might include all of the  matters  mentioned
       in this determination, but they fall  to  be  assessed  in  terms  of
       whether they constitute  "strong  reasons"  -  the  language  of  the
       current IDI - that displace those best interests.

   11. This determination does not frame the assessment of  'reasonable'  in
       those terms. As I set out above  the  balancing  exercise  rather  is
       confined  to  whether  removal  is  proportionate  under  Article  8.
       Although that was ultimately the question that needed to be answered,
       it was not the primary focus of  the  Third  and  Fourth  Appellant's
       appeals.

   12. The decision is therefore set aside.

   The Re-Making

   13. The parties before me agreed that I can remake  this  matter  on  the
       evidence already before the Tribunal.

   14. My decision will follow the following framework:

       i) I will first determine whether the Third,  Fourth  and  now  Fifth
          Appellants  meet  the  substantive   requirements   of   paragraph
          276ADE(1)(iv) at the date of this decision;

      ii) If they do that will be relevant  to  my  determination  of  their
          Article 8 appeals, and in particular to whether the Respondent can
          show that the decision to remove them is proportionate;

     iii) The Article 8 appeals of the First and Second Appellants  will  be
          determined with reference to guidance set down in Razgar, and  the
          public interest considerations set out in the Rules and Statute.

       276ADE

   15. The rule provides:

          276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave
          to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the
          date of application, the applicant:

          (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section
          S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and

          (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the
          grounds of private life in the UK; and

          (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years
          (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

          (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in
          the UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of
          imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable to expect the
          applicant to leave the UK; or

          (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent at
          least half of his life living continuously in the UK (discounting
          any period of imprisonment); or

          (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above, has
          lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting
          any period of imprisonment) but there would be very significant
          obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to which
          he would have to go if required to leave the UK

   16. In her refusal letter dated 29th May 2014  the  Respondent  expressly
       accepts that none of the children's  applications  fall  for  refusal
       under the suitability criteria [at page 7 of 10].

   17. The substantive requirement is set out at (iv). Abra and Abrainna are
       twins born in the UK on the 25th September 2006. Justy  was  born  on
       the 21st December 2007. They have all lived in the UK  all  of  their
       lives. At the date of this determination all three children meet  the
       test in the first limb of (iv), that they have lived continuously  in
       the UK for at least seven years.

   18. It is the Respondent's view that they cannot meet  the  test  in  the
       second limb of (iv), that they show it not to be reasonable that they
       leave the UK.   They  have  demonstrated,  with  reference  to  their
       continuous long residence, that they have a well established  private
       and family life in the UK. Are there "strong reasons" to remove  them
       nevertheless?

   19. The arguments advanced by the Respondent fall into two  parts:  those
       "countervailing factors" which might be said  to  weigh  against  the
       child, and those factors particular to the child himself  which  mean
       that the loss of the Article 8(1) rights in the UK are  mitigated  by
       the gain of such rights in Ghana.

   20. I deal first with  the  issue  of  countervailing  factors.    It  is
       difficult to understand to what extent  the  poor  behaviour  of  the
       child's parents can be weighed against the child.  On  the  one  hand
       there are numerous authorities which say that it would  be  wrong  to
       blame the child for the  sins  of  the  parents,  Zoumbas[7]  and  ZH
       (Tanzania)[8] amongst them,  but  on  the  other  it  seems  entirely
       artificial to exclude altogether the fact that the  parents  have  no
       leave, and that they have, it would seem, actively sought  to  remain
       in the UK long enough to benefit under this very  provision:  see  to
       the same effect in the context  of  Article  8  the  guidance  in  EV
       (Philippines)[9]. This conundrum is illustrated by the refusal letter
       [4 of 10]:

          "while the children are  not  responsible  for  their  immigration
          status, the behaviour of their  parents  and  their  lack  of  any
          attempt to remain within the Immigration Rules  or  to  remain  in
          contact with the immigration authorities needs to  be  taken  into
          account. This is particularly the case as Ms Anaafi was aware that
          she used another person's passport to enter the UK and  Mr  Anaafi
          would have been aware that he had remained here  past  the  expiry
          date of his visit visa. Therefore, in full  knowledge  that  their
          immigration status was  precarious  they  remained  here,  working
          without permission to do so and also having three children here".

   21. I note that the status of the parents is one of the factors listed in
       the current IDI as being  a  factor  that  would  generally  indicate
       removal to be reasonable. I therefore  weigh  that  matter,  and  the
       First-tier Tribunal's generally negative appraisal  of  the  parents'
       behaviour, into the balance. There is, quite rightly, no criticism of
       the behaviour of any of the children.

   22. Next I consider what might be thought of as the positive  aspects  of
       removal to Ghana. These children are all  Ghanaian  by  heritage  and
       nationality. It might be said to be to their benefit to  be  able  to
       avail themselves of  the  advantages  of  that  citizenship,  and  to
       continue their development in the context of their parents'  culture.
       I adopt the finding of the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  children
       would, with their parents' assistance, be able to adapt  to  life  in
       Ghana.  Their parents would be able to work  and  provide  for  them.
       They may not be familiar with the curriculum in schools there but the
       medium of instruction is in  English  and  they  would  manage.    In
       respect of their health I note that the  twins  continue  to  receive
       medical treatment here for a range of complex allergies; there was no
       evidence that they could not  get  similar  treatment  in  Ghana  and
       although I do accept that it would be preferable for there  to  be  a
       continuity  of  care  from  the  clinicians   familiar   with   their
       conditions, this is not a factor that I have attached any  particular
       positive weight to.  I have attached absolutely no weight to the fear
       expressed by the adults at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal
       that they and the children would be exposed to Ebola.  There  was  no
       Ebola epidemic in Ghana.

   23. I have considered all of these factors.  I remind myself that all  of
       these children were born in the UK and that at the date of  this  re-
       making the twins have lived in the UK for the 8 and a half years  and
       Justy 7 years and two months. The Secretary of  State  recognises  in
       her current guidance that in  those  circumstances  "strong  reasons"
       will be required to make their removal reasonable.  I  have  attached
       significant weight to the fact that the parents  have  no  leave  and
       have, it would seem, deliberately sought to remain  in  the  UK  long
       enough to make these applications. Mrs Obeng  Anaafi  is  an  illegal
       entrant who used someone else's passport to gain entry to the UK.  Mr
       Obeng Anaafi came here as a visitor and overstayed for the  past  ten
       years. None  of  that  is  to  their  credit.    I  have  also  given
       consideration to the reasons why the First-tier Tribunal  found  that
       the children would be able  to  live  in  Ghana.  I  am  not  however
       satisfied  that  the  cumulative  weight  of  all  of  those  factors
       constitutes  "strong  reasons"  to  remove  these  children.    These
       children have grown up in the UK and will see no  difference  between
       themselves and their classmates. Their Article 8 private lives cannot
       be reduced to a list of the relationships that they have  with  their
       friends,  teachers,   extended   family   members,   their   doctors,
       neighbours, members of their church or their parents'  friends.  They
       have, to paraphrase the language of the Home  Office  guidance,  "put
       down roots here" to the extent that it is unreasonable to expect them
       now to leave.

   24. I find that each of these children  qualifies  for  leave  to  remain
       under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).

       Article 8: the children

   25. That is not of course the end of the matter, since these appeals  are
       brought under Article 8.  I find that each of  the  children  have  a
       private life in the UK and that this decision would interfere with it
       to an extent that Article 8 is engaged. The  Secretary  of  State  is
       entitled as a matter of law to make removal directions against  those
       who did not, at the date the decision was taken, have valid leave  to
       remain in  the  UK.  Those  are  the  first  three  Razgar  questions
       answered.  It is now for the Secretary of  State  to  show  that  the
       decision is rationally connected to one of the  legitimate  aims  set
       out in Article 8(2): that is here identified as  "protection  of  the
       economy". It is also for the Secretary of State to show the  decision
       to remove is proportionate.

   26. Ms Everett advanced no reasons why a decision to remove children  who
       qualify for leave to remain under the Rules  would  be  necessary  in
       pursuit  of  the  legitimate  aim  of  protecting  the  economy,   or
       proportionate.  It follows that  the  appeals  of  the  children  are
       allowed under Article 8.

       Article 8: the adults

   27. Like their children the adults have been  in  the  UK  a  significant
       amount of time.  Although neither have  accrued  sufficient  time  to
       qualify under the Rules I am satisfied  that  they  have  established
       private lives here. The huge bundle before me contains evidence  from
       friends, relatives and members of the church all  testifying  to  the
       quality of the relationships  that  Mr  and  Mrs  Obeng  Anaafi  have
       established here.  I am satisfied that  their  removal  from  the  UK
       would interfere with that private life and that Article 8 is engaged.

   28. There is no dispute that the decision is lawfully  available  to  the
       Secretary of State and that  the  removal  of  illegal  entrants  and
       overstayers is rationally  connected  to  the  Article  8(2)  aim  of
       protection of the economy.

   29. In respect of proportionality I am bound my statute to  consider  the
       'public interest' factors set out in ss117A to 117D of the NIAA 2002.
        Section 117B (6) expressly provides as follows:

        (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
          public interest does not require the person's removal where -

           (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

          (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
             United Kingdom.

   30. I have found that the children in this case are "qualifying" in  that
       they have spent a continuous period of seven years or more in the UK.
       I have found that it would not be reasonable to expect them to  leave
       the UK. In those circumstances the public interest does  not  require
       the removal of their parents, and their appeals must too  be  allowed
       under Article 8.

       Decisions

   31. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law
       and it is set aside.




   32. I re-make the decision in the appeals  by  allowing  all  appeals  on
       human rights grounds.



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          11th February 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 16th December 2015 by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Levin
[2] Determination promulgated on the 28th October 2014
[3] Immigration decisions dated the 3rd June 2014
[4] For a detailed history of the rule and its development see Dyson LH in
Munir v SSHD [2012] UKSC 32 paras 9-13
[5] The Grounds of Compatibility with Article 8 of the ECHR: Statement by
the Home Office (13 June 2012) at 27.
[6] At column 1383, Hansard 5th March 2014
[7] Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74
[8] ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4
[9] EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874

