
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/25155/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 11 March 2015                     |On 12 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             SVITLANA CHYBIZOVA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    In person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whilst this is an appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, for  convenience  I  will  refer  to  the  parties  in  the
    determination as they appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant, a  national  of  Ukraine,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision made by the Secretary of  State  to  refuse
    her application for leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  as  the  spouse  of
    Christopher Dance. The respondent refused the application on the  basis
    that the appellant could not meet the requirements of  Appendix  FM  or
    paragraph 276ADE of the Rules. In particular the respondent  said  that
    the appellant had not demonstrated that she  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph E-LTRP 2.1 as she had entered the UK as a visitor and did not
    meet Ex 1 as there were no insurmountable obstacles to family life with
    her partner continuing outside the UK. The appellant's  appeal  against
    this decision was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Ferguson under Article
    8 of the European Convention on Human Rights. The Judge considered  the
    decision in SSHD v Hayat (Pakistan) [2012] EWCA Civ 1054 and  concluded
    that, in the absence of the  Secretary  of  State  showing  a  sensible
    reason for returning the appellant to Ukraine to  make  an  application
    for  entry  clearance,  the  decision  to  remove  her   would   be   a
    disproportionate interference with her family life.  The  Secretary  of
    State now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

Error of law

 3. The grounds of appeal contend that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  erred
    in making a material misdirection of law by failing to have  regard  to
    the  considerations  listed  in  section  117B  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in considering the public  interest  in
    the proportionality assessment under Article 8.  Sections 117A -117D of
    the 2002 Act were introduced by the Immigration Act 2014 and came  into
    effect on 28 July 2014. These provisions require courts  and  tribunals
    to take into account the considerations listed in section 117B  in  all
    cases where they are considering the public interest question, that  is
    the question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
    respect for private and family life is justified under Article 8.

 4. The Judge did not refer to these considerations. However that in itself
    is not an error of law. The Tribunal in Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT
    00090  (IAC)  pointed  out  at  paragraph  26  that  "...it  will   not
    necessarily be an error of law for a judge to omit to  refer  expressly
    to ss.117A-117D considerations, albeit it may well  be  if  he  or  she
    fails to address them in substance."  It  is  therefore  the  substance
    rather  than  the   expression   of   these   considerations   in   the
    proportionality assessment which matters here.

 5. Section 117B sets out a non-exhaustive list  of  considerations  to  be
    considered in all cases;
         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases
         (1)The maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
         public interest.
         (2) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-
             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
             (b) are better able to integrate into society.
         (3) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-
             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
             (b) are better able to integrate into society.
         (4) Little weight should be given to-
             (a) a private life, or
             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,  that  is
             established by a person at a time when the person  is  in  the
             United Kingdom unlawfully.
         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established  by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.
         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-
             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and
             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.

 6. The appellant did not use an interpreter at the hearing in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and spoke English at  the  hearing  before  me,  although
    there  were  some  issues  of  understanding.  However  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did not have regard to the appellant's ability to  speak
    English. The appellant's husband is in  receipt  of  a  state  pension,
    Attendance Allowance and pension credits. There is no evidence that the
    appellant works or has her own income or savings. It appears  that  the
    appellant is  not  financially  independent,  being  dependant  on  her
    husband who is in receipt of a state pension  and  some  benefits.  The
    Judge did not assess the implications of this and made no comment as to
    how much weight should be attached to any findings on this  issue.  The
    appellant entered the UK as a student  visitor  and  married  and  then
    applied for leave to remain on the basis of that  marriage  during  the
    currency of that leave. The appellant already knew  her  husband,  they
    had been in contact over the internet in 2012 and he visited Ukraine in
    2013. The Judge did refer to  the  appellant's  immigration  status  at
    paragraph 21 but it is not clear whether he attached any weight  to  it
    either way.

 7. I further note Mr  Clarke's  submission  that  the  appellant  did  not
    possess the required English language certificate and  that  the  Judge
    further erred in failing  to  recognise  that  the  refusal  could  not
    therefore have been for the sole reason  that  she  did  not  have  the
    required entry clearance. This appears to be the case, although  it  is
    not mentioned in the reasons  for  refusal  letter,  and  should  be  a
    relevant factor in the proportionality exercise.

 8. In all the circumstances it cannot be said  that,  had  the  Judge  had
    regard to  the  considerations  set  out  in  section  117B,  he  would
    necessarily have reached the same conclusion. Accordingly I  must  find
    that the failure to have regard to the statutory  considerations  is  a
    material error of law and I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 9. The appellant  and  her  husband  were  unrepresented  before  me.  The
    appellant's husband has hearing difficulties and was  therefore  unable
    to follow the proceedings. The appellant does  speak  English  but  had
    some difficulties understanding the proceedings. I had  concerns  about
    their ability to understand and properly participate in the remaking of
    the decision before me. They expressed their reluctance  to  return  to
    London for a resumed hearing given the distance from their home. I took
    into account the anticipated costs and resources of the  appellant  and
    her husband and the need to ensure that they could participate fully in
    the proceedings. I had regard to age of the sponsor and the  fact  that
    the appellant and her husband said that the Birmingham  hearing  centre
    is more accessible for them. In light of my concerns as to the  ability
    of  the  appellant  and  her  husband  to  follow  and  understand  the
    proceedings I had particular regard to the overriding objective in Rule
    2 of the Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  2008.  I  considered  these
    factors in interpreting Practice Statement 7.2 and the need to ensure a
    fair hearing and I decided that the most appropriate course  of  action
    for the fair and just disposal of the appeal is to remit the appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal. In these circumstances the findings of fact of
    the First-tier Tribunal are set aside also and the appeal  is  remitted
    for a de novo hearing.

Decision

The Judge made an error on a point of  law  and  the  determination  of  the
First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.



Signed      Date: 11 March 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



