
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA257282015
     IA257292015
     IA257302015
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th July 2017                             |On 7th August 2017            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                                Mohammad [R]
                                 Shanaz [H]
                                    [R R]
                         (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr B Singh, Counsel, instructed by Malik Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are all citizens  of  Bangladesh.   Their  appeals  were
    dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Baldwin   in   a   decision
    promulgated on 27th October 2016.  Grounds of application were  lodged.
    It was said that the judge erred in law (Ground a) in failing  to  have
    proper regard to the seven year residency of the child,  (b)  that  his
    approach to the question of proportionality under Article 8 was legally
    flawed  and (c) that the judge failed to have regard to Section  55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  Details are  given.



 2. Permission to appeal was initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Ford, who found that Ground (a) was merely argumentative,  (b)  all  of
    the issues relevant to proportionality were fully assessed and (c)  was
    not arguable as the child's best interests were fully considered  as  a
    primary consideration.

 3. Renewal of the grounds to the Upper Tribunal  was  successful  in  that
    Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer found that it was arguable that the  judge
    had failed to attach weight to the  child's  residence  of  over  seven
    years - and that this approach was arguably not in accordance  with  MA
    (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705.  A Rule  24  notice  was  lodged
    essentially saying that the judge directed himself appropriately and it
    was  clear  from  paragraph  20  that  the  judge  had  very  carefully
    considered the position of the  minor  in  this  case  including  their
    length of residence and level of integration.  The Secretary  of  State
    considered that the grounds were no more than a disagreement  with  the
    findings of the judge.

 4. Before me Mr Singh appeared for the Appellant and focused on  paragraph
    20 of the judge's decision.  The judge had set out a number of  factors
    which went to the proposition that it  would  be  a  breach  of  [RR]'s
    rights if she was returned to Bangladesh.  Moreover,  the  Home  Office
    IDI at paragraph 11.2.4 said that "strong reasons" would be required in
    order to refuse a case with continuous UK residence of more than  seven
    years.  The judge had not applied the terms of the IDI and the findings
    in paragraph 20 were inconclusive.  In response to submissions from the
    Home Office I was referred to MA and to paragraph 46 where it was  said
    that in cases of this type there must be a very strong expectation that
    a child's best interests would be to remain in the UK with his  parents
    as part of a family unit, and that must rank as a primary consideration
    in the proportionality assessment. I was invited to  set  the  decision
    aside and remake the decision in favour of the Appellants.

 5. For the Home Office Ms Isherwood referred to MA and to paragraph 47. It
    was notable that the  court  rejected  the  submission  that  the  best
    interests  assessment   automatically   resolved   the   reasonableness
    question.  If Parliament had  wanted  the  child's  best  interests  to
    dictate the outcome of the leave application it  would  have  said  so.
    Even where the child's best interests are to stay here it may still  be
    not unreasonable to require the child to leave.  Although the judge had
    not been referred to the IDI he had, in fact, considered  the  relevant
    considerations referred to therein, in particular under (a)  there  was
    no significant risk to the child's health.  Under (b) the  child  would
    be leaving the UK with their parents.  Under  (c)  the  child  was  not
    dependent on wider family members who were here and under (d) the child
    was likely to be able to  reintegrate  readily  into  life  in  another
    country for reasons given by the judge.  The judge's  conclusions  were
    clearly set out in paragraphs 21 and 22 of the decision.  There was  no
    error of law in the decision, which should stand.

 6. I reserved my decision.

    Conclusions

 7. As was said in MA, the fact that a child has been  resident  for  seven
    years would be a factor which must be given significant weight  in  the
    balancing exercise but it does not  otherwise  modify  or  distort  the
    usual Article 8 proportionality assessment.  That  test  requires  that
    where the parents have no right to be in the UK that is  the  basis  on
    which the Article 8 proportionality assessment must be made.  Before me
    both parties were happy to refer to the IDI referred to above albeit it
    was not put before Judge Baldwin.  Mr Singh criticised  the  judge  for
    making a number  of  findings  in  favour  of  the  Appellant  [RR]  in
    paragraph 20 but not coming to any conclusion about those findings.  It
    seems to me that the judge commenced making conclusions at the  end  of
    paragraph 20 and went on to give further reasons in paragraphs  21  and
    22.  He recognised that her best interests would probably  lie  in  her
    being allowed to remain here with her parents but this was not a  trump
    card.  He said the question was whether it  would  be  unreasonable  to
    expect  her  to  move  to  Bangladesh  now  and  whether  it  would  be
    disproportionate or unreasonable to expect all of them to  do  so.   He
    used the word "now" having acknowledged in paragraph 20 that the  child
    was 8.5 years of age and had always lived here and was doing very  well
    educationally.

 8. It seems to me that the judge did acknowledge the  strength  of  [RR]'s
    case at paragraph 20 and he said that her position could not be equated
    with children who came to the UK when 5 to 8 years old and were now  13
    to 16 years old - by inference referring in approximate terms  to  what
    is said in  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (Decisions  Affecting  Children;
    Onward Appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC).

 9. Ms Isherwood did not shrink from the proposition that the judge had  to
    show that strong reasons would be required in order to refuse an appeal
    for someone who enjoyed a UK residence of more than seven years.  Going
    through the relevant considerations set out in the IDI it is clear that
    the  judge  had  taken  into  account  the   relevant   considerations.
    Specifically there is no significant risk  to  the  child's  health  if
    returned to Bangladesh. She would be leaving with her  parents.   There
    is no issue on the extent of wider family ties here and the  judge  did
    consider whether [RR] was likely to be able to integrate  readily  into
    life  in  another  country.   In  terms  of  paragraph  22  the   judge
    specifically noted that it would not be unreasonable to except [RR]  to
    move with her parents to Bangladesh where  she  would,  for  the  first
    time, have the pleasure of meeting  and  forming  family  relationships
    with her many relatives there.

10. The judge clearly appreciated that the longer  [RR]  had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom the more the balance would go in her favour in expecting
    a child to leave the UK.  It was not suggested to me that the judge had
    missed out any factor in his decision-making.  It seems to me that  the
    judge cannot be faulted for not considering the terms of an  IDI  which
    were not put to  him  by  either  party.   Nevertheless,  at  least  by
    implication, it can be inferred that he did attach  significant  weight
    to the fact that [RR] had been here for eight and a half years and  was
    integrated here.   He  considered  that  [RR]  had  some  knowledge  of
    Bengali.  There was no suggestion that the family will be split up.  He
    accepted that she was now well-established at her school.  It  was  not
    disputed that the judge  asked  himself  the  correct  question  as  to
    whether it  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  her  now  to  move  to
    Bangladesh and whether it would be disproportionate and unreasonable to
    expect all of them to do so.  The judge explained the background as  to
    what had led to the passage of time, noting there was  little  evidence
    to show  that  this  had  allowed  the  family  to  become  more  fully
    integrated here (paragraph 21).

11. The essence of Mr Singh's submission  was  that,  standing  the  agreed
    facts, the appeal of [RR] should have been  successful.   What  can  be
    said is that in any similar case where a child has been here for around
    eight and a half years there is an argument that the appeal  should  be
    successful because of what is set out in the well-known  case  law  and
    the IDI.  However, that is a long way from saying  that  the  judge  in
    this appeal erred in law.  In terms of the specific Grounds  of  Appeal
    the judge did consider whether it would be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    Appellant [RR] to leave the United Kingdom.  He did take account of the
    best interests of [RR] (paragraph 20) and it was not an  error  in  law
    (it was not argued that it was) not to mention Section 55 of  the  2009
    Act.  In particular, the judge acknowledged  that  her  best  interests
    probably did lie in her being allowed to remain here but correctly said
    that that was not a trump card  and  went  on  to  consider  the  other
    relevant factors.

12. For these reasons there is therefore no material error of  law  in  the
    judge's decision, which must stand.

    Notice of Decision

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

14. I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity order is made.






Signed    JG Macdonald                           Date 4th August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
