
IAC-AH-DN-V3
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25133/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th December 2014                          |On 3rd February 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                             Mr muhammad shahzad
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 5th January  1989.   The
    Appellant has an extensive  immigration  history  as  set  out  in  the
    Secretary of State's notice  of  11th  August  2014.   The  Appellant's
    previous leave curtailed and expired on 15th April 2014.  On that  date
    he submitted an application as a Tier 4 Student.  On 14th  May  it  was
    identified that to support his student application  the  Appellant  had
    submitted a fraudulently obtained English  language  test  certificate.
    On 6th June 2014 a decision was made to remove the Appellant  from  the
    United Kingdom in accordance with Section 10  of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 1999.  He was served with IS151A, 151A Part 2 and his Tier 4
    Student leave to remain refusal on the grounds of deception.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Pacey sitting at Nottingham Magistrates'  Court  on  13th
    August 2014.  In a determination promulgated on 21st  August  2014  the
    Appellant's appeal was allowed on the basis that the Secretary of State
    had not discharged the burden of proof to  the  required  standard  and
    therefore the Appellant was not caught by the provisions  of  paragraph
    322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.

 3. On 1st September 2014 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of  Appeal.
    Those Grounds of Appeal contended firstly that the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had misdirected himself in law with  regard  to  jurisdiction  in
    that the judge had refused to go behind an earlier decision of  a  Duty
    Judge and that the judge had materially erred in law  in  finding  that
    there had been prior service of the refusal decision when both  in  law
    and fact they had been served and deemed to be served on 6th June 2014.
     Secondly it was contended that the judge had failed to have regard  to
    relevant evidence on deception and had made a  mistake  of  fact  on  a
    material point.

 4.  On  3rd  October  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Osborne   granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Osborne stated at paragraph 3:

         "In an otherwise focused determination in which the  judge  engaged
         with the evidence, it is nonetheless the case that the judge failed
         to refer to the evidence annexed to the Respondent's bundle  at  C1
         and C2.  It is therefore arguable that the  judge  overlooked  that
         evidence  when  he  made  his  findings  at  paragraph  10  of  the
         determination.  It is further arguable that in arguably failing  to
         consider that evidence the judge arguably erred in  law.   All  the
         issues raised in the grounds are arguable."

 5. It is on that basis that this  matter  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.   For  the  sake  of  continuity  throughout
    proceedings Mr  Shahzad  is  referred  to  as  the  Appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State the Respondent albeit that this is an appeal by  the
    Secretary of State.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office
    Presenting  Officer,  Mr  McVeety.   The  Appellant  appears   by   his
    instructed Counsel, Mr Brown.  There is no Rule 24  response  filed  by
    the Appellant's solicitors.  Mr  McVeety  refers  me  to  the  skeleton
    argument dated 4th December on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  upon
    which he relies.

Submissions/Discussions

 6. Mr McVeety indicates that the appeal  is  divided  into  two  sections,
    firstly the question of  jurisdiction  and  secondly  the  question  of
    evidence considered by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  He relies on his
    skeleton argument.  He submits that on the evidence before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal the Tribunal did  not  have  jurisdiction  and  that  the
    refusal letter (the variation decision) and  the  Section  10  decision
    dated 6th June 2014 were issued  on  the  same  day  to  the  Appellant
    physically by an Immigration Officer.  He submits that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge materially erred in law in finding that there  had  been
    prior service of the refusal of the decision when both in  law  and  in
    fact they had been served and deemed to be served on 6th June 2014  and
    he relies on the authority of Anufrijeva, R (on the application  of)  v
    Secretary of State for Home Department and Another  [2001]  EWHC  Admin
    895.  He submits that there is no authority to  enable  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to go behind the preliminary issue and therefore  assume
    the jurisdiction which he  retains.   He  submits  that  the  judge  is
    therefore wrong to hear the appeal and that the decision should be  set
    aside.

 7. Mr Brown starts by taking me to the authority  of  the  Queen  (on  the
    application of) Nirula [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1436  pointing  out  that  is
    authority for saying that it is necessary to be certain that the  judge
    was wrong in the approach that he adopted and that had the judge raised
    human rights in his student application he would have a right of appeal
    but quite simply we do not know whether such issues  were  raised.   He
    refers me specifically to paragraphs 11 and  24  of  Nirula  indicating
    that those paragraphs imply a general  right  and  that  there  is  now
    evidence in any event that the Appellant  is  a  father  of  a  British
    child.  He submits that if there  is  no  jurisdiction  I  have  to  be
    satisfied that there are no human rights issues raised before the judge
    and that the correct process to have been followed would have been  for
    a judicial review to be applied for by  the  Secretary  of  State.   He
    concedes that  if  there  is  no  human  rights  application  then  the
    Appellant's position is  more  difficult  but  that  jurisdiction  only
    becomes material if there was no human  rights  application  previously
    advanced.

 8. Mr McVeety submits that the  judge  had  materially  erred  in  law  in
    failing to deal with the documents.   Mr  Brown  acknowledges  that  an
    assessment could be made at paragraph 10 of the determination but  that
    the judge has carried out a proper analysis and that it was open to the
    judge to adopt the position that he found on jurisdiction and  to  draw
    the conclusions he reached at paragraph 11.  He  states  thereafter  it
    will be a matter for the Secretary of State to decide what to do  if  I
    am with him on the jurisdictional point.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

11. The first basis upon which I  am  asked  to  consider  this  matter  is
    whether or not there is jurisdiction for the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    to hear this appeal.  The very basis upon  which  the  Appellant  could
    have a right of appeal is as submitted by Mr McVeety he  made  a  human
    rights claim to the Secretary of State as  per  Section  92(4)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The first time that  the
    Appellant has made a human rights claim is in his Grounds of Appeal  in
    the present proceedings.  The question arises as to whether or not  the
    Appellant has made a human rights claim as defined in Section  113.   I
    am considerably helped by the skeleton provided  by  Mr  McVeety.   The
    Appellant's Tier 2 application of 18th February 2014 did not include  a
    human rights claim.  However the reality of this matter is that  it  is
    very clear from the Grounds of Appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  that
    Article 8 was raised  and  indeed  was  considered  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge though he chose not to address it.  It is  pertinent  to
    note that the First-tier Tribunal Judge states in the final sentence of
    his findings:

         "As I have found for the Appellant under the Immigration  Rules  it
         is not in my judgment necessary in the course of this determination
         to address  human  rights  matters,  either  as  reflected  in,  or
         outside, the parameter to the Immigration Rules."

12. Whether that is right or  wrong  is  to  a  certain  extent  immaterial
    insofar as it is not raised as a Ground of Appeal by the  Secretary  of
    State.  In order to succeed as to whether or not there is  jurisdiction
    it is necessary for the Secretary of State to show that there  were  no
    human rights issues raised before the judge.  It seems to me clear that
    they were raised.  The fact however remains that  the  judge  chose  to
    adopt an approach by which he did not address human rights for  reasons
    that he has given.

13. In such circumstances I am satisfied that the approach adopted  by  the
    judge is one that is sustainable and  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    arguments on jurisdiction fall away as  there  was  extant  before  the
    Upper Tribunal an appeal  under  Article  8  albeit  that  it  was  not
    properly addressed  by  the  judge  because  he  did  not  consider  it
    necessary.  No challenge to that has been  made  at  any  stage  within
    these proceedings.

14. Little is said in submission by  the  advocates  regarding  the  second
    Ground of Appeal.  Mr McVeety relies  on  the  skeleton  argument.   Mr
    Brown  submits  the  issue  was   adequately   addressed   within   the
    determination.   Paragraphs  9-11  of  the  determination  assess   the
    position thoroughly and makes findings that the judge was entitled  to.
    In such circumstances the Secretary of State's  contentions  amount  to
    little more than disagreement  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    findings.

15. In such circumstances the decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not
    disclose a material error of law and the appeal  of  the  Secretary  of
    State is dismissed and the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose a  material  error
of law and the appeal is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014.  No application is made to vary that order and none is made.



Signed        Date 3rd February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No application for a fee order is sought and none is made.



Signed        Date 3rd February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
