
                                    [pic]
IAC-HW-AM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25816/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th December 2016                          |On 9th December 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Melody frimpong
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A. Khusi, instructed by Bedford Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Heatherington) who, in  a  determination
    promulgated on 26th July 2016, allowed her appeal against the  decision
    of the Secretary of State to refuse her  application  for  a  residence
    card under the EEA Regulations.  No request was made on behalf  of  the
    Appellant for anonymity nor are there any grounds  that  would  support
    such a direction.

 2.  Whilst the Appellant is the Secretary of State, for ease of  reference
    I intend to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 3. The Appellant's immigration history can be summarised as follows.   The
    Appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally and on  the  16th  April
    2011 she met her partner who is Dutch  national.  They  began  to  live
    together in or about May 2012. A customary marriage took place  on  the
    4th July 2015.

 4. The present application was made on 19th February 2015 for a  residence
    card as a family member of an EEA  national  who  had  been  exercising
    treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  The application  was  refused  on
    7th July 2015.

 5.  The Appellant appealed that decision and it came before the First-tier
    Tribunal on 24th June 2016.  The conclusions are set out by  the  judge
    at paragraphs [5] to [31]. It was conceded before the  Judge  that  the
    evidence  provided  of  the  customary  marriage  was  insufficient  to
    discharge the burden of proof  that  the  marriage  was  valid  in  the
    Netherlands) see [9]). This had been one of the reasons  the  Secretary
    of State refused  the  application.  However,  the  judge  reached  the
    conclusion that it had  been  demonstrated  that  this  was  a  genuine
    relationship and was a durable relationship and having  considered  the
    evidence set out at paragraphs 27 -29 found it was a relationship which
    had existed for 4 years and  that  her  partner  was  an  EEA  national
    exercising Treaty Rights.  Thus the judge allowed the appeal.

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  that  decision  and
    permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal (E.B Grant) on  the  27th
    October 2016.

 7. The matter comes before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the First-
    tier Tribunal's decision involved the making of an error on a point  of
    law.  After having considered the Grounds of Appeal advanced on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State  and the submissions of the advocates,  it is
    common ground between the advocates that in the  light  of  the  recent
    decision of  Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC)   the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of an  error
    on a point law.  In the light of that decision, the First-tier Tribunal
    had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal as set out in  the  decision  of
    Sala ( as  cited)  that  there  is  no  statutory  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State not to grant a residence card to a  person  claiming
    to be an Extended Family Member, which was the  nature  of  the  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal, it having been accepted  that  she  was
    not a "Family Member" and the case being advanced on the basis that she
    was an "Extended Family Member".  Therefore  whilst  the  Secretary  of
    State is correct in  her  grounds  that  this  was  a  case  where  the
    Secretary of State had yet to exercise discretion  conferred  upon  her
    under Regulation 17(4) of the EEA Regulations, even if  that  were  not
    the case, the appellant had no statutory right of appeal in  the  light
    of the decision in Sala and there was no jurisdiction  for  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to make any decision.

 8. In those circumstances, it is open to the appellant  to  make  a  fresh
    application. Whilst Mr Melvin submitted that the hearing was  void,  it
    seems to me that the findings  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    sitting in a judicial capacity are capable of being  taken  account  in
    any application  as  the  judge  gave  reasons,  which  have  not  been
    challenged in these grounds, that there was sufficient evidence  before
    the Tribunal  to  demonstrate  that  the  parties  were  in  a  durable
    relationship and that the appellant's  partner  was  exercising  Treaty
    Rights.

Notice of Decision

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  The decision is  set  aside.  There  was  no  valid
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 8/12/2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

