
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25045/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 July 2015                      |On 26 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                           MR SHERAZ HUSSAIN SHAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Shaw, a Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                 REASONS FOR FINDING A MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    ("the Secretary of State")  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT") to allow the appellant's appeal against the  Secretary
    of State's decision that the UK would not be in breach of  the  of  the
    Immigration Rules or the European Convention on Human  Rights  ("ECHR")
    and specifically Article 8  thereof  ("Article  8")  by  returning  the
    appellant to Pakistan.

2.    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mailer  gave  the  Secretary   of   State
    permission to appeal on 26 February 2015 because he considered it to be
    arguable  that  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   O'Rourke   ("the
    Immigration  Judge")  had  applied  the  incorrect  threshold  to   the
    appellant's spouse joining him in Pakistan.  It was at  least  arguable
    that  the  Immigration  Judge  had   incorrectly   decided   that   the
    respondent's decision breached Article 8.

Background

3.   The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, was born  on  28  February  1985.
    He first entered the UK as a student on 13 June 2008 with  valid  leave
    until 30 September 2011.   On  28  September  2010  he  applied  for  a
    certificate of approval to marry Ms Payabba Ali, which was  granted  on
    11 November 2010.  The appellant applied for leave as the spouse  of  a
    British citizen on 20 May  2011  having  gone  through  a  ceremony  of
    marriage with Ms  Ali  on  26  January  2011.   On  28  July  2011  the
    application  was  refused.   A  request  for  reconsideration  of  that
    application had not been  considered  when  on  15  November  2013  the
    appellant was arrested working illegally and served with an IS.151A  as
    an overstayer. He was placed in detention.  On  18  November  2013  the
    appellant asked to stay in  the  UK  on  the  grounds  that  Article  8
    rendered his  continued  detention  and  a  removal  unlawful.   On  11
    December 2013 he was released from detention and given temporary  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom.  On 8 May 2014 the Secretary of  State
    wrote to the appellant's  representatives  asking  for  any  additional
    grounds on which that application was based  and  for  him  to  provide
    supporting evidence.  On 14 May 2014  the  appellant's  representatives
    responded to that request.

4.   On 4  June  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  rejected  the  appellant's
    application under Article 8  because  she  considered  the  appellant's
    return to Pakistan would not breach  the  UK's  obligations  under  the
    ECHR.  The appellant did not have a good immigration history and  there
    were insufficient factors justifying allowing him to remain in  the  UK
    having regard to the limited time he had spent here and the  fact  that
    Ms Ali could return to Pakistan to continue her family  life  with  the
    appellant there.

5.   The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")  on  11  June
    2014 and his appeal came before the Immigration  Judge  on  19  January
    2015.  The decision was promulgated on 20 January 2015.

6.   The Immigration Judge decided that, based on the evidence, it would  be
    unreasonable  to  expect  the  sponsor  to  live  in   Pakistan.    The
    Immigration  Judge  purported  to  consider   Section   117B   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 but decided  that  it  was
    unreasonable to "expect (the sponsor)  to  adjust  to  a  long-term  or
    permanent existence in Pakistan".  It  was  "pointless"  to  "send  the
    appellant back to Pakistan simply for the purpose of  him  applying  to
    enter  the  UK  to  rejoin  his  wife".   The   appellant's   "somewhat
    'chequered' immigration history" and the arguments in relation  to  the
    appellant's "precarious"  immigration  status  did  not  "outweigh  the
    couple's Article 8 rights".

The Grounds of Appeal

7.   The grounds of appeal state that  the  Immigration  Judge  had  made  a
    material error of law because the appellant did not have any  leave  to
    be in the UK as a spouse and was therefore here  precariously.  It  was
    not unreasonable for the appellant's wife to go to Pakistan with him of
    them to continue their family life there on a  temporary  or  permanent
    basis.  It was submitted that the Immigration  Judge  misunderstood  or
    misinterpreted Section 117B of the 2002 Act and  failed  to  understand
    that the appellant was in  the  UK  unlawfully,  as  contended  by  the
    Secretary  of  State.    Accordingly   his   immigration   status   was
    "precarious" for the purposes of section 117 B (5)  and  little  weight
    should have been given to private life formed  in  such  circumstances.
    The Immigration Judge failed to give adequate reasons for his  decision
    to allow the appeal under Article 8.

The Hearing

8.   At the hearing I heard representations by both parties.  The  appellant
    pointed out that his bundle of documents for the UT  hearing  had  been
    supplied on 12 March 2015.  I confirmed that I had a copy of that.

9.   I was referred by Mr Tufan for the Secretary of State to the  cases  of
    VW and MO [2008] UKAIT 00021.  In that case Sedley LJ, at paragraph 31,
    considered the question of reasonableness/seriousness and the  need  to
    strike a balance between the interests of the individual and the  wider
    community.  Mr Tufan pointed out that  the  new  Rules  had  come  into
    effect in 2012 and had overtaken the earlier case law.  The  new  rules
    provided the factors to be taken into account when carrying out such  a
    balancing exercise. The present case was made under the new Rules.  The
    decision in the case of Nagre [2013] EWHC 720  (Admin)  broadly  upheld
    the approach  in  the  new  Rules  and  said  that  there  have  to  be
    "compelling circumstances" justifying a  departure  from  those  Rules.
    Only where such circumstances existed  would  the  finder  of  fact  be
    justified in considering the case under the ECHR. I was  also  referred
    to a case called Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74 in the Court of Appeal, which
    states that it is not necessary to look at Article 8 in every case.  It
    was submitted that compelling circumstances must be shown which justify
    departure from the Rules.  I was also referred  to  SS  (Congo)  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387.  At paragraph 5 of that  decision  the  Court  of  Appeal
    confirmed that Nagre contained an accurate statement of  the  law  (see
    paragraph 5 thereof).  Mr  Tufan  then  went  on  to  explain  why  the
    decision in this case was wrong.  He pointed out that  the  Immigration
    Judge had launched into a free-standing Article  8  assessment  without
    first considering whether it was appropriate to do so having regard  to
    the requirements of the Rules.  The Immigration Judge ought at least to
    have referred to Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of those Rules.   The
    Secretary of State did not dispute the finding that there was a genuine
    and subsisting relationship between husband  and  wife,  but  no  clear
    reason had been given as to why that family life could not continue  in
    Pakistan.  Mr Tufan also referred  to  paragraph  25  of  the  case  of
    Agyarko, another decision of the Court of Appeal made in  2015  ([2015]
    EWCA Civ 440).  In paragraph 25 of that case Immigration Rules referred
    to the obstacles which existed to Mrs Agyarko going to  live  with  the
    appellant in Ghana but the assertion that, because  the  appellant  had
    lived in the UK all his life and had a job here, he could not  relocate
    did  not  constitute  an  insurmountable   obstacle.    Difficulty   or
    reluctance to relocate were insufficient reasons and I was referred  to
    the SS (Congo) case at paragraph 51  in  support  of  that  submission.
    There, Lord Justice Richards explained why compelling circumstances had
    to be shown to justify a grant of leave to enter or  remain  where  the
    Rules were not complied with.

10.  Mr Tufan then referred to the other recent case  of  Chen  [2015]  UKUT
    189 (IAC).  In that case the point was made that Appendix FM  does  not
    include  the  consideration  of  the  question  whether  it  would   be
    disproportionate to expect an individual to return to his home  country
    to make an application for entry clearance.  There may be  cases  where
    there are no insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life  being  enjoyed
    outside the UK and where temporary separation to enable  an  individual
    to make the appropriate application may not be  disproportionate.   The
    appellant had to place evidence before the Secretary of State that such
    temporary  separation  will  interfere  disproportionately   with   his
    protected rights.  I was also referred to Agyarko at  paragraphs  27-31
    where the point was  made  that  there  may  be  a  proper  purpose  in
    requiring a married partner to return to his own country.

11.  Paragraph 21 of the Immigration Judge's findings appeared to show  that
    he accepted that the appellant's  status  in  the  UK  was  precarious.
    Indeed, he went on to find at paragraph 22 of the  Immigration  Judge's
    decision where he referred  to  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  a
    "chequered" immigration history.  In the  circumstances,  he  ought  to
    have found it not disproportionate to require the appellant  to  return
    to Pakistan to make the appropriate application.  The Immigration Judge
    had the documents to consider whether the appellant had  satisfied  the
    Immigration Rules.  Whilst it was  accepted  that  he  met  the  income
    requirements he had not satisfied other requirements.

12.  I then heard from the appellant who submitted that paragraph 21 of  the
    decision showed that the Immigration Judge  had  adequately  considered
    the provisions of the Immigration Act 2014.  I  was  also  referred  to
    paragraph 22(iii) where the Immigration Judge made  it  clear  that  he
    found it  disproportionate  to  require  the  appellant  to  return  to
    Pakistan to make an application for entry clearance  to  the  UK.   The
    evidence was "impliedly" considered.  It  was  submitted  that  in  the
    event that I found that a free-standing application  was  not  one  the
    Immigration Judge should have considered,  it  was  submitted  that  it
    should be remitted to the Secretary of State to make a fresh decision.

13.  As far  as  the  "free-standing  principles"  were  concerned,  it  was
    accepted that the appellant did not qualify under the Rules.   However,
    no part of the sponsor's income information  was  submitted  until  the
    hearing.   There  were  grave  difficulties  in   relocating   as   the
    Immigration Judge found at paragraph 22.  The sponsor  had  dealt  with
    these difficulties in paragraph 16 of her witness statement.  They were
    a cross-caste couple who were westernised.  Objective  evidence  before
    the judge demonstrated how difficult it would be for them to settle  in
    Pakistan.  Both the  case  of  Chen  and  Agyarko  had  post-dated  the
    hearing.  The appellant was relying on a family  life,  not  a  private
    life.

14.  By reply, Mr Tufan said that no reasonable judge could  have  concluded
    that  this  appellant  could  not  return  to  Pakistan  and  make   an
    application there.  I was referred to the  definition  of  "precarious"
    given by Vice President Ockelton in the case of AM and urged to  accept
    that the issue was whether the "seriousness" threshold was  engaged  or
    not.

Discussion

15.  The Immigration Judge purported to decide this  appeal,  partly,  under
    Rule  284  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   However,  I  agree  with  the
    respondent that this must be an error.  The present application was not
    made until 18 November 2013. It was made on the basis  that  Article  8
    made his removal unlawful.

16.  The issue in the appeal is whether the Immigration Judge  was  entitled
    to conclude, as he appears to have, that it was "unreasonable to expect
    the sponsor to live in Pakistan".

17.  The correct test (in EX.1 found in  Phelan  "Immigration  Law  Handbook
    9th ed at 1155) was: whether there were "insurmountable  obstacles"  to
    the appellant's family life with the sponsor continuing outside the UK,
    not whether it was "unreasonable" for  the  respondent  to  expect  the
    sponsor to live outside the UK.  In addition, Section 117B (4) and  (5)
    of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("2002  Act")
    provided that:

         "(4) Little weight should be given to -

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious".

18.  It was pointed out by Mr Tufan that the appellant did not have  a  good
    immigration history in  that  on  15  November  2013,  having  outlived
    previous periods of leave, he was found working  illegally  and  served
    with an IS.151A as an overstayer.  It was as a result  of  that  notice
    that the appellant's  representatives  (Berkshire  Law  Chamber)  wrote
    requesting that their client's case be considered under Article 8.

19.  It was submitted by Mr Tufan that  the  application  should  have  been
    considered first of all under paragraph 276ADE  (private  life)  and/or
    under  Appendix  FM  (family  life).   Mr  Tufan  also  made   frequent
    references to  the  requirement  for  "insurmountable  obstacles".   It
    appears this requirement, introduced into the Rules on 9 July 2012,  is
    to be found in Appendix FM Section EX at sub-paragraph (b) which  deals
    with "genuine and subsisting relationships" with a partner  who  is  in
    the UK.

20.  Based on Mr Tufan's analysis, there is no doubt  that  the  appellant's
    status in the UK throughout was "precarious" in the sense that  he  was
    dependent on the grant  of  further  leave  throughout  his  period  of
    residence in the UK.  His residence in the UK became unlawful  when  he
    was arrested for being an illegal overstayer on 15 November 2013.   The
    appellant became engaged to Ms Ali on 14 February 2010  and  claims  to
    have married her the following January.  It was  therefore  during  his
    first period of  lawful  entry  into  the  UK  where  his  status  was,
    technically, precarious.  Thus, little weight should have  attached  to
    his private life formed here.

21.  As far as the appellant's family life was concerned, this  depended  on
    the application of the "insurmountable obstacles" test to the facts  of
    this case.

22.  The sponsor was  of  Pakistani  heritage  and  spoke  Bengali,  as  the
    Immigration Judge acknowledged.   She  had  also  visited  Pakistan  on
    occasions.  It appears from paragraph 25 of the refusal  dated  4  June
    2014 that in fact she had visited Pakistan on numerous occasions.  This
    included visits throughout 2010, 2012 and 2013.

23.  Whilst the Immigration Judge was entitled to reach a generous  view  of
    the extent of the family life that had  been  formed  in  the  UK,  his
    primary task was to consider  whether  the  application  could  succeed
    under the Immigration Rules before he  embarked  on  a  "free-standing"
    analysis under Article 8.  This  is  clear  from  a  number  of  recent
    authorities, a number of which Mr Tufan referred me  to,  including  AM
    [2015] UKUT 260, Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and Gulshan [2013]  UKUT
    640 (IAC).

24.  Those cases, which have been approved by  the  Court  of  Appeal,  show
    that it is only exceptionally that a person who  cannot  succeed  under
    the Immigration Rules ought to be eligible under Article 8.  Every case
    should  first  consider  the  Rules  and  ask  whether  the   appellant
    qualifies.  If he does not, the tribunal would consider  whether  there
    were some  exceptional  circumstances  justifying  departure  from  the
    requirements of the Rules.

25.  Here, whilst the appellant had formed a private  life  in  the  UK  his
    immigration status had been precarious. Difficulties which were said to
    exist in the sponsor adjusting to life in Pakistan did  not  constitute
    exceptional circumstances.  As a matter of law, the  Immigration  Judge
    ought to have attached weight to the requirements of the Rules and  the
    respondent's for refusing to grant leave to remain on that basis.  I am
    in any event sceptical as to whether the sponsor would  have  been  "in
    extreme danger" or to have "stuck out like a sore  thumb"  in  Pakistan
    and it could be realistically be argued that  there  was  no  place  in
    Pakistan that she and her husband could live safely.

26.  The test in the case of Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40, which deals with  the
    reasonableness of requiring a temporary  separation  for  the  overseas
    national to return to his own country to comply  with  the  immigration
    rules relating to partners,  must now be applied in the light of  later
    case law including Chen [2015] UKUT 189. In that  case  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Gill  explained  that  the  question  was:  whether  a  temporary
    separation  to  enable  an   individual   to   seek   entry   clearance
    disproportionate?  It would be for the individual  to  put  before  the
    respondent  evidence  that  such  temporary  separation  would   be   a
    disproportionate interference with his protected human  rights.   I  am
    not satisfied that the Immigration Judge asked this question,  nor  did
    he come to any conclusion on this point.

Conclusions

27.  The respondent appears to have reached a detailed and careful  analysis
    based on the Immigration Rules  that  applied  at  the  date  that  the
    application  was  considered.   Whilst  the  Immigration   Judge   made
    reference to Section 117 of the 2002 Act, he also referred to the wrong
    Immigration Rule and he should have  made  detailed  reference  to  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE, Appendix FM  and  the  insurmountable
    obstacles test in EX.1.  In my view there were in  fact  no  compelling
    circumstances justifying departure from the requirements of  the  Rules
    in this case and I would not describe  the  obstacles  to  the  parties
    continuing their family life outside the UK as being "insurmountable".

28.  At paragraph 21 of his decision, The Immigration Judge appears to  have
    accepted that the appellant's status  was  "precarious"  and  that  the
    respondent's decision was lawful (see paragraph 21).  The circumstances
    were such that there may be difficulty or reluctance on the part of the
    sponsor  to  relocate  but  they  did  not  constitute   insurmountable
    obstacles as a matter of law (see paragraph 25) in the case of  Agyarko
    [2015]  EWCA  Civ  440.  Thus  the  circumstances  pertaining  in   the
    appellant's case were not such as to entitle the Immigration  Judge  to
    conclude,  as  he  seems  to  have,  that  there  were   insurmountable
    obstacles.

29.   For  these  reasons  the  Immigration  Judge's  decision  did  contain
    material errors of law such as require it to be set aside.

30.  Having carefully  considered  the  evidence  including  the  favourable
    findings  that  the  appellant  and  sponsor  were  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship,  I  nevertheless  conclude  that  the  correct
    course is to substitute the decision  of  this  Tribunal  which  is  to
    dismiss the appeal against the respondent's decision.

Notice of Decision

The Upper Tribunal finds a material error of law  in  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal so that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must  be
set-aside.  The Upper Tribunal substitutes its decision which is to  dismiss
the appeal against the respondent's  refusal  to  refuse  further  leave  to
remain.

No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal  and  I  make  no
anonymity direction.

No fee award was made by the First-tier Tribunal and I make no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

