
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber    Appeal Number: IA/25535/2014
                                                               IA/25536/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9 October 2015                    |On 13 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   BETWEEN

                                     ISD
                                     DJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Rungasamy, legal representative, Lawrence &
                    Associates Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision, promulgated on 7 May  2015,
         of First-tier Tribunal Judge P-J White (hereinafter referred to  as
         the FTTJ). Permission to appeal was granted by FTTJ Grant-Hutchison
         on 30 July 2015.

      2. On 22 April 2006, the appellants, who are husband and wife, entered
         the United Kingdom as visitors.  Their leave was serially  extended
         as a student and student dependent until 27  January  2014.  On  20
         January 2014, the appellants sought leave to remain in  the  United
         Kingdom on human rights grounds.

      3. In refusing the appellants application, the respondent  noted  that
         the appellants were both nationals of Mauritius who had  no  lawful
         immigration status in the United Kingdom; it was not accepted  that
         they had lost ties to their home country and there were said to  be
         no exceptional circumstances which might merit  a  grant  of  leave
         outside the Rules. The Secretary of State noted that the appellants
         had  buried  their  deceased  child  in  the  United  Kingdom   but
         considered that they could apply for leave to enter as visitors  in
         order to visit the grave.

      4. At the hearing before the FTTJ, neither appellant was  present  and
         an adjournment was sought  on  their  behalves  for  a  psychiatric
         report to  be  produced  in  relation  to  them  both.  The  second
         appellant was also said to have made a very recent suicide attempt.
         The FTTJ refused that application as he considered there  had  been
         ample time to produce this evidence and there was no evidence as to
         the inability of the appellants to attend the hearing. The  hearing
         then proceeded by way of submissions. On behalf of  the  appellants
         it was argued that the mental health of the  second  appellant  had
         deteriorated and that he was  seeking  time  to  recover.  For  the
         respondent, it was argued that the appellants had ties to Mauritius
         and that mental health care was available there.

      5. The grounds of application focused on the refusal  to  adjourn  the
         hearing. It was said that the FTTJ placed insufficient weight on  a
         letter from the Private Therapy Clinic requesting an  extension  of
         time to carry out psychiatric assessments. The fact that  the  same
         letter referred to the second appellant's  treatment  was  said  to
         clearly suggest that he had mental health issues. It was also  said
         that the FTTJ had  speculated  regarding  the  appellants'  medical
         conditions.

      6. Permission was granted on the basis that it was arguable  that  the
         psychiatric report could have made a  material  difference  to  the
         outcome of the proceedings including the  proportionality  exercise
         under Article 8 ECHR.

      7. The  respondent  filed  a  Rule  24  response  on  5  August  2015.
         Essentially, the respondent opposed the appeal; considered that the
         FTTJ directed himself appropriately and that  he  was  entitled  to
         reach the conclusions he did.

      8. At the hearing before me, Mr Rungasamy submitted a letter  from  Dr
         Rebecca Spelman, the Clinical  Director,  of  the  Private  Therapy
         Clinic, at  which  the  second  appellant  is  currently  receiving
         treatment. That letter confirms  that  on  16  February  2015,  the
         Clinic requested an additional month  to  complete  the  report  in
         relation to the second appellant. The said report was completed  on
         11 March 2015, by  Dr  Marzio  Ascione.  The  letter  concludes  by
         indicating that were a further, updated, report to be required, the
         second appellant would need to be re-assessed.

      9. Mr Rungasamy submitted that it was unfair of the FTTJ to refuse  to
         adjourn the appeals and that a psychiatric report would have made a
         significant difference. He stressed that the appellants  were  only
         seeking an adjournment of a month and were not present.

     10. In terms of the significance of the psychiatric evidence sought, Mr
         Rungasamy argued that the report would have given  some  indication
         of the appellants' current mental states and prescribed medication.
         With that information, the appellants might have been able  to  put
         forward arguments as  to  the  availability  and  affordability  of
         medical treatment in Mauritius  and  they  might  have  been  in  a
         position to attend and give live evidence at a subsequent hearing.

     11. Mr Walker indicated that he  saw  some  force  in  the  appellants'
         argument, however asked me to note that the report of 11 March 2015
         was never submitted. In terms  of  materiality,  Mr  Walker  argued
         that, in any event, the FTTJ considered the availability of  mental
         health treatment in Mauritius.

     12. In reply, Mr Rungasamy  conceded  that  in  general  treatment  was
         available for mental health conditions in Mauritius, however  there
         was no evidence as to what particular disorder the appellants  were
         suffering from and therefore it would be difficult to know  whether
         treatment was available for  them  without  that  information.  The
         assessment of the FTTJ was based on a false premise. Finally, while
         the report was available, this  was  after  the  hearing  when  the
         decision had already been reserved.

     13. At the end of the hearing, I concluded that the FTTJ had materially
         erred in that  he  fell  into  procedural  error  in  refusing  the
         appellants' adjournment application for the following reasons.

     14. The FTTJ was not correct in stating at [10]  that  the  appellants'
         solicitors had ample time to have obtained a report. A letter  from
         Dr Spelman dated  16  February  2014,  at  [20]  of  the  decision,
         referred to a very recent  and  significant  deterioration  in  the
         second appellant's mental state. Dr Spelman's  letter  stated  that
         the second appellant's mental state  needed  additional  assessment
         would be done and that this and a report would be ready  within  an
         additional month.  Furthermore, the FTTJ was told that  the  second
         appellant had made an attempt on his life just nine days  prior  to
         the hearing. The FTTJ made adverse comment regarding the absence of
         any mention  of  a  suicide  attempt  in  the  appellants'  witness
         statements. However, these statements were unsigned and undated and
         therefore it cannot be said when they were compiled.

     15. Despite refusing to adjourn for psychiatric reports,  the  FTTJ  at
         [16] places weight  on  the  fact  that  no  medical  evidence  was
         submitted; that the extent of the evidence before him  was  limited
         [20]; at [24] that there was "no evidence about the length of  time
         for which the second appellant anticipates needing  treatment"  and
         there was no "evidence save the assertions made in the  appellants'
         witness statements, which are not supported by  the  attendance  of
         either of them."

     16. I have had regard to the Tribunal Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
         (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 regarding the power the
         First-tier Tribunal has to adjourn or postpone a hearing under  its
         case  management  powers.  Regard  should  have  been  had  to  the
         overriding objective set out in Rule 2 requiring  the  Tribunal  to
         deal with cases fairly and justly.

     17. I have also had regard to the  decision  in  Nwaigwe  (Adjournment:
         Fairness) [2014] UKUT  00418  (IAC).  The  crucial  question  being
         whether the refusal of an adjournment deprived the  affected  party
         of a right to a fair hearing. I have also taken into  consideration
         the Presidential Guidance note no. 1 of 2014 and note that  factors
         weighing in favour of adjourning an appeal, even at a  late  stage,
         include whether further time  is  needed  because  of  a  delay  in
         obtaining evidence  which  is  outside  the  party's  control,  for
         example, where an expert witness fails to provide a  report  within
         the period expected. That is to be  balanced  by  factors  weighing
         against the grant of an adjournment, namely  that  the  application
         was not made at the earliest opportunity or is speculative or  that
         it does not show that anything material would be  achieved  by  the
         delay.

     18. In SH (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1284  at  [13],  it  was
         held that when  considering whether an adjournment should have been
         granted, the test was not irrationality or whether the decision was
         properly open to the FTTJ; the sole test was whether it was unfair.
         As stated in  Nwaigwe,  supra,  in  practice,  in  most  cases  the
         question will be whether the refusal deprived the affected party of
         his right to a fair hearing. I find that the appellants  have  been
         so deprived.

     19. I find from the background circumstances that prevailed at the date
         of the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal,  that  fairness  in
         this case required that an adjournment should have been granted for
         the purpose of obtaining a  psychiatric  report.  That  could  have
         informed the Tribunal whether  the  appellants'  mental  conditions
         were severe to the extent that they were  entitled  to  succeed  on
         that ground, coupled with the lack of access to necessary care  and
         treatment available in Mauritius.

     20. Having regard to the case law and the 2014 rules, I find  that  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal refusing  the  adjournment  was
         unfair in the circumstances. I accordingly set aside  the  decision
         of the First-tier Tribunal.

     21. I have had regard to  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement
         regarding remitting an appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
         fresh decision. However, I am satisfied  that  the  effect  of  the
         error has been to deprive the appellants of an opportunity to  have
         their case properly put and considered by the First-tier  Tribunal.
         This is accordingly an appropriate case for remittal. The appeal is
         accordingly  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
         decision to be made.

     22.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  by  the  FTTJ,  however,   an
         application has now been made and given the deeply personal  nature
         of  the  appellants'  particular  circumstances,  I   consider   it
         appropriate to make the following anonymity direction:

    "Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellants. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings."

    Conclusions

    The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision to be re-made.

    The appeal is to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  at  Hatton
    Cross, to be decided by any judge other than FTTJ  P-J  White,  with  a
    time estimate of 2 hours.




    Signed:      Date: 11 October 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara


