
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber    Appeal Number: IA/25233/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Date Sent                            |
|On: 18 December 2015                 |On: 5 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   BETWEEN

                               MR MEHMET OZGEN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against the decision, promulgated on 20 March 2015,
       of First-tier Tribunal Judge AW Khan (hereinafter referred to as  the
       FTTJ). Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge McGinty on 15 September 2015.

    2. On 5 September 2012, the  appellant  was  granted  limited  leave  to
       remain in the United Kingdom  until  5  September  2013  as  a  self-
       employed  businessperson  under  the   Turkish   European   Community
       Association Agreement. On 5 September 2013, the appellant applied for
       further leave to remain in order to continue operating his business.

    3. According to the reasons for refusal letter dated 5 March  2014,  the
       Secretary of State did not accept that the  appellant  had  genuinely
       established himself in business,  essentially  owing  to  a  lack  of
       supporting evidence to show that he had leased the Turkish Tea  House
       from the registered  owners.  Furthermore,  the  respondent  did  not
       accept that the appellant's share of the profits were  sufficient  to
       support him. Reference was made to the appellant's failure to provide
       evidence that he was legally obliged to pay rent; his failure declare
       outgoings for bills or items of his personal expenditure.

    4. At the hearing before the FTTJ, an  adjournment  was  sought  because
       counsel for the appellant withdrew representation shortly before  the
       hearing and he requested that the hearing be adjourned  in  order  to
       obtain alternative legal representation. The FTTJ declined to adjourn
       the appeal as there "was no valid reason" to do so as the issues were
       simple, a bundle of documentary evidence had been  supplied  and  the
       appellant could state his case through the interpreter. The appellant
       was said to have confirmed that he was willing to  proceed  with  the
       appeal and gave evidence on his own behalf.  The FTTJ  dismissed  the
       appeal on the basis that the appellant was not genuinely  established
       in business, finding that he had made a "contrived attempt"  to  show
       that he was genuinely operating a business.  Reference  was  made  to
       evidence provided showing that a business known as the Clay Oven  was
       operating from 43-45 Seaside Road rather than the appellant's claimed
       business.

    5. The initial grounds of application to the First-tier Tribunal focused
       on the refusal to adjourn the hearing. It was said that the appellant
       had been surprised at the withdrawal of his representative and  asked
       for an adjournment to be on an equal footing to the respondent.

    6. FTTJ Homes refused the application noting that the issues in  dispute
       were factual; the appellant's solicitors remained on the  record  but
       there was no suggestion that they proposed to attend later in the day
       and the FTTJ was entitled to infer that counsel would have spoken  to
       the solicitors before  withdrawing  her  services.  The  decision  to
       withdraw was said to be  one  that  was  well  within  the  range  of
       reasonable responses to the situation the FTTJ  was  presented  with.
       The appellant had agreed  to  proceed  after  the  process  had  been
       explained to him and the decision was  said  to  contain  nothing  to
       suggest any unfairness in the process adopted. The grounds identified
       nothing that is said to have rendered the process unfair.

    7. The renewed grounds argued  that  the  appellant  was  not  given  an
       informed choice but was "forced" to continue the hearing.  The  point
       was made that the appellant may be represented under  Rule  10(1)  of
       the First-tier Tribunal procedure rules and he  considered  that  his
       right to a fair trial was taken away from him.

    8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that  it  was  arguably
       procedurally unfair to "effectively force the  appellant  to  proceed
       completely unrepresented in the circumstances. "

    9. The respondent filed  a  Rule  24  response  on  23  September  2015.
       Essentially, the respondent opposed the appeal; considered  that  the
       FTTJ directed himself  appropriately  and  relied  upon  FTTJ  Homes'
       refusal to grant permission.

   10. At the hearing before me, the appellant  represented  himself.  There
       was a slight delay while the respondent's Rule 24 response  was  read
       to the appellant in Turkish by the interpreter and while  Mr  Bramble
       read the appellant's witness statement which  was  prepared  for  the
       hearing before me.

   11. I asked the appellant to explain how the FTTJ's decision  to  proceed
       with the hearing of his appeal without him being represented affected
       his case. The appellant told me that he and his counsel disagreed  as
       to how much money the appellant was to pay counsel  for  representing
       him at the hearing and this resulted in counsel refusing to represent
       him. The appellant told me that he asked  the  FTTJ  to  adjourn  his
       appeal to another date but that the judge had insisted on  proceeding
       "as it was a 5-minute case." The appellant felt  under  pressure  and
       stressed and his concentration level very bad, although the judge had
       told him he would be fair. In reading the FTTJ's  decision  now,  the
       appellant  had  noticed  that  one  document,  at  page  44  of   the
       appellant's bundle, had been ignored. That document related  to  what
       the FTTJ said about there being no evidence that  the  owner  of  the
       business premises where the  appellant's  business  was  said  to  be
       located, requiring the  consent  of  the  lender  to  sublet  to  the
       appellant. I asked the appellant if there were any other reasons  why
       he believed that going ahead without a representative meant  that  he
       did not have a fair hearing  and  he  told  me  there  were  not.  In
       addition, the appellant explained that he was not represented  before
       the Upper Tribunal because he believed that he was not allowed to run
       his business owing to the Home Office decision and as a result he was
       in financial difficulty in terms of finding a representative.

   12. Mr Bramble relied upon the Rule 24 response and argued that the  FTTJ
       had not fallen into  procedural  error  in  failing  to  adjourn  the
       appeal. He asked me to note that  the  appellant  had  indicated  his
       agreement in proceeding without a representative at the time but  the
       contrary was said to be the position today. I was also asked to  take
       into consideration the reason given by the appellant  for  not  being
       represented before me and to find that these circumstances would have
       applied had his appeal been adjourned at the First-tier.

   13. In response, the appellant denied that he carried on with his hearing
       willingly. He had asked the FTTJ to  adjourn  his  case  for  another
       date. If the appeal had adjourned, he intended  to  supply  documents
       missing from his file and his case would be presented properly to the
       judge.

Decision on error of law

   14. At the end of the hearing, I announced that the FTTJ made no material
       error of law  and  upheld  his  decision  in  its  entirety  for  the
       following reasons.

   15. I have had regard to the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
       (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 regarding the  power  the
       First-tier Tribunal has to adjourn or postpone a  hearing  under  its
       case management powers. Regard should have been had to the overriding
       objective set out in Rule 2 requiring the Tribunal to deal with cases
       fairly and justly.

   16. I have also considered Rule 10(1),  which  was  relied  upon  by  the
       appellant in his witness statement, which states as follows;
           '(1) A party may be represented by  any  person  not  prohibited
           from representing by section 84 the 1999 Act.'

   17. The key word is "may." Contrary to  the  appellant's  argument,  this
       provision does not entitle a party to  be  represented  at  each  and
       every hearing of their appeal.

   18. I have also had regard  to  the  decision  in  Nwaigwe  (Adjournment:
       Fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC). The crucial question being whether
       the refusal of an adjournment deprived the affected party of a  right
       to  a  fair  hearing.  I  have  also  taken  into  consideration  the
       Presidential Guidance note no.  1  of  2014  and  note  that  factors
       weighing in favour of adjourning an appeal, even  at  a  late  stage,
       include whether  further  time  is  needed  because  of  a  delay  in
       obtaining evidence which is outside the party's control, for example,
       where an expert witness fails to provide a report within  the  period
       expected. That is to be balanced  by  factors  weighing  against  the
       grant of an adjournment, namely that the application was not made  at
       the earliest opportunity or is speculative or that it does  not  show
       that anything material would be achieved by the delay.

   19. In SH (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1284 at [13], it was  held
       that when   considering  whether  an  adjournment  should  have  been
       granted, the test was not irrationality or whether the  decision  was
       properly open to the FTTJ; the sole test was whether it  was  unfair.
       As stated in Nwaigwe, supra, in practice, in most cases the  question
       will be whether the refusal deprived the affected party of his  right
       to a fair hearing.  I  find  that  the  appellant  has  not  been  so
       deprived.

   20. At [4]  of  the  FTTJ's  decision,  he  sets  out  the  circumstances
       surrounding the adjournment application clearly  and  in  detail.  He
       notes that notwithstanding the withdrawal of counsel,  the  appellant
       remained represented by VC Legal (UK). The FTTJ was correct in noting
       that the matters in issue before him were simple. Those  issues  were
       whether the appellant  was  genuinely  established  in  business  and
       whether the profits from that business  were  sufficient  to  support
       him. The FTTJ addressed the competing factors and noted  the  9-month
       delay in the appeal coming to a hearing. He had an  extensive  bundle
       of documents before him from the  appellant  and  rightly  considered
       that the appellant, as the claimed businessperson, would be  able  to
       state his case without injustice being done.

   21. I particularly take note of the fact that the appellant indicated  to
       the FTTJ his willingness to proceed with the appeal, also at  [4]  of
       the decision. I have no reason to doubt  the  FTTJ's  record  of  the
       appellant's response to this issue.

   22. Clearly, the appellant is no longer happy that his  appeal  proceeded
       in the absence of a representative, however I consider that  this  is
       solely because he was unhappy with the FTTJ's comprehensive findings,
       which did not go in his favour.

   23. At the hearing before me, the  appellant  could  only  point  to  one
       matter, which he said might have been affected by the FTTJ proceeding
       without the appellant being represented. That related to whether  the
       consent of the bank had been obtained for the premises to be  sublet.
       Contrary to what the appellant told me, the FTTJ, at  [5]  considered
       the appellant's oral evidence on this issue and noted the location of
       the document confirming that this consent had been obtained, at  [41]
       of the appellant's bundle. Therefore, the  appellant's  objection  is
       without foundation.

   24. The FTTJ listed 9 separate reasons for concluding that the  appellant
       was not genuinely established in business. One of those  reasons,  at
       [13(f)] is particularly informative and arose  from  the  FTTJ  being
       shown a photograph of the address from where the appellant's  claimed
       business (called the Turkish Teahouse) was said to be operating.  The
       FTTJ remarked; "What  the  appellant  has  not  explained  is  why  a
       business known as the Clay  Oven  is  operating  from  43-45  Seaside
       Road." Also at 13(g) the FTTJ comments adversely on  the  appellant's
       failure to provide any satisfactory explanation why he did not comply
       with a request from the Home Office to supply further details that he
       was running a genuine business.

   25. In the circumstances set out above, I  conclude  that  the  FTTJ  was
       right to proceed with the hearing in the absence of  the  appellant's
       representative and that  a  further  delay  would  not  have  made  a
       material difference to the process  or  outcome  of  the  appellant's
       appeal.  That  the  appellant  remains   unrepresented   today   only
       emphasises the correctness of the FTTJ's approach.

   26. No anonymity direction was made by the FTTJ and I can see  no  reason
       to make any such direction now.

       Conclusions

       The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
       the making of an error on a point of law.

       I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.




       Signed:    Date: 20 December 2015


       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara


