
  [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25435/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 28 November 2014                      |On 18 December 2014       |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON


                                   Between

                           MR MIAN MUHAMMAD SALMAN
                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr C Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan, born on 3  August  1989.
       He appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett
       (the Judge), who dismissed his appeal  against  the  refusal  by  the
       Respondent to issue a residence card as confirmation of his right  to
       reside in the UK on the basis that he is a family member  of  an  EEA
       national. She noted in her determination that it  is  stated  in  the
       decision notice that the Appellant's EEA national Sponsor had  failed
       to provide evidence that she was a qualified person  as  provided  in
       Regulation 6 of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
       2006. She also noted that in his  notice  of  appeal,  the  Appellant
       stated that he intended to send in detailed  grounds  of  appeal,  an
       appeal bundle and a witness statement at a later stage, none of which
       were provided when she heard the appeal on 12  August  2014.  In  the
       absence of evidence, the Judge  found  that  the  Appellant  had  not
       satisfied the burden of proof and she dismissed his appeal.


    2. Although the grounds of application span 5 pages,  the  complaint  of
       the Appellant, who is unrepresented, is  that  he  had  gone  to  his
       immigration consultant (the representative) who had taken  statements
       from him and his wife, that the representative had made a  bundle  of
       documents which they signed and he left them with the  representative
       to  send  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  After   he   received   the
       determination of the Judge, he had gone to his representative who had
       admitted that he had put the Appellant's documents into a drawer  and
       forgotten to submit them in a timely manner and the documents were in
       fact only submitted a few days ago. He stated  that  the  lawyer  had
       promised to work for him for another appeal for free. Permission  was
       granted by Judge Grant-Hutchinson on the basis that  it  is  arguable
       that evidence which had not been  lodged  through  no  fault  of  the
       Appellant may have made a material difference to the  outcome  or  to
       the fairness of the proceedings.


    3. The Appellant did not attend the hearing before me, despite notice of
       hearing having been sent to him at  his  last  known  address  on  30
       October 2014.


    4. The Respondent submitted a Rule 24 response, opposing the application
       because, as summarised by the First-tier Judge Grant-Hutchinson  (who
       granted permission to appeal), the grounds did not  demonstrate  that
       the Judge had erred in law. It was therefore open to the Appellant to
       make another  application  for  a  residence  card  with  appropriate
       evidence. It is also  asserted  in  the  response  that  'Unsupported
       assertions about the activities of  a  firm  of  unnamed  immigration
       consultants do not establish the material facts.'


Decision and reasons


    5.  I can only set aside the Judge's decision if I  find  that  she  has
       materially erred in law. A judge can have materially erred in law  if
       he committed or allowed a  procedural  irregularity  to  occur  which
       resulted in an  unfair  hearing  or  which  materially  affected  the
       outcome of the appeal. However, although the Appellant states that he
       saw his representative and he was told that the papers had only  been
       sent a few days ago, this does not establish when the papers were  in
       fact sent to the Tribunal. The Judge's appeal was  promulgated  on  8
       September 2014. The documents sent in  by  the  Appellant  were  date
       stamped received by the Tribunal on  10  September  2014.  The  Judge
       cannot be said to have erred in law for failing to consider  evidence
       that was not provided to her.


    6. Although permission was granted on the  basis  that  the  failure  to
       submit evidence was not the fault of the Appellant, no  evidence  was
       supplied from the representative to support the  assertions  made  by
       the Appellant in  his  grounds  of  application.  There  is  also  no
       evidence that  the  Appellant  made  any  compliant  to  the  claimed
       representative's  governing  body.  Whilst  I  appreciate  that   the
       Appellant is unrepresented, alleging  that  representatives  were  to
       blame for the failure to file evidence, is a serious  allegation  and
       must be supported by evidence. As noted in the Rule 24 response,  the
       Appellant does not even  name  his  alleged  representative.  In  the
       circumstances, I am not satisfied that the Appellant has  established
       that he was let down by his representative. Furthermore, even if  the
       Appellant was let down by his representative, this does not mean that
       the Judge materially erred in law  and  I  can  only  set  aside  her
       decision if there was such an error  on  her  part.  The  appropriate
       course of action is for the Appellant to submit a new application for
       leave to remain with appropriate supporting evidence.


    7. Having read the grounds of application and the  determination,  I  am
       satisfied that the Judge did not materially err in law.


Decision

    8. The determination of Judge Grimmett contains no  material  errors  of
       law and her decision must therefore stand. The Appellant's appeal  is
       dismissed.


    9. An anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier Tribunal and on
       the facts of this case, I see no reason why an order should  be  made
       pursuant to Rule 13 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
       2008.



Signed        Date18 December 2014

M Robertson
Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Judge Grimmett made no fee award because she dismissed the Appellant's
appeal. As her decision is upheld, so too is her decision as to the fee
award.



Signed        Dated18 December 2014

M Robertson
Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
