
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
IA/25198/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 1 February 2016                 |On 16 March 2016                   |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                              MUHAMMAD MUBASHIR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms E Rutherford counsel instructed by the Appellant
For the Respondent: Ms C Johnstone Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
3. The Appellant was born on 9 November 1991 and is a national of Pakistan.
4. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Dickinson promulgated on 2 October  2015  which  dismissed
   the Appellant's appeal against a decision  to  remove  him  from  the  UK
   following a reconsideration dated 25 November 2013 of an earlier  refusal
   of an application dated 20 April 2012 for limited leave  to  remain.  The
   refusal letter included a notice under section  120  of  the  Nationality
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.
5. The refusal letter dated 25 November 2013 considered the  application  by
   reference to paragraph 276ADE , 353B and Article 8.
      . The Respondent did not accept that the Appellant had lost all  ties
        to Pakistan and therefore he could not  meet  the  requirements  of
        276ADE(1) (vi)
      . The  letter  asserted  that  the  Appellant  had  been  in  the  UK
        unlawfully since the expiration of the last period of leave.
      . There were no exceptional circumstances to justify a grant of leave
        outside the Rules.


The Judge's Decision
6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge  Dickinson  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the   appeal   against   the
   Respondent's decision. The Judge found :
   a) Under the heading paragraph 276ADE the Judge found the  Appellant  had
      not lived in the UK for 20 years and was not under 18 so did not  meet
      276ADE(1) (iii) (iv) or (v).
   b) In the absence of any evidence to the contrary he did  not  find  that
      the Appellant had lost all ties to Pakistan.
   c) He concluded that the Appellant did not meet the private life Rules.
   d) He was not satisfied that the Appellant would be 'unable  to  survive'
      to survive if relocated as he was a well educated young man.
   e) He did not accept that the Appellant was dependent on his family as he
      gave evidence that he was a 'completely independent person.'
   f) There was a network of family relatives living in Pakistan  who  could
      provide support as he had  grandparents  and  maternal  aunts  and  an
      uncle.


7. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing:
   a) The Judge failed to consider the Appellants  statement  of  additional
      grounds that he could meet the requirements of paragraph 276B  of  the
      Rules which he had submitted in response to the one stop notice.
   b) The consideration of paragraph 276ADE was inadequate as there  was  no
      consideration of what ties the Appellant had to Pakistan.
   c) The Judge applied the wrong test in Article 8 suggesting  he  was  not
      satisfied that the Appellant 'would be unable to survive'.
   d) The consideration of whether the  Appellant  had  a  family  life  was
      inadequate given that he had only ever lived with his family.


8.  On 13 March 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Kecic gave permission to appeal.

9. At the hearing I heard submissions from Ms Rutherford on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that :

   a) She did  not  accept  that  the  permission  granted  was  limited  to
      arguments about paragraph 276ADE and Article 8 as there  was  evidence
      that the Appellant had  been  in  the  UK  lawfully  since  2004.  She
      submitted that although at the date of hearing on  17  September  2014
      the Appellant had not been  in  the  UK  lawfully  for  10  years  the
      Respondents Guidance (at page 97 of the Consolidated bundle)   allowed
      the Respondent to grant an application where it was received  28  days
      or less before the applicant completed the qualifying period.

   b) The assessment under paragraph 276ADE(1) (vi)  was  wholly  inadequate
      given that the Appellant came to the UK before his 13th  birthday  and
      at the time of the hearing was 22 years old.  He  had  given  evidence
      that he had never been back to Pakistan since he was 12 years old  and
      therefore there should have been consideration of whether any ties  he
      had were meaningful.

   c) In relation to Article  8  she  argued  that  there  was  no  adequate
      assessment of family life.

   d) The proportionality assessment was very brief and based on whether the
      Appellant could survive: that is the wrong test.

   e) There was no consideration of the public interest factors  in  section
      117B of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

10. On behalf of the Respondent Ms Johnstone submitted that :

   a) She relied on the Rule 24 notice.

   b) In relation to the 10 year route the Appellant would not have achieved
      10 years lawful residence until 9 October 2014. The Guidance  referred
      to allowed a discretion  to  the  decision  maker  but  this  was  not
      applicable to the Judge.

   c) The Judge's assessment under paragraph 276ADE was adequate.  There  is
      no template .

   d) In relation to  Article  8  the  findings  were  adequate.  The  Judge
      identified the key factors :  that  the  Appellant  was  an  educated,
      independent adult  and  while  relocation  might  cause  hardship  the
      Appellant could establish himself and work in Pakistan.

   e) Section 117B was not a checklist leading to a grant of leave.

Legal Framework

11. In relation to paragraph 276ADE I  have  considered  Bossadi  (paragraph
   276ADE; suitability; ties) [2015] UKUT 42 (IAC) held that the requirement
   set out in paragraph 276ADE (vi) (in force from 9 July 2012  to  27  July
   2014) to show that a person  "is  aged  18  years  or  above,  has  lived
   continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting any period  of
   imprisonment) but has no ties (including social, cultural or family) with
   the country to which he would have to go if required to  leave  the  UK",
   requires a rounded assessment as to  whether  a  person's  familial  ties
   could result in support. In Ogundimu (Article  8  -  new  rules)  Nigeria
   [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC) the Tribunal said  that  the  natural  and  ordinary
   meaning of the word 'ties' in paragraph 399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules
   (HC194) imports a concept involving something more than merely remote  or
   abstract links to the country of  proposed  deportation  or  removal.  It
   involves there being a connection to life in that country.  Consideration
   of whether a person has 'no ties'  to  such  a  country  must  involve  a
   rounded assessment of all of the relevant circumstances and is not to  be
   limited to 'social, cultural and family' circumstances

Finding on Material Error

12. Having heard those  submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made material errors of law.

13. In relation to the  first  ground  argued,  that  the  Judge  failed  to
   consider paragraph 276B I note that Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kekic  stated
   that this had no merit. I am satisfied that even if she had not  intended
   to limit the grant of permission the ground did  indeed  have  no  merit.
   Given that the Appellants case was that he arrived in the UK on 9 October
   2004 he would not have been in the UK for 10 years until 9  October  2014
   after the date of the hearing before Judge Dickinson. While I  note  that
   there is a discretion available to caseworkers in allowing an application
   submitted 28 days early there was nothing before the Judge or  before  me
   to suggest that such a discretion was available to the Judge.

14. In relation to the  assessment  under  paragraph  276ADE  there  are  no
   findings independently made by the Judge.  He  has  merely  repeated  the
   paragraph in the refusal letter (page 2  of  the  refusal  letter)  which
   simply asserts that having lived until he was 13 in Pakistan it  was  not
   accepted that he had lost all ties to the country. I note what  was  said
   in Ogundimu and given the substantial bundle submitted by  the  Appellant
   and that other family members gave evidence which was not referred  to  I
   am satisfied that there has been no rounded  assessment  of  all  of  the
   relevant circumstances or indeed consideration of  the  social,  cultural
   and family circumstances.

15. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to address and determine  whether
   the Appellant had lost all ties to Pakistan constitutes a clear error  of
   law. This error  I  consider  to  be  material  since  had  the  Tribunal
   conducted this exercise the outcome could have been different. That in my
   view is the correct test to apply.

16. I am also satisfied that the consideration of Article 8 is there  is  no
   adequate assessment of the whether this  is  a  family  or  private  life
   appeal for the purpose of Article 8(1). The assessment is also apparently
   underpinned by the application of the wrong test, whether  the  Appellant
   'will be able to survive'.

17. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that  the
   Judge's determination cannot stand and must be set aside in its entirety.
   All matters to be redetermined afresh.

18. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
   of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted to the First  Tier
   Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:
    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

19. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
   the Appellant did not have a fair hearing due  to  the  failure  to  make
   adequate findings either in relation to the Rules or Article 8.  In  this
   case none of the findings of fact are to stand and the matter will  be  a
   complete re hearing.

20. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting
   at Manchester to be heard on a date to be  fixed  before  any  First-tier
   Immigration judge other than Judge Dickinson.

Signed                                                              Date
8.2.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
