
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25444/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19 July 2017                           |On 29 November 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                             mr Stephen Amponsah
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Al-Rashid, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a  citizen  of  Ghana,  born  in  1970.   He  made  an
    application for a residence card as the spouse of an EEA citizen.   The
    respondent refused the application in a decision dated  29  June  2015,
    pursuant to the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006
    ("the EEA Regulations").

 2. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Plumptre  ("the  FtJ")  at  a  hearing  on  9
    December 2016, whereby she dismissed the appeal.

 3. In relation to the appellant's marriage, that was a marriage  conducted
    by proxy in Ghana.  The FtJ found that it was a customary  marriage  by
    "double proxy".  She applied the decision of  the  Tribunal  in  Kareem
    (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC).

 4. Amongst other things, that case decided that in an appeal  against  the
    refusal of a residence card on the  basis  of  marriage,  the  starting
    point is to decide whether the  marriage  was  contracted  between  the
    parties according to the  national  law  of  the  EEA  country  of  the
    qualified person's nationality.

 5. However, the Tribunal's decision was overturned on appeal  in  Awuku  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 178.  It was
    concluded that the Tribunal erred in deciding that in  the  absence  of
    evidence that German law recognises a Ghanaian  marriage  by  proxy  as
    valid, the marriage would not be recognised in the United Kingdom.

 6. In the appeal before me, the FtJ however also decided that she  had  no
    jurisdiction to determine whether the appellant was an extended  family
    member under the EEA Regulations by  reason  of  being  in  a  'durable
    relationship'.  She came to  that  view  on  the  basis  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT  00411.
    That case decided that there is no statutory right  of  appeal  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State not to grant a residence card to
    a person claiming to be an extended family member.

 7. The grounds of appeal against the FtJ's decision take  issue  with  the
    FtJ's reliance on Kareem on the basis that the Court of Appeal  was  at
    that time considering the Upper Tribunal's decision.

 8. The grounds further take issue with the FtJ's decision that she had  no
    jurisdiction to consider the  point  of  a  durable  relationship.   In
    addition, it is asserted that the FtJ was wrong to state  that  it  was
    common ground between the parties  that  she  had  no  jurisdiction  in
    relation to that issue.

 9. In submissions before me, it  was  accepted  that  there  had  been  no
    challenge  to  the  FtJ's  conclusion  that  the  appellant   had   not
    established that the proxy marriage in Ghana was a valid proxy marriage
    by Ghanaian law, or that it was  validly  and  properly  registered  in
    accordance with Ghanaian law.  The submissions before me were made only
    in relation to the jurisdiction/Sala point.

10. Mr Al-Rashid sought to distinguish this appellant's case from  that  of
    Sala on the basis that the appellant in this case  had  applied  for  a
    residence card as a family member, under reg 17(1)(b), whereas Sala was
    a case under Reg 17(4) (extended family member).  Thus, Sala was a case
    purely about a durable relationship, whereas the appeal before the  FtJ
    concerned someone who claimed to be a family member, as a spouse.

11. It was submitted that once the appellant had lodged  an  appeal  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, "legitimate grounds" were open  to  him.   Any
    restrictions on  the  right  of  appeal  must,  it  was  submitted,  be
    interpreted narrowly.

12. In addition, reliance was placed on the  fact  that  the  Secretary  of
    State,  in  the  decision,  had  considered  the   issue   of   durable
    relationship in the alternative.  The appellant  had  been  afforded  a
    right of appeal and there was only one decision which was appealed.

13. Mr Jarvis referred to the decision in Rashid Anwar v Secretary of State
    for  the  Home  Department  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  1275  in  terms  of  the
    distinction between the constitutive and adjudicative  jurisdiction  of
    the Tribunal.   It  was  further  submitted  that  the  fact  that  the
    Secretary of State had dealt with the issue of durable relationship was
    not relevant to whether  the  FtJ  had  jurisdiction  to  consider  the
    matter.  It was, it was submitted, illogical for  an  appellant  to  be
    able to gain a right of appeal by raising another matter which may have
    no substance at all.  A person would therefore get a right of appeal in
    circumstances where others would not.

14. Subsequent to the hearing before me, the Court  of  Appeal  in  Khan  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ  1755  found
    that Sala was wrongly decided. In the circumstances,  I  considered  it
    appropriate to allow  the  parties  the  opportunity  to  make  further
    submissions on the issue, and issued directions to the  parties  on  10
    November 2017 giving them 14 days to make submissions  should  they  so
    wish, limited solely to the Sala point. I indicated that at the  expiry
    of that period, whether or not further submissions have been filed  and
    served, a  decision  on  the  appeal  would  be  made  without  further
    reference to the parties.

15. On 24 November written submissions  were  received  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, but no submissions on behalf of the respondent.

16. The appellant's submissions, to summarise, contend that in the light of
    Khan the appeal should be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    hearing to determine  the  issue  of  durable  relationship,  but  also
    referring to the fact that Kareem has also been overruled by the  Court
    of Appeal in Awuku.

    Conclusions

17. It was accepted on behalf of the respondent that the FtJ had  erred  in
    law in concluding that she was bound by the decision in  Kareem,  given
    the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  Awuku.  Nevertheless,  it  was
    submitted that any error of law in that regard was not material.

18. However, in the light of the decision in Khan it is now  apparent  that
    the FtJ did err in law in concluding that she was bound by the decision
    in Sala, although of course the FtJ entirely properly applied  the  law
    as it was thought to be  at  the  time.  That  view  we  now  know  was
    erroneous. The decision must be set aside for that reason.

19. The error of law in relation to the application of Kareem,  bearing  in
    mind the decision of the Court of Appeal in Awuku, is  again  an  error
    which is entirely understandable given the state of the authorities  at
    the time of the appeal before the FtJ. It is not however an error  that
    would have required the decision  to  be  set  aside  given  the  FtJ's
    findings in relation to the validity of the marriage in  Ghanaian  law.
    The contrary was not argued on behalf of the appellant before  me  (and
    see my [9] above).

20. It is nevertheless the case that the issue of whether the appellant  is
    in a durable relationship and is thus an extended family  member  is  a
    matter that requires to be determined.  In  the  circumstances,  taking
    into account the Senior President's  Practice  Statement  at  paragraph
    7.2, it is appropriate for the appeal to be remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that matter to be decided.

21. However, the FtJ has already, and without legal error,  concluded  that
    the appellant's marriage is not valid in Ghanaian law. That is a matter
    that does not require any further fact-finding and the  FtJ's  decision
    in that regard is to stand, along with her findings  of  fact  in  that
    respect.

    Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and its decision is therefore set aside.  The  appeal
    is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing to  determine  the
    issue of whether the appellant is an extended family member within  the
    meaning of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006,
    before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Plumptre.


Upper   Tribunal   Judge   Kopieczek                                   dated
    28/11/17








