

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal No:
IA/25969/2013





Heard at Field House                         Determination promulgated
On 13 June 2014                              On 4 July 2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL DIGNEY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         IKPONMWOSA GERALD IZE-IYAMU

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant: Mr Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent: Mr Ijezie

                               DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The respondent, a citizen of Nigeria, applied under section 10 of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 for a certificate that he
      was entitled  to  a  right  of  abode  in  the  United  Kingdom.  That
      application was refused on the basis that the respondent's mother  was
      not born in the United Kingdom and she had acquired her right of abode
      in the United Kingdom through residency  and this could not be  passed
      on to the respondent. The respondent also claimed to derive a right of
      abode through his father and this claim was also rejected. The  appeal
      was allowed on the basis of both claims, but  for  reasons  that  will
      become apparent it is not necessary  for  me  to  consider  the  claim
      allegedly derived from the father.


   2. Permission to appeal was granted on  6  May  2014.  The  first  ground
      argues that the judge confused  a  right  to  register  as  a  British
      citizen under section 4C of the British Nationality 1981 Act  with  an
      entitlement to a right of abode. The  grounds  concede  (6)  that  the
      respondent may have an entitlement to register as  a  British  citizen
      under section  4C  "if,  had  the  law  allowed  mothers  to  pass  on
      nationality to their  children,  they  would  have  become  a  British
      citizen on 1 January  1983".  The  grounds  go  on  to  say  that  the
      respondent would further have to show that he had been resident in the
      United  Kingdom  for  five  years  and  that  is  something  that  he,
      admittedly,  cannot  do.  The  second  ground  is  really  a  slightly
      different  statement  of  the  first  ground.  It  repeats  that   the
      respondent had not resided here for five years and was not  a  citizen
      of the United Kingdom as his mother could not pass her nationality  to
      her children as the law in force prior to 1983 did not allow a  mother
      to pass her nationality to her children.


   3. I have to decided whether the original determination was  vitiated  by
      any material error of law.

   4. At the hearing Mr Jarvis argued that the appeal against the  Secretary
      of State's original  decision  is  effectively  an  appeal  against  a
      refusal  to  grant  citizenship  and  such  a  decision  is   not   an
      "immigration decision" as laid down by section 82 of the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Mr Ijezie  relies  on  the  case  of
      Harrison v SSHD [2003]  EWCA  Civ  432  which  is  authority  for  the
      proposition that "the natural place for  the  determination  of  legal
      rights  [in  that  case  citizenship]  conferred  by  statute  is  the
      court"[1]. His argument is that  this  Tribunal  is  "the  court"  for
      present purposes and therefore it can decide the matter. He seemed  to
      think that it was open to the Tribunal to make a  declaration.  It  is
      clear that what is referred to as "the court" is the High Court  (`the
      case is one of judicial review); it is also clear that the Tribunal is
      a statutory body that has no jurisdiction  beyond  what  it  has  been
      given by statute. Indeed it is actually said earlier in  paragraph  35
      that in cases of citizenship "there is in the legislation no structure
      of adjudicators or rights of appeal and the like".

   5. However I conclude that  it  is  open  to  the  Tribunal  to  consider
      citizenship. That is because  citizenship  is  a  relevant  factor  in
      deciding the question of a right of abode; it is, at  any  rate  in  a
      case such as this, a condition precedent that has to be  decided.  The
      matter is analogous to a decision by "the appropriate authority"  that
      someone has not been trafficked. There is no appeal  to  the  Tribunal
      against such a decision but if a finding on the point is necessary  in
      an asylum case it is open to the Tribunal to decide the point, and the
      Tribunal is not bound by the  decision of the "appropriate authority".

   6. The next point to be decided is whether the  respondent's  mother  can
      pass on to him her status. The grounds of appeal  (6  above)  seem  to
      conclude that this may  be  possible  and  Mr  Jarvis  did  not  argue
      strongly to the contrary. It is clear from section 45 of the  Borders,
      Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 that descent through  the  mother
      is to be treated in precisely the same way as that  through  a  father
      and it is equally clear that the section is retrospective; if it  were
      not it would serve no purpose.

   7. Paragraphs 55 and 56 of the determination explain why  the  respondent
      is entitled to a right of abode. Subject to  the  question  of  rights
      passing through the mother, the  reasoning  is  not  impugned  in  the
      grounds of appeal but it is argued that as well as  citizenship  there
      are other conditions that must be complied with  before  there  is  an
      entitlement to a right of abode, namely that the respondent  had  been
      resident in the United Kingdom for five years.

   8. At the hearing Mr  Jarvis  reiterated  this  point  and  produced  the
      Immigration (Certificate of Entitlement  to  Right  of  Abode  in  the
      United Kingdom) Regulations 2006. This contains a  schedule  detailing
      the evidence that must accompany an  application  and  state  what  is
      necessary in an application based on five years'  residence  before  1
      January 1983.  The regulations do not provide the statutory basis  for
      the requirement but for the evidence needed to satisfy it. I had great
      difficulty in finding the basis for this requirement and that  is  not
      altogether surprising because it appeared in the original  version  of
      the Immigration Act 1971 as section 2(1)(c) which   was   repealed  by
      section 39 of the British Nationality Act 1981. That  the  regulations
      cannot apply to the respondent is made clear  in  the  schedule  where
      reference is twice made to periods before 1983. It  follows  that  the
      appellant  is  wrong  to  say  that  the  respondent  must  meet  this
      additional requirement; this has  not  been  a  requirement  for  many
      years.

   9. It follows that the  conclusions  in  paragraphs  55  and  56  of  the
      determination are not subject to any  further  requirements  with  the
      result that the judge's conclusions are not vitiated by any  error  of
      law.

  10. The respondent also claims a right of abode by reason of descent  from
      his father. The judge concluded that the respondent succeeded on  this
      ground because his father remained a British citizen  after  Nigeria's
      independence. On the basis of the evidence that I have been  shown  it
      appears that this was an incorrect assumption, but as  the  respondent
      succeeds on the basis of descent from his mother, it is not  necessary
      to decide the point.

  11. The determination is not vitiated by any material error of law and the
      original decision shall stand.


The appeal is dismissed


Designated Judge Digney      Judge of the Upper Tribunal 1 July 2014



-----------------------
[1] See paragraph 35.

