
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP/LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25514/2009


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 March 2016                              |On 13 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                  P K (DRC)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:              Mr S Kotas, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr Richard Bartram, Solicitor, Migrant Law
Partnership


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal allowing on asylum  grounds  the  claimant's
    appeal against the decision made on 21 August 2009 to refuse to  revoke
    a deportation order made against him as a foreign  criminal  on  3  May
    2007 under Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971, with  reference
    to Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    made an anonymity direction, and I consider it is appropriate that  the
    claimant continues to be accorded anonymity for  these  proceedings  in
    the Upper Tribunal as the central issue remains whether he has a  well-
    founded fear of persecution on return to the  DRC  on  account  of  his
    political profile.

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 2. On 14 October 2015 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J  M  Holmes  gave  her
    reasons for granting the Secretary of State permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal:

         1.   In a Decision promulgated on 8 July  2015  a  panel  of  Judge
             Whalan and Judge Scott Baker allowed  on  asylum  grounds  the
             Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to deport
             him to the DRC.  The application was made in time.

         2.   It is arguable, as set out in the grounds, that  the  Tribunal
             has failed to adequately engage with  the  Respondent's  case,
             and has failed to provide adequate reasons for  the  decision,
             and has failed to follow the relevant  country  guidance.   On
             any view the assessment of the status and objectivity  of  the
             "expert witness" required great care given that  she  and  the
             Appellant are,  or  were,  in  a  relationship  together,  and
             arguably the weight that could be given to  her  evidence  was
             not analysed with that properly in mind.   The  Tribunal  also
             needed to  make  clear  reasoned  findings  upon  whether  the
             Appellant's account of his sur place activities was  credible,
             given his extensive record of dishonesty, and his inability to
             pursue  the  sur  place  activities  relied  upon  whilst   in
             detention.  Having decided what was  accepted,  and  what  was
             not, the Tribunal  then  needed  to  analyse  which  of  those
             activities (if any) would  be  likely  to  have  come  to  the
             attention of the authorities in the DRC.  The cynicism of  the
             Appellant in undertaking any of  those  sur  place  activities
             also required specific findings,  because  that  cynicism  (if
             any) went to the  HJ  (Iran)  argument  he  relied  upon,  and
             informed the decision of whether he was  genuinely  likely  to
             pursue them further following deportation.  Thus the  decision
             required a  careful  examination  of  the  chronology  of  the
             Appellant's  immigration   status   and   offending   history,
             alongside the sur place activities the  Tribunal  accepted  he
             had undertaken.

Relevant Background

 3. The claimant is a national of the Democratic Republic  of  Congo  (DRC)
    who was born on [ ] 1967.  He entered the United  Kingdom  on  5  March
    1995 with his wife  and  two  children.   He  applied  for  asylum  the
    following day.  He claimed refugee status on the basis of his political
    opinion as an active member of the UDPS.

The Decision of the Tribunal in February 2004 - No future risk,  but  appeal
allowed on Article 8 grounds

 4. His claim for asylum was refused  on  28  November  2001.   His  appeal
    against refusal of asylum came before  Adjudicator  Powell  sitting  at
    Hatton Cross on 11  February  2004.   In  a  subsequent  determination,
    Adjudicator Powell  dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum  and  Article  3
    grounds, but allowed his appeal under Article 8.   He  found  that  the
    claimant was detained in the DRC because he was an active member of the
    UDPS opposed to President Mobuto.  He found his  account  of  detention
    ill-treatment to be credible and if the present state  of  DRC  society
    and its institutions were an indication of what took place in the past,
    it was quite credible that the appellant was able to bribe his way  out
    of prison and out of the country.

 5. However, he was not satisfied there was any  evidence  to  suggest  the
    appellant would be of interest to the authorities today.   He  had  not
    been directly involved in DRC politics since  1995.   Two  regimes  had
    passed away in DRC since he was politically active.  The UDPS was now a
    legal party.  Its refusal to  register  under  the  May  2001  law  had
    resulted in harassment by the government but  such  harassment  fell  a
    long way short of persecution.  He  was  not  satisfied  the  appellant
    would be of interest to the authorities on  account  of  his  political
    activities nearly ten years ago for a party that was lawfully  able  to
    engage in politics in the DRC.

 6. The judge rejected a submission by the claimant's  representative  that
    the claimant would be recorded as a political opponent of  the  current
    regime by implication, and as an individual who had escaped from prison
    in 1995.  Part of the judge's reasoning on  this  issue  was  that  the
    claimant was not a senior member of the UDPS in 1995.  He was  arrested
    with others who supported the organisation.  He  did  not  believe  the
    claimant was regarded as anything other than  a  relatively  low  level
    member of the opposition by the authorities.  His  detention  may  well
    have been justified in the regime's mind in 1995, but did not find that
    his release, however accomplished, would have caused the authorities to
    take a further interest in him.

 7. With respect to the appellant's Article 8 claim, the Adjudicator  noted
    that the claimant had volunteered the fact that both he  and  his  wife
    had been separately convicted of criminal offences committed in the UK.
     He did not consider this was determinative, as  neither  of  them  had
    been made the subjective of a recommendation  for  deportation  by  the
    trial judges or magistrates who heard their cases.

The Claimant's Repeat Offending leading to Warning in February 2005

 8. By the beginning of 2005, the  claimant  had  accrued  twelve  separate
    criminal convictions in a period  spanning  October  1996  to  December
    2004.  This led to the Secretary of State issuing him  with  a  warning
    letter in February 2005 of the need to comply  with  the  laws  of  the
    United Kingdom, and the risk  of  his  discretionary  leave  to  remain
    (consequential upon his earlier  appeal  being  allowed  on  Article  8
    grounds) being withdrawn.  No action  would  be  taken  to  deport  him
    unless he again came to the adverse notice of the courts.

Further Offending triggering Decision to Deport

 9. As recorded in a subsequent decision of a panel sitting at Taylor House
    on 24 November 2006,  the  claimant  did  not  heed  the  warning,  and
    appeared before the  criminal  courts  on  a  further  three  occasions
    prompting then Secretary of State to serve the claimant with  a  notice
    of intention to make a deportation order on 26 May 2006.

The Decision of the Tribunal in  November  2006  dismissing  the  Claimant's
Appeal against Deportation on asylum and Article 8 grounds

10. In their subsequent decision, the panel found  that  the  claimant  had
    appalling criminal antecedents  with  no  less  than  fifteen  criminal
    convictions, largely related to driving with excess alcohol and driving
    whilst disqualified.  He also had convictions for matters of dishonesty
    in the form of deceptions, attempted  deception  and  receiving  stolen
    goods.  There was no doubt in the panel's view that there  was  a  real
    risk of the claimant reoffending if granted  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  He posed a risk to the public.  There was  every  risk
    that, whilst under  the  influence  of  alcohol  and  driving  a  motor
    vehicle, the claimant might cause injury to himself or another.

11. The claimant, who was legally represented, was  appealing  against  the
    decision to deport him on Article 8 grounds only.  His evidence  before
    the panel was that he had no details of the other persons who were also
    associated to his political party in the DRC, and he had  not  kept  an
    interest in the events occurring in the DRC.

12. At paragraph 25 of their determination, the panel found  there  was  no
    evidence that the claimant would be targeted  on  his  return  or  they
    would be placed in a position of fear or danger as a result of his past
    political associations.  Having regard to the country guidance case  of
    MK (AB and DM confirmed) DRC CG [2006] UKAIT 001 and the latest Country
    of Origin Information Report, they concluded there was no  evidence  of
    risk of return to the claimant at the date of the appeal hearing.   The
    evidence of the claimant was that he was no longer  politically  active
    and showed no interest in the events in the DRC.  In the  circumstances
    it was unlikely that the claimant would attract  any  adverse  interest
    from those in authority.

13. The panel dismissed the claimant's appeal against deportation,  and  on
    17 January 2007 Senior  Immigration  Judge  Jordan,  as  he  then  was,
    dismissed his application for a reconsideration of his appeal as  being
    utterly without merit.  This decision was upheld by the  Administrative
    Court on 12 April 2007.

The Claimant's relationship with a human  rights  activist  leading  to  him
becoming an activist alongside her

14. The claimant spent some  sixteen  months  in  detention  following  the
    completion of his prison sentence for  his  last  criminal  conviction.
    While in detention he met Elizabeth Atherton, a human  rights  activist
    who came to offer her assistance in resisting his  deportation  to  the
    DRC.  As the claimant put it in a subsequent witness statement he  made
    on 29 April 2008, she came to visit him to  help  him  with  his  case.
    They fell in love and a serious relationship  developed  between  them.
    He was released from detention on bail on 31 August 2007, and  went  to
    live with Elizabeth Atherton, who was both his partner and his  surety.



15. In the same  statement,  he  said  that,  following  his  release  from
    immigration detention, he had become  a  political  activist.   He  had
    attended several demonstrations  against  deportation  to  the  DRC  in
    September 2007 outside Field House at the time of the BK hearing.   One
    of  these  demonstrations  was  filmed  by  Friction  TV.   They   were
    criticising immigration policies by the British Government  in  keeping
    people in detention and deporting them to dangerous  regimes  like  the
    DRC.  On 12 January 2008 he attended a  demonstration  outside  Hackney
    Empire, and afterwards he had gone to a meeting  which  he  was  filmed
    making a strong statement criticising the Kabila regime  and  the  fact
    that Kabila was really Kanabam and was not from Congo.  He said his DVD
    was circulated around the country and in other parts of Europe, through
    other Congolese organisations and also  in  Congolese  shops.   It  was
    widely known in the Congolese community in the UK that some people  had
    been  offered  money  by  the  Congolese  government  in  exchange  for
    intelligence about opposition activists.  That was why he was sure that
    information about him would have been  sent  to  Kinshasa.   He  was  a
    recognisable face and his  family's  name  was  already  known  to  the
    authorities.  The information he had from Congo was  that  his  younger
    brother, who had recently returned from exile to Kinshasa, was arrested
    for driving people to and from UDPS  meetings.   He  was  currently  in
    Makala Prison.

The Secretary of State's Reasons for rejecting the Refugee Sur  Place  claim
- limited and inconsequential sur place activities undertaken in  bad  faith
and/or the Claimant would not be taken seriously by the DRC  authorities  as
a genuine opponent of the regime

16. On 21 August 2009 then Secretary of State gave his or her  reasons  for
    refusing to revoke the deportation order which had  been  made  against
    the claimant on 3 May 2007.  The reasons  given  were  very  extensive,
    running to 29 pages.  One of the reasons that the decision letter is so
    long  is  that  the  caseworker,   Philip   Williams,   gave   detailed
    consideration to each element of the claimant's multifaceted sur  place
    claim.  It was multifaceted as it featured participation in a number of
    different demonstrations, and  membership  of  a  number  of  different
    organisations, and a number of different contexts in which the claimant
    said that his antigovernment views were  likely  to  have  entered  the
    public domain and/or would have been likely to have been passed  on  to
    the authorities in the DRC by agents operating in the UK.

17. In broad terms, the  caseworker  accepted  that  the  majority  of  the
    alleged  sur  place  activity  had  taken  place,  but   disputed   its
    ramifications in terms of its effects on the claimant's  risk  profile.
    For example, the claimant said he faced a real risk of  persecution  in
    the DRC because of his position  as  a  leader  of  the  Congo  Support
    Project ("CSP").  The caseworker did not accept that his membership  of
    the CSP gave rise to a risk of persecution on  return.   Firstly,  this
    was because the CSP did not have the objective of the  removal  of  the
    current DRC government.  In BK (failed asylum seekers)  DRC  CG  [2007]
    UKAIT 0098, in which Ms Atherton, the founder of CSP,  appeared  as  an
    expert witness, she was recorded as stating that the aims of  the  CSP,
    which was officially founded by her in 2007,  were  to  support  asylum
    seekers and refugees from the DRC in the UK.

18. The caseworker accepted the CSP was critical of the human rights record
    of the current regime in the DRC and was also critical  of  the  United
    Kingdom government.  But the organisation did  not  appear  to  have  a
    website and no information could be found on how to join  it  or  where
    and when it held meetings.  So there was no  evidence  to  support  the
    claim that the CSP had any substantial importance as either a political
    human rights organisation in the United Kingdom or elsewhere, and there
    was no evidence that its activities were of any significance, either in
    the UK or the DRC.

19. A common theme in the caseworker's deconstruction of the claimant's sur
    place activities was that they were low  level,  of  limited  reach  in
    terms of the extent of publication and/or the content of what he  said.
    Although "critical and insulting", what the claimant  said  was  either
    manifestly unfounded and/or not revelatory.   In  short,  he  contended
    that the authorities in the DRC would not take the  claimant  seriously
    as a genuine political activist.

20. The caseworker expanded on this  latter  theme  at  paragraph  66.   In
    interview he claimed to have been a political activist  ever  since  he
    arrived in the United Kingdom, but this was inconsistent with  what  he
    had said in his deportation appeal.  He had exaggerated the  length  of
    time he had been a member of the CRC and IRC, he  had  exaggerated  his
    importance  within  these  organisations  and  the  prominence  of  his
    activities within the CRC.   These  exaggerations  indicated  that  the
    claimant was seeking dishonestly to enhance his claim  to  asylum,  and
    that his activities were not in pursuit of genuine  political  beliefs.
    He had taken part in his recent activities in  full  knowledge  of  the
    fact that he was due for deportation to the DRC.  He had only commenced
    his activities in the United Kingdom after his deportation  appeal  had
    been dismissed in December 2006.   He  was  a  person  whose  name  had
    hitherto attracted no particular attention either in  the  DRC  or  the
    United Kingdom, and the revelation of his identity  in  the  course  of
    attending demonstrations or giving interviews  raised  the  possibility
    that the claimant was deliberately and repeatedly revealing his name in
    order to enhance his claim to asylum.  In short, the claimant  had  not
    engaged in his activities in the United Kingdom to act upon his genuine
    political beliefs but had done so solely or mainly to provide  a  basis
    for seeking a revocation of his deportation order.

Further criminal offending in 2009 and 2010

21. Following his release from immigration detention, the claimant  accrued
    two further criminal convictions.  On 28 May 2009 he was convicted of a
    possession of a  class  A  controlled  drug  and  of  being  drunk  and
    disorderly.  For this he received a conditional discharge.  But  on  20
    January  2010  he  was  convicted  of  ABH,  and  received  a  term  of
    imprisonment of eighteen months. His victim was Ms Atherton.

The Decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  in  January  2011  dismissing  the
appeal on asylum grounds, but allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds

22. The claimant's appeal against refusal to revoke his  deportation  order
    came before Judge Head sitting with a non-legal  member  at  Richmond's
    Magistrates' Court on 24 January 2011.

23. The claimant was legally represented.  His Counsel, Mr Belaro, informed
    the panel that the claimant was relying on Article 3 and 8  only.   The
    panel heard from Ms Atherton, who had been the victim of the assault by
    the claimant on  29  August  2009  which  had  led  to  his  subsequent
    conviction.  She had attended his trial at the  Crown  Court,  but  was
    treated as a hostile witness.  In cross-examination, she confirmed  she
    had given expert evidence in the case of  BK  although  she  had  never
    visited the DRC.  She said she was committed to halting removals to the
    DRC.  The reason her evidence had not been accepted by the Tribunal  in
    BK was not because it was incorrect  but  because  there  had  been  no
    evidence to substantiate what she had said.  So it was incorrect to say
    the claimant had not kept an interest in persons in the  DRC.   He  had
    been a member of  the  UDPS  and  the  DRC  and  had  joined  the  same
    organisation on his arrival in the United  Kingdom.   When  he  was  in
    immigration detention between 2006 and 2007 he expressed an interest in
    working in her organisation and had become involved.  She accepted  she
    had stood surety for at least twenty other DRC nationals who  had  been
    facing removal or deportation.

24. In their subsequent decision, the panel considered the claim  that  the
    claimant was a refugee sur place on account of his  present  activities
    in  the  country  with  the   Congolese   Resistance   Council   (CRC),
    International Congolese Rights (ICR), the Combattants,  and  the  Congo
    Support Project (CSP).  They found that all these  organisations,  with
    the exception of the CSP, were UK based political  organisations  whose
    objective was the removal  of  the  current  regime  in  the  DRC.  His
    interests in these organisations commenced at the end of 2006 after his
    deportation hearing.  He  claimed  that  since  then  he  had  attended
    regular meetings and demonstrations, and had distributed leaflets.  The
    panel accepted his involvement in these groups.

25. The panel continued in paragraph [35]:

         It  was  the  respondent's  opinion,  and  we  concur,   that   the
         organisations did not have  a  significant  public  profile  either
         within  the  United  Kingdom  or  elsewhere  and  the  [claimant's]
         involvement with these organisations would not  bring  him  to  the
         adverse attention of the authorities in the DRC.

26. At paragraph [36], the panel addressed the  claim  that  there  were  a
    number of DVDs and videos and photographs  which  showed  the  claimant
    expressing views against the DRC government and that these would  bring
    him to the adverse attention of the DRC authorities.   The  panel  were
    satisfied that none of the DVDs, videos or photographs  identified  the
    claimant as a member or leader of any political party.

27. Finally at paragraph [37] the panel noted an argument that some  people
    within the Congolese community in the United Kingdom had  been  offered
    money by the Congolese  government  in  exchange  for  intelligence  by
    opposition activists and that it was likely that  the  claimant's  name
    could come to the adverse attention of the  DRC  government.   However,
    neither the claimant nor his witnesses were able to  substantiate  that
    claim by any independent or objective material.

28. The panel concluded at paragraph [38] that the decision to  return  the
    claimant to the DRC would not be in breach of his rights under  Article
    3 ECHR.

29. The panel however went on to allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds,  on
    account of the claimant's relationship with his four children in the UK
    and because it was not reasonable to expect his children  or  those  of
    his partner, Ms Atherton, to accompany  the  claimant  to  the  DRC  to
    establish a life with him there.

The Decision of the Upper Tribunal setting aside the decision of the  First-
tier Tribunal

30. The Secretary of State successfully applied for  permission  to  appeal
    against  the  decision  to  allow  the  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds
    notwithstanding the claimant's repeated offending.   In  November  2011
    Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and ordered it to be remade.

Further Criminal Offending by the Claimant in the period 2012 to 2014

31. The Claimant was convicted of further offences on 7  January  2012,  11
    January 2012, 6 March 2014 and 17 March 2014.

The Decision of the First-Tier Tribunal in 2015 pursuant to the remittal  of
the appeal by the Upper Tribunal in 2013 for a fresh hearing

32. It appears to have been envisaged that the decision would be remade  by
    the Upper Tribunal. Following a number of aborted hearings in 2012  and
    2013, Judge Eshun  decided  to  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    tribunal due to the inordinate delay since the case had been last  been
    adjourned part-heard. Due to further  procedural  difficulties,  appeal
    was not re-heard at Taylor House until 20 March 2015.  The appeal  then
    had to be adjourned part-heard, for a further hearing on 12 June  2015.
    The claimant was represented by Mr Bartram, who appeared for him  on  a
    pro bono basis.  The appeal was heard by a panel  consisting  of  Judge
    Whalan and  Judge  Scott-Baker.   Judge  Whalan  wrote  the  subsequent
    decision.

33. At paragraph [46] the panel  found  that  the  claimant  had  conducted
    himself with a  truly  contumelious  disregard  and  contempt  for  the
    criminal authorities, in circumstances where  it  seemed  that  nothing
    stopped or prevented  his  propensity  to  reoffend.   The  relentless,
    almost routine nature of his offending, was affirmed by the  fact  that
    he almost invariably pleaded guilty to the charges  made  against  him,
    suggesting that he considered his behaviour to be somehow  unavoidable.
    He also had a history of both refusing to provide his identity  details
    to the criminal authorities and/or of proffering false identities, both
    in terms of his offending for dishonesty and the circumstances  of  his
    repeated arrest and detention.

34. The panel received evidence from the  claimant  as  to  continuing  sur
    place activities in the period 2012 to 2015.  He relied inter  alia  on
    an interview held on BEN TV in  December  2014  and  a  meeting  on  26
    January 2015 she said was broadcast within the DRC.

35. The panel noted at paragraph [56] that the claimant had showed them DVD
    extracts and various television  interviews  he  had  given  expressing
    (sometimes in combative terms) his opposition to the DRC regime.    The
    interviews were broadcast on BEN TV, which were shown  on  Sky  Channel
    182, and these  were  conducted  in  slots  given  to  (or  bought  by)
    opposition political groups.

36. At paragraph [58], the panel said that his evidence about his sur place
    activity would suggest a continuing active involvement, insofar  as  he
    had been in a march to the Congolese Embassy in London on Friday before
    the hearing on "1st June 2012" (sic). (I infer that the date given is a
    typographical error, and that the intention of the panel was  to  refer
    to a march which took place shortly before the resumed  hearing  on  12
    June  2015).   This  march  had  been  organised  by  an  umbrella   of
    antigovernment  groups,  including  APARECO  (UK).   Footage  of  these
    demonstrations had been broadcast on YouTube and BEN TV.

37. The panel received evidence from Ms Atherton.  She  confirmed  that  he
    had helped found the CSP and had been an active supporter  ever  since.
    He was now a vice-coordinator of the organisation.  She said as the DRC
    diaspora in the UK was comparatively small, the CSP  would  necessarily
    have contact and dealings with opposition groups, namely  the  CRC  and
    APARECO.

38. At paragraph [65], the panel observed that the claimant  had  not  only
    been a core  member  of  the  CSP  from  its  inception,  but  also  Ms
    Atherton's romantic partner.  They had lived  together  between  August
    2007 and September 2014, when they separated.  They  remained  on  good
    terms.  They said that Ms Atherton could not be described  as  a  truly
    independent witness as her motivation derived in  part  from  the  fact
    that she was the claimant's  close  friend  and  ex-partner.   But  one
    result of this established relationship was that the claimant was known
    throughout the DRC community in the UK as the partner of Ms Atherton:

         Ms Atherton, who is an intelligent, committed and visible activist,
         has undoubtedly an established profile within  the  DRC  opposition
         movement active in the UK.

39. The panel found at paragraph [66] that her evidence  corroborated  that
    of  the  claimant  in  respect  of  his  attendance  at  meetings   and
    demonstrations and, more particularly, the fact of  his  profile  as  a
    coordinator  and  spokesman,  in  circumstances  where  he   had   been
    filmmaking  speeches  or  addresses  at  both  demonstrations  and   on
    programmes broadcast on YouTube and via BEN TV.

40. At paragraph [69] onwards, the panel addressed the issues of  law.   At
    paragraph [73], they summarised the issue in the case as being  whether
    he was at risk on return to the DRC arising  from  an  established  and
    visible  position  as  an  anti-government  opposition   activist,   as
    demonstrated not by his experiences in  the  DRC  prior  to  1995,  but
    rather by his sur place activity in the UK since about 2005 or 2006.

41. At paragraph [74],  the  panel  said  the  relevant  guidance  was  now
    outlined in BM and Others (returnees - criminal and  non-criminal)  DRC
    CG [2015] UKUT 00293 (IAC).

42. At paragraph [76], the panel also made reference to MM (EDS  members  -
    risk on return) Democratic Republic of Congo CG [2007] UKAIT  0023  and
    AB and DM (risk categories reviewed - Tutsis added) DRC CG [2005] UKIAT
    00118.

43. The panel's findings of fact were set out at  paragraph  [77]  onwards.
    They found that the claimant was an established and committed  opponent
    and dissident of the existing political regime in the DRC.   He  had  a
    genuine history of activism with the UDPS in the DRC.   This  could  be
    termed low-level activism,  but  it  had  led  nonetheless  to  lengthy
    detention and torture.  They found the  claimant,  in  respect  of  his
    evidence as to his political activities, to be a  comparatively  clear,
    consistent and credible witness.  His evidence was corroborated by that
    of Ms Atherton, and it was supported by documentation such as  internet
    reportage, photographs and DVD records of speeches and interviews given
    on satellite television.

44.  The  claimant  was  in  summary  a  vice-coordinator  of  the  CSP,  a
    comparatively small yet active and visible opposition group in the  UK,
    whose campaigning emphasis was opposing the repatriation or deportation
    of people to the DRC.  The claimant was also an active member of  other
    opposition groups, specifically Combattant and the CRC.  For almost ten
    years he had attended pickets,  demonstrations  and  protest  meetings,
    often in high-profile or visible locations,  particularly  outside  the
    DRC Embassy in London.  He had given - and had  been  filmed  giving  -
    addresses and speeches at some of  those  meetings.   His  profile  was
    enhanced by interviews  televised  on  the  Voice  of  Congo  programme
    broadcast on BEN TV.  He was not a member of APARECO (UK) and had never
    held a position within that organisation.  But it seemed to  the  panel
    that the organisation of the comparatively small DRC opposition  groups
    in the UK was both fluid  and  collegiate.   Many  activists  would  be
    members of more than one such group and would not see non-membership as
    constituting a dilution of their  own  sincerity  or  commitment.   The
    groups combined at pickets and demonstrations and it may  sometimes  be
    unclear to the casual onlooker which group,  or  which  combination  of
    groups, an individual spokesman represented.  They were satisfied  that
    the claimant's activism was sincere and  not  a  cynical  manoeuvre  to
    avoid removal or deportation.  This did not mean that his evidence  was
    free entirely from exaggeration, or that the aggressive content of some
    of his speeches represented necessarily an imminent or credible threat.
     Nonetheless his status within the dissident DRC diaspora in the UK was
    effectively that of a spokesperson, office bearer and leader.

45. Ms Atherton could not be described as an independent witness, given her
    determined activism and her long-standing  romantic  relationship  with
    the claimant.   The  panel  also  found  that  her  evidence  sometimes
    inclined towards inaccurate exaggeration.  But none of this  undermined
    the credibility of her core evidence.  Her assessment  had  undoubtedly
    some foundation in truth in respect of leading or visible activists  in
    the UK.

46. The panel reached the following conclusions at paragraphs [85] to [87],
    which I repeat verbatim below.

         85.  How should our findings of fact be applied in the light of the
             recent country guidance outlined in BM & Others  (returnees  -
             criminal and non-criminal) DRC CG  [2015]  UK  UT00293  (IAC),
             following MM  (UDPS  Members  -  Risk  on  Return)  Democratic
             Republic of Congo CG [2007] UK AIT00023?  There  are,  in  our
             view, three points of broad  note  and  significance.   First,
             insofar as the Appellant's  established,  longstanding,  anti-
             government activism is concerned, he has the visible status of
             a spokesman and organisational leader.   This  status  is  not
             exclusive and it is not the case that he adopts  invariably  a
             leadership role  when  attending  anti-government  marches  or
             rallies.  But he has done so on an identifiably regular basis,
             in circumstances where his interviews and speeches  have  been
             recorded and broadcast, on social media such  as  YouTube  and
             satellite television channels like BEN TV.   Second,  he  has,
             perhaps unusually, an additional, identifiable status  as  the
             partner (recently ex-partner) of Ms Atherton.   It  was  noted
             that Ms Atherton is  a  very  capable  and  visible  political
             activist.  The evidence of the parties, which  we  accept,  is
             that the Appellant will be known and identified with  the  DRC
             diaspora as the partner of Ms Atherton, and vice versa.   They
             are undoubtedly a visible partnership, partly by reference  to
             their own political profiles, but also because Ms Atherton  is
             white and the Appellant is not.  Third,  the  Appellant's  sur
             place activism follows a foundation of  oppositional  activity
             undertaken between 1991 and 1995 in the DRC as a member of the
             UDPS.  We note again that the Tribunal concluded (as early  as
             2004)  that  the  Appellant's  evidence  in  this  regard  was
             credible and correct.  He had been arrested, detained for many
             months and tortured in the DRC, before securing his release by
             bribery.    This   low-level   membership   and   activism   -
             notwithstanding  the  rather  serious  consequences  for   the
             Appellant  himself  -  was  not  (and  still  would  not   be)
             sufficient  to  constitute  a  claim   for   protection.    In
             combination with the other broad factors, however,  it  serves
             to enhance his overall profile.  The Appellant, in summary has
             an anti-government profile that sets him apart from the active
             membership as a whole.  He is not, of course,  the  only  such
             spokesman in the UK, and indeed may have  a  profile  that  is
             towards the lower end of the leadership spectrum,  but  it  is
             clear to us that his profile is comparatively significant  and
             visible.

         86.  We find, in turn,  that  this  profile  places  the  Appellant
             within the category of persons at risk on return to  the  DRC.
             We acknowledge that he is not a member let alone  a  spokesman
             for  APARECO  but  we  do  not  see  the  guidance  in  BM  as
             establishing APARECO as an exclusive  body  whose  leaders  or
             spokesman are at atypical risk when compared to persons with a
             comparative profile in other opposition groups.   The  CSP  is
             without doubt a smaller and more  defined  organisation,  with
             the core purpose that may  be  different  to  some  opposition
             groups, but our findings, as outlined at paragraph  82  above,
             are that the other  groups  operate  often  effectively  as  a
             collegiate whole, so that the state agents of  the  DRC  would
             not discriminate necessarily between spokesman  for  one  over
             the other.  Our  conclusions,  reached  after  a  careful  and
             considered assessment of the facts applicable in this case, is
             that the Appellant does fall within the category of persons at
             risk on return to the DRC, following the guidance in BM (ibid)
             and MM (ibid).  There is really no question of  safe  internal
             re-location for him within the DRC on his deportation to  that
             country.  Insofar as this risk derives  from  the  Appellant's
             actual political opinion, we consider his  entitlement  to  be
             that of a refugee who should be granted  asylum,  rather  than
             the recipient of humanitarian protection or  protection  under
             Article 3 of the ECHR.







                             Notice of Decision

         87.  The Appellant is subject to conducive deportation as a foreign
             criminal under Section 3(5)(a) of the  Immigration  Act  1971.
             He is, however, entitled to asylum.  We allow accordingly  his
             appeal  against  the  Respondent's  refusal  to   revoke   the
             Deportation Order signed and served on 3rd May 2007.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

47. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Kotas development the arguments raised in the  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  He submitted the panel had
    ignored the fundamental discrepancy between the claim that the claimant
    had never stopped being  an  activist,  and  the  complete  absence  of
    political activity prior to 2007.  The panel had not adequately engaged
    with the case advanced in the refusal letter that the claimant was  not
    a genuine activist, but was acting in bad faith. Tthe panel had  become
    fixated by the claimant's ramblings on DVDs etc. and  had  not  engaged
    with the case advanced in the refusal letter that he would not be taken
    seriously by the DRC authorities as a genuine political activist.

48. Secondly, he submitted that the panel had misdirected themselves as the
    implications of the latest country  guidance  authority.   It  was  not
    indicative of their being a general threat to  all  DRC  nationals  who
    express opposition to the government.

49. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Bartram submitted that the panel had made
    findings that were reasonably open to them  on  the  evidence  and  the
    country guidance case law, and that the challenge of the  Secretary  of
    State  amounted  to  no  more  than  expression  of  disagreement  with
    sustainable findings and conclusions.

Discussion

50. Ground 1 is that the  Tribunal  failed  to  give  reasons  or  adequate
    reasons for finding the asylum claim to be credible.  It is argued that
    the decision letter raised various issues regarding the credibility  of
    the asylum claim from paragraphs 30 to 70 in great detail, and yet none
    of this  has  been  considered  by  the  Tribunal  when  assessing  the
    claimant's credibility.  The Tribunal should have placed little  weight
    on the evidence of Ms Atherton given that she was  not  an  independent
    witness, and that her views as an expert witness were not supported  by
    recent country guidance.  If the claimant was  particularly  motivated,
    he would not have refrained from any activism for ten years until faced
    with deportation.  In short, it is argued that the Tribunal has  failed
    to give adequate reasons as to why  the  claimant's  asylum  claim  was
    credible.

51. Ground 1 is undermined by the  fact  that  the  pleader  cites  various
    paragraphs in the  Tribunal's  decision  by  way  of  support  for  the
    proposition that the Tribunal has not taken a particular  consideration
    into account.  In short, the pleaded case is self-contradictory.

52. The Tribunal clearly took into account the fact that  Ms  Atherton  was
    not to be treated as  an  independent  witness,  both  because  of  her
    relationship with the claimant and also because her evidence as to  the
    situation faced by returnees to the DRC was  not  supported  by  recent
    country  guidance.   It  was  open  to  the  Tribunal  to  find   that,
    nonetheless, her evidence as to the nature and extent of the claimant's
    sur place activities in the UK was credible  and  consistent  with  the
    documentary evidence.

53.  The  panel  did  not  specifically  address  the  adverse  credibility
    implications of the claimant becoming  actively  engaged  in  political
    activity from 2006, having previously been completely inactive since he
    had fled the DRC in 1995.  But the fact  that  the  claimant's  renewed
    activism was highly advantageous to him in resisting deportation  as  a
    foreign criminal did not mean that his renewed activism was a  complete
    charade.  It was open to the Tribunal to find that the claimant  was  a
    genuine political activist, for the reasons which they gave.   Firstly,
    he had been an opposition activist in  the  DRC.  Secondly,  there  was
    abundant evidence, much  of  it  in  documentary  form  and  hence  not
    reasonably controvertible, as to the claimant's political  activism  in
    the UK from 2006 to date.

54. There is no merit in the  criticism  that  the  panel  did  not  engage
    adequately with the caseworker's critique of the sur  place  activities
    which the claimant was relying on in 2009.  Firstly, the Tribunal  were
    assessing the matter in 2015, some six years later,  and  the  claimant
    was relying on up-to-date evidence of his sur place activities.  So the
    focus of the Tribunal  was  necessarily  on  the  up-to-date  evidence,
    rather than on the  evidence  that  had  been  made  available  to  the
    Secretary of State in 2009.  Secondly, at paragraphs [52] to  [58]  the
    Tribunal addressed the two main themes of  the  caseworker's  critique,
    which was whether the claimant's activities  would  have  come  to  the
    attention of the DRC authorities  in  the  first  place;  and,  if  so,
    whether he would be thereby taken  seriously  as  an  opponent  of  the
    regime.

55. At paragraph [57] the Tribunal discussed a DVD extract of an  interview
    given at a demonstration outside the DRC Embassy in  London  in  which,
    dressed in a form of army camouflaged uniform,  he  made  a  passionate
    speech anticipating the overthrow of the regime in  the  DRC.   It  was
    evident to the Tribunal from the footage  that  the  claimant  was  not
    alone, but he appeared to be the (or at least  a)  spokesman  for  this
    group of protestors:

         Such interviews may be subject to some critique  -  the  respondent
         cites the almost comic unlikelihood of the [claimant]  leading  any
         form of armed paramilitary insurrection - but it did seem clear  to
         us that the [claimant] was exhibiting the status  of  a  leader  or
         spokesman for an active (although possibly quite small)  opposition
         group.

56. Ground 2 is the panel failed to give reasons or  adequate  reasons  for
    finding that the claimant had a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  on
    return to the DRC.  The panel found that the country guidance  case  of
    BM and Others related to other people  with  comparative  profiles  and
    other political groups other than APARECO.  But the panel was wrong  to
    do so (it is argued), as the country guidance in BM and Others  relates
    to members of APARECO only, and no findings about membership  of  other
    political parties were made.  The earlier country guidance, such as  MM
    (UDPS members - risk on return) DRC CG [2007] UKAIT 0023 did not assist
    the claimant, because even if his political activity  was  genuine,  it
    could not be said to be activity in which he would be perceived to be a
    leader, office bearer or spokesperson.  Given  his  extensive  criminal
    history, the panel failed to factor into their assessment  how  he  was
    able to perform a leadership role, when he had been in constant trouble
    with the law and had spent numerous periods in custody.  There  was  no
    evidence the authorities  in  the  DRC  would  even  be  aware  of  the
    organisations which he was a member, given that these organisations did
    not operate outside the  UK.   Even  if  the  claim  was  genuine,  the
    claimant was nothing more than a low level political activist  and  the
    authorities in the DRC would have no interest in him and  therefore  he
    would not be at risk if returned.

57. In his oral submissions, Mr Kotas principally focused on  the  argument
    that the Tribunal had misapplied BM.  I consider that this  is  by  far
    the strongest argument raised by way of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The panel's  observations  at  the  beginning  of  paragraph  [86]  are
    controversial in that prime facie the message of BM  is  precisely  the
    opposite of what was stated by the panel.  The  implication  of  BM  is
    that APARECO is an exclusive body regarded with particular  concern  by
    the DRC regime, with the consequence that its leaders and spokesmen are
    at a much higher  risk  of  persecution  than  the  generality  of  DRC
    activists in the UK.

58. In his introduction, the President reviewed the DRC's  recent  history,
    and observed that the period 2011 to 2015  had  been  characterised  by
    relative cessation of military and other hostilities, social unrest and
    political instability.  Taking into account both history  and  context,
    he said it might not be inaccurate  to  describe  the  present  overall
    situation of the DRC was one of relative peace and stability.  He  went
    on to observe that there were several reported decisions of  the  Upper
    Tribunal which considered conditions in the DRC  and  the  legality  of
    returning  its  nationals  from  the  United  Kingdom.   All  of  these
    decisions belonged to the period 2004 to 2007.

59. Part of the evidence considered by the Tribunal in BM was  the  OGN  of
    May 2012 which observed that no evidence could be found to support  the
    allegations that  the  DRC  authorities  had  either  capacity  or  the
    capability  in  the  UK  to  monitor  low  level  political  opponents,
    including those participating in anti-government rallies in the UK. The
    same OGN noted the Tribunal's decision in MM that  the  level  of  risk
    those having, or perceived to have, political profile in opposition  to
    the DRC was one which  fluctuated  in  accordance  with  the  political
    situation and low level members and or sympathisers were  not  at  real
    risk upon return (paragraph 35).

60. Another source of  evidence  considered  by  the  Tribunal  in  BM  was
    evidence emanating from the British Embassy in  Kinshasa  in  November-
    December 2014 which was addressed at some length by  the  President  at
    paragraph [43].  The most striking feature of this evidence in his view
    was its vintage.  Having been generated in November/December  2014,  it
    constituted the most recent evidence available for the Tribunal.

61. The Swiss Premier  Colaborateur  is  quoted  as  saying  that  the  DRC
    authorities had an interest in those who pose a political risk, or  who
    are a high level activist.

62. The executive director of a Kinshasa based  human  rights  organisation
    said that the DGM maintained a blacklist of persons who were  subjected
    to further questioning by the  ANR.   The  blacklisted  categories  are
    persons in respect of  whom  there  are  arrest  warrants  in  DRC  and
    "opposition political activists, for example those who  had  plotted  a
    coup against the government or who were  believed  to  be  involved  in
    attacks against Congolese authorities whilst visiting  overseas."   The
    executive director was not aware of any returning failed asylum  seeker
    or foreign national offender  having  serious  problems  upon  arrival.
    While there had been some reports of subsequent arrests  or  harassment
    of returning nationals, none of these persons emanated from the  United
    Kingdom.  The  interviewer  believed  that  the  interest  of  the  DRC
    authorities  was  focused  on  "those  linked  to  radical   opposition
    political parties".

63. The Tribunal received expert evidence from  Dr  Kennes  who  said  that
    APARECO was perceived as a serious threat to the president  as  it  was
    very influential in shaping the political opinion of the  diaspora  and
    public opinion abroad.  The movement was founded in 2005  by  a  former
    security advisor to depose the president.  At DRC ports of entry  there
    were lists of APARECO activists in  Europe.   He  opined  that  APARECO
    members and militants who returned to DRC  as  failed  asylum  seekers:
    "... ranked among the category of people who run the highest  level  of
    risk for detention, arrest and cruel, inhuman and  degrading  treatment
    during interrogations".

64. The ANR and DGM officials interviewed in 2009 described APARECO as "the
    most dangerous opposition movement abroad".

65. The conclusions of the Tribunal are set out at paragraphs [59] onwards.
     At paragraph [64], the President said the Tribunal had  no  hesitation
    accepting one of the central themes of Dr Kennes' evidence, namely that
    the focus of the DRC authorities will be on persons  who  are,  at  the
    relevant moment in time, perceived to be a significant  threat  to  the
    regime.

66. At paragraph [87] the President turned to address the discrete question
    of risk to those who are considered  to  be  opponents  of  the  Kabila
    regime by reason of their sur place activities in the  United  Kingdom.
    He continued:

         In addressing and determining this question, we make the  following
         specific findings:

          i) APARECO is the cohesive, structured organisation which has its
             main base in France and strong bases in other certain European
             countries, including the United Kingdom.  It also operates  in
             Canada and the United States.

         ii) APARECO is implacably  opposed  to  the  regime  of  President
             Kabila which has governed DRC during the past decade.  It  was
             overarching aims  are  the  defeat  of  this  regime  the  re-
             establishment of the State on a different basis ...

        iii) APARECO has no  overt  presence  in  DRC,  where  it  operates
             underground.

         (iv) The external opposition of APARECO to the governing regime  of
             DRC is overt and  visible.   Its  highest  profile  activities
             unfold in public places, accessible  to  all.   Activities  of
             this nature are accompanied by advanced publicity.

         (v)  In common with many comparable regimes throughout  the  world,
             both present  and  past,  the  DRC  government  has  a  strong
             interest in opposition organisations, including APARECO.  Such
             organisations  are  monitored  and  data  is  recorded.   This
             includes information about the identities  of  most  prominent
             members of such organisations, that is to say  their  leaders,
             office holders and spokespersons...

         (vii)     It  is  likely  that  the  leaders,  office  bearers  and
             spokespersons of APARECO (UK) are known to the DRC UK  Embassy
             and the DRC government, in particular ANR and DGM.

67. At paragraph [88], the President went on to give the following  general
    guidance in respect of DRC nationals returning from the United  Kingdom
    to their country of origin:

         (iii)    Persons who have a significant and visible profile  within
             APARECO (UK) are at real risk of persecution for a  Convention
             reason or serious harm or treatment prescribed  by  Article  3
             ECHR by virtue of falling within one of  the  risk  categories
             identified by the Upper Tribunal in MM (UDPS members - risk on
             return) Democratic Republic of Congo  CG  [2007]  UKAIT  0023.
             Those belonging to this category include persons who  are,  or
             are   perceived   to   be,   leaders,   office   bearers   and
             spokespersons.  As a general rule, mere rank and file  members
             are unlikely to fall within this category.  However, each case
             will be fact-sensitive, with particular attention directed  to
             the likely knowledge and perceptions of DRC state agents.

68. The individual facts of AA's case were considered at  paragraphs  [112]
    to [117].  One of the reasons for allowing AA's appeal was that she had
    taken part in an APARECO protest outside the Savoy Hotel London  on  20
    and 21  October  2014.   It  was  a  meticulously  organised  and  well
    publicised event in a public space.  The occurrence of  the  event,  as
    the  photographic  evidence  demonstrated,  included  large,   striking
    posters broadcasting clearly legible slogans which  identified  APARECO
    (UK) as the organiser and President Kabila as  a  main  target  of  the
    protest.  AA was prominent in many of the photographs.  She was one  of
    the most visible protestors  and  clearly  had  a  leading  role.   The
    Tribunal considered it highly likely the event was monitored by  agents
    of the DRC government.  Such monitoring probably resulted in  AA  being
    identified or confirmed  as  a  leading  APARECO  (UK)  activist.   The
    Tribunal was satisfied the DRC government did not make fine and  subtle
    distinctions relating to roles, designations and portfolios within  the
    organisation.  Its main interest was  in  members  and  associates  who
    appeared to and/or were perceived to threaten the DRC  regime  and  who
    occupied positions of prominence.  Substance,  rather  than  form,  was
    what mattered in this context.  There was a printout of the first  page
    of Google search results in respect of AA which linked her  to  a  high
    profile petition accusing President Kabila of crimes  against  humanity
    and   demanding   appropriate   international   action   against   him.
    Furthermore there was evidence of the APARECO  website,  accessible  to
    all, contained photographs and videos of  AA  attending  demonstrations
    and meetings of the organisation's leadership.  So  the  appeal  of  AA
    succeeded, based on the significant and visible profile which she  held
    in APARECO (UK).

69. Although the First-tier Tribunal in this appeal found that the claimant
    had attended demonstrations in which APARECO were also involved,  there
    is no equivalent finding to that made in respect of AA of the  claimant
    appearing to act as a spokesman at a demonstration  which  was  visibly
    organised and promoted by APARECO.  Moreover, in contrast to this case,
    in the case of AA there was material available on  the  internet  which
    would have enabled agents of the DRC government in the UK to check  and
    confirm that she was an APARECO activist.

70. However, the Tribunal in BM did not purport to set  aside  the  earlier
    country guidance of MM, in particular the risk category of those having
    or perceived to have a military or political profile in  opposition  to
    the government.

71. While the Tribunal clearly considered that an association with  APARECO
    gave rise to an enhanced risk of persecution on the grounds  of  actual
    or imputed political opinion, I do not consider that the Tribunal in BM
    is to be taken as excluding from risk political dissidents who  operate
    under the banner of smaller and less threatening groups which  have  no
    presence in the DRC, whether overt or underground.

72. So although a differently constituted Tribunal might well have  reached
    a different conclusion on the same facts, there was no error of law  in
    this panel finding that the claimant had a political profile  that  was
    towards the lower  end  of  the  leadership  spectrum,  but  which  was
    nonetheless sufficiently significant and visible such as to engender  a
    real risk of persecution on  return,  following  the  country  guidance
    given in MM, which is not displaced by the country  guidance  given  in
    BM.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decisions stands.  This appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimant and to the SSHD.  Failure to comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
