
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25348/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 26 October 2017                           |On 8 November 2017             |



                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                               Umbreen Pervaz
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Ahmed, Counsel, instructed by 12 Bridge
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to  the  parties  as  they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The Secretary of State is the Respondent, and Mrs Pervaz the
    Appellant.  This is a challenge by the Respondent against the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Majid  (the  judge),  promulgated  on  10
    February 2017, in which he allowed the Appellant's appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision  of  22  October  2015,  which  had  refused  her
    application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom.







The Judge's Decision

 2. The judge sets out the general background to the  Appellant's  case  at
    paragraphs 11 to 12 of his decision.   The  totality  of  findings  and
    conclusions are contained in a brief passage in paragraph 26.




Grounds of Appeal and Grant of Permission

 3. The grounds of appeal simply assert that the judge has failed  to  make
    any reasoned findings of fact whatsoever.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne on 22 August 2017.




The Hearing before Me

 4. Mr Duffy relied upon the grounds of  appeal.   Mr  Ahmed  attempted  to
    defend the judge's decision by suggesting that he had had all  relevant
    matters in mind when reaching his overall conclusions in paragraph 26.




Decision on Error of Law

 5. The judge's decision is wholly inadequate.  There are  no  findings  of
    fact, no reasons, and no sustainable  conclusions  whatsoever.   I  set
    aside the decision.

Disposal

 6. Both representatives were agreed that if errors of law were found  this
    appeal must be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  I entirely  agree.
    There have been no findings of fact in this case and  everything  needs
    to be looked at again.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
I therefore set it aside.

This  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a   complete
rehearing.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date: 6 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



