
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/25601/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 24 November 2017                      |On 14 December 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                               MUHAMMAD ADNAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Asanovic, of Counsel, instructed by M & K
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge M.A. Khan (hereafter "the  judge"),  promulgated  on  6
      December 2016, dismissing his appeal. The  appeal  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal had been against a refusal by the  Respondent  to  issue  the
      Appellant a residence card as a family  member  of  an  EEA  national.
      Essentially the Respondent concluded that the Appellant's marriage  to
      his EEA  national  spouse  was  a  marriage  of  convenience  contrary
      regulation 2 of The Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
      2016 (hereafter "the EEA Regulations").

2.    At the hearing before the judge both  parties  were  represented.  The
      judge heard evidence from the Appellant and his wife. The latter  gave
      evidence in English.  The  circumstances  in  which  she  did  so  are
      referred to by the judge at [23] as follows:

           "I the heard evidence from  Mrs  Catia  Cristina  Ferreira,  the
           appellant's wife (Mr Mahmood stated that the witness spoke  very
           little English and it may be difficult to communicate with  her,
           no interpreter has been  booked).  The  witness  was  shown  her
           witness statement, which she adopted." (sic)

3.    At [25] the judge then stated thus:

           "I asked the witness that she spoke very little English, it  has
           been a difficult process for her to give evidence, how  did  she
           manage to communicate with her husband? The  witness  said  that
           her husband speaks to her very very slowly.  She  said  he  only
           speaks few words of Portuguese." (sic)

4.    The judge concluded that the evidence of the Appellant's and  that  of
      his wife was not credible and he noted various inconsistencies between
      their evidence. In his omnibus conclusion the judge stated at [34]:

           "However, the appellant's EEA  sponsor,  a  Portuguese  national
           speaks very little English, the appellant  does  not  speak  any
           Portuguese. She said in evidence that the appellant speaks  very
           very slowly with her so she is able to to under  stand  him.  On
           the evidence before me, on the balance of probabilities, I  find
           that the level of the EEA sponsor's knowledge of English  is  so
           low that a meaningful communication and conversation  cannot  be
           held between them. There I find that the fact  that  the  couple
           have a son does not  give  rise  to  a  genuine  and  subsisting
           relationship." (sic)

5.     The  judge  thus  concluded  that  the  marriage  is  a  marriage  of
      convenience. The judge further found that the Appellant's wife was not
      exercising treaty rights because she had ceased  employment  following
      childbirth and did not intend to return to work until her son was  old
      enough to attend nursery. Accordingly, he dismissed the appeal.

6.    The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
      Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Southern  on
      26 September 2017 who considered that it was arguable that  the  judge
      erred in law for the reasons given in the grounds.



Decision on Error of Law

7.    At the hearing, following a discussion with  the  representatives,  it
      was agreed that the judge's decision is unsustainable.

8.    There are difficulties with the judge's approach and consideration  of
      the evidence.  It  is  not  clear  in  what  circumstances  the  judge
      proceeded to receive evidence from the wife without an interpreter and
      neither party was able to provide any assistance on this point at  the
      hearing - the Appellant  has  since  changed  representatives  and  Ms
      Asanovic did not represent him before the First-tier  Tribunal.  While
      this is troubling, it is agreed, rightly, that the fact that the judge
      considered it appropriate to proceed and to hold against the Appellant
      the answers given by his wife in cross-examination sits  uncomfortably
      with the conclusion that she was incapable of meaningful communication
      in  English,  the  language  of  communication  between  them.  In  my
      judgement, the judge's consideration and analysis of the  evidence  is
      tainted by legal error  on  the  grounds  of  perversity.  That  error
      further infects the judge's tangential consideration of  the  evidence
      that the couple have a child which he appeared to accept at [34].

9.    I also agree that  the  judge  erred  by  his  failure  to  apply  the
      principles enunciated in the case of Saint Prix v UK  (Case  C-507/12)
      in  determining  that  the  wife  was  not  exercising  treaty  rights
      following child birth.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing  of  the  appeal
by a judge other than Judge M.A Khan.

An Urdu and Portuguese interpreter will be required for the rehearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                             Date 9 December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

