
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25498/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13 January 2014                              |On 18 February 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      shelton Chakrawarti Arulanantham
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Physsas, instructed by Ravi, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Shelton Chakrawarti Arulanantham was born  on  13  June
    1980 and is a citizen  of  Sri  Lanka.   The  respondent  had  appealed
    against the decision of the respondent dated 4 June 2013 to refuse  his
    application for a residence card as a family member of an EEA  national
    (his mother, Mrs Shanti  Philomena  Anthonypillai,  a  Dutch  national,
    hereafter referred to as the sponsor).   The  Secretary  of  State  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. As an extended family  member,  the  respondent's  application  to  the
    Secretary of State and his subsequent  appeal  fell  to  be  considered
    under Regulation 8 (2) of  The  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006:

    "Extended family member"

    8.-(1) In these Regulations "extended family member" means a person who
    is not a family

    member of an EEA national under regulation 7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and  who
    satisfies the conditions in

    paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

    (2) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the person is
    a relative of an EEA

    national, his spouse or his civil partner and-

    (a) the person is residing in an EEA State in which  the  EEA  national
    also resides and is

    dependent upon the EEA national or is a member of his household;

    (b) the  person  satisfied  the  condition  in  paragraph  (a)  and  is
    accompanying the EEA national

    to the United Kingdom or wishes to join him there; or

    (c) the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a), has joined the
    EEA national in the

    United Kingdom and continues to be dependent upon him or to be a member
    of his

    household.

 3. The facts of the appeal as  found  by  the  judge  and  which  are  not
    challenged by the appellant are that  the  respondent  is  currently  a
    member of the sponsor's household in  the  United  Kingdom  and  was  a
    member of the sponsor's household  when  they  lived  together  in  Sri
    Lanka.  However, as the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Duff)  observed  at
    [7] the sponsor did not leave Sri Lanka until 1994 and it was  sometime
    after that, when the appellant and sponsor no longer lived together  in
    the  same  household,  that  the  sponsor  travelled  to  live  in  the
    Netherlands where she married a Dutch national and subsequently  became
    a citizen of the Netherlands herself.  The sponsor and  appellant  were
    subsequently reunited in the United Kingdom when the  sponsor  came  to
    live here in 2009.  The grounds of appeal asserts [4] that:

         [the Secretary of State] is unclear on what basis the appellant can
         meet the requirements of Regulation 8(2) when his mother was not an
         EEA national when he resided with her in Sri Lanka (see also Moneke
         (EEA - OFMs) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00341 (IAC)).

 4. In his determination  at  [12],  Judge  Duff,  having  found  that  the
    appellant and sponsor were living together in the  United  Kingdom  and
    had lived together in the same household in Sri Lanka  prior  to  1994,
    concluded that,

         Upon the basis that the law  as  stated  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Storey in Dauhoo (EEA Regulations - Regulation 8(2)) [2012] UKUT 79
         (IAC) I am satisfied the appellant has demonstrated that  he  comes
         within the terms of Regulation 8(2)(c) and that he was a member  of
         his mother's household in Sri Lanka (and was  also  dependent  upon
         her in Sri Lanka) and is a member of her household  in  the  United
         Kingdom.

 5. In Dauhoo, the Upper Tribunal summarised the provisions  of  Regulation
    8(2):



    Under the scheme set out in reg 8  (2)  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006, a person can succeed  in  establishing
    that he or she is an "extended family  member"   in  any  one  of  four
    different ways, each of which requires proving  a  relevant  connection
    both prior to arrival in the UK and in the UK:

         prior dependency and present dependency


         prior membership  of  a  household  and  present  membership  of  a
    household


         prior dependency and present membership of a household;

         prior membership of a household and present dependency.






 6. The respondent also relies on the following passage  of  Rahman  [2012]
    EUECJ C-83/11 (5 September 2012):

    32.  So far as concerns the time at which the applicant must  be  in  a
    situation of dependence in order to be considered a 'dependant'  within
    the meaning of Article 3(2) of Directive 2004/38, it  is  to  be  noted
    that, as follows from  recital  6  in  the  directive's  preamble,  the
    objective of that provision is to 'maintain the unity of the family  in
    a broader sense' by facilitating entry and residence  for  persons  who
    are not included in the definition of family member of a Union  citizen
    contained in Article 2(2) of Directive  2004/38  but  who  nevertheless
    maintain close and stable family ties with a Union citizen  on  account
    of specific factual circumstances, such as economic dependence, being a
    member of the household or serious health grounds.




    33      It is clear that such ties may exist without the family  member
    of the Union citizen having resided in the same State as  that  citizen
    or having been a dependant of that citizen shortly  before  or  at  the
    time when the latter settled in the host State. On the other hand,  the
    situation of dependence must exist,  in  the  country  from  which  the
    family member concerned comes, at the time when he applies to join  the
    Union citizen on whom he is dependent.

 7. Ms Physsas, for the respondent,  also  referred  me  to  the  following
    passage in Oboh [2013] EWCA Civ 1525:

    We acknowledge that, if what is  required  is  historic  dependency  or
    membership of household as well as present dependency or membership  of
    household, there will be  situations,  such  as  those  posited  by  Mr
    Jafferji (see [28] -  [29]  above),  in  which  the  inability  of  the
    individuals concerned to  qualify  as  "other  family  members"  within
    Article 3(2)(a) of the Directive may have some deterrent effect on  the
    exercise by the EU citizen of his right of free movement and residence,
    in particular of residence, within the territory of the Member  States.
    However, it is important not to lose sight of  the  nature  of  Article
    3(2) which is intended to lay down a rule of  general  application.  In
    our view it was not intended to make detailed provision for  individual
    cases. Furthermore, it  is  significant  that  it  confers  on  persons
    falling within  the  identified  category  certain  advantages  in  the
    pursuit of rights of entry  or  residence.  Its  application  does  not
    result in the refusal of such rights to individuals  who  fall  outside
    the preferred category. They are able to make their applications in the
    ordinary course. In the exceptional cases postulated by the  appellants
    other legal principles will come into play, among them Article 8 of the
    European Convention on Human Rights. Accordingly, we consider  that  we
    would not be justified in permitting such exceptional cases to set  the
    limits of general application of Article 3(2).[56]

 8. The submission made by the Secretary of State is  that  the  judge  has
    completely overlooked the determination of the Upper Tribunal (Blake  J
    presiding) in Moneke, in particular at [40] [my emphasis]:

    Conclusions:  place of dependency




    40.  We therefore conclude that for the time being, subject  to  future
    clarification by the higher courts,  IJs  should  adopt  the  following
    approach:




                               i.     A person claiming to be  an  OFM  may
    either be a dependant or a member of the household of the EEA national:
    they are alternative ways of qualifying as an OFM.

                             ii.      In  either  case  the  dependency  or
    membership of the household must be on a person who is an EEA  national
    at the material time. Thus dependency or membership of a household that
    preceded the sponsor becoming an EEA national would not be  sufficient.
    It is necessary for the pre entry dependency to be on the EEA  national
    and not a person who subsequently became an EEA  national.  Thus  if  a
    sponsor has been financially supporting OFMs who live abroad  for  many
    years  before he became  an EEA national, but there was no such support
    after the sponsor acquired EEA nationality, there would be no  evidence
    of dependency on an EEA national.

                           iii.   By  contrast  with  Article  2(2)  family
    members, an OFM must show qualification as such not just since  arrival
    in the United Kingdom but before arrival here and  the  application  to
    join the EEA national who is resident here.  The  applicant  must  have
    been a dependent in the country from which they have come, that  is  to
    say their country of origin or  other  country  from  which  they  have
    arrived in the United Kingdom.

                            iv.      Membership  of  a  household  has  the
    meaning set out in KG (Sri Lanka) and Bigia (above); that is to say  it
    imports living for some period of time under the roof  of  a  household
    that can be said to be that of the EEA national for a time when  he  or
    she had such nationality.  That necessarily  requires  that  whilst  in
    possession of such nationality the family member has lived somewhere in
    the world in the same country as the EEA national, but not  necessarily
    in an EEA state.

                             v.      By contrast the dependency on  an  EEA
    national can be dependency as a result of the material remittances sent
    by the EEA national to the family member,  without  the  pair  of  them
    having lived in the same country at that time.

 9. Curiously, in  what  is  otherwise  a  detailed  and  helpful  skeleton
    argument, Ms Physsas refers to Moneke only as follows:

           (xiv)  The SSHD seeks to rely upon Moneke.

           (xv)   However the judge found that the A  and  his  mother  were
                credible.  The A was  previously  found  to  be  a  credible
                witness by a judge  in  respect  of  his  asylum  claim  (as
                recorded in the determination paragraph 7).

10. The Secretary of State has not challenged the credibility  findings  of
    the judge, simply the application of the law to the facts as  he  found
    them.  The point made in Moneke is that, where the qualification as  an
    extended family  member  depends  on  dependency  or  membership  of  a
    household either in the United Kingdom or abroad, the  individual  upon
    whose EU citizenship the entire application is founded must  have  been
    and must continue to be an EEA  national  at  the  time  of  dependency
    and/or membership of a household.  In the present appeal, the appellant
    was never a dependant and/or member of a household of an  EEA  national
    in Sri Lanka because, during the period of time upon  which  he  relies
    when he and his mother lived together in Sri Lanka), she was not an EEA
    national.  I can identify nothing in  the  jurisprudence  cited  by  Ms
    Physsas which in any way contradicts the conclusions  at  [40]  of  the
    Upper Tribunal in Moneke.  It follows that Judge Duff erred in  law  by
    failing  to  apply  the  principles  enunciated  in   Moneke.    As   a
    consequence, I set aside his determination.  In the light of the  facts
    which I have detailed above, I find that the  appellant  is  unable  to
    satisfy Regulation 8(2)  of  the  2006  Regulations  so  I  remake  the
    decision by dismissing the appeal.

DECISION

11. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    19 November 2013 is set aside.  I have remade the decision.  The appeal
    against the respondent's decision dated  4  June  2013  to  refuse  the
    appellant a residence card is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 11 February 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

