
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25388/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke on Trent               |Decision & Reasons  Promulgated      |
|On 2 October 2017                     |On 3 October 2017                    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                         Reagesira Yasmine Thavaraja
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M West, instructed by Shan & Co
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Lawrence  promulgated  6.1.17,  dismissing  her  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 7.7.15, to refuse
    her human rights claim.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Brunnen  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    21.7.17, limited to two grounds only:

      a) That the judge failed to take account of the  length  of  time  the
         appellant and her husband have been absent from  Sri  Lanka,  their
         lack of any family support  there  and  the  vulnerability  of  the
         appellant as a pregnant woman with a young child;

      b) That the assessment at [31] of the decision  as  to  whether  there
         were compelling circumstances to justify granting LTR  outside  the
         Rules is flawed by the judge  dealing  with  it  in  one  sentence,
         stating the conclusion with no reasons.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 2.10.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. For the reasons summarised below, I found no error of law in the making
    of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such that  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside.

 5. I have taken into account  the  submissions  of  both  representatives,
    including the late-service of Mr West's skeleton argument.

 6. In relation to the first ground, I find that the judge did take account
    of all relevant considerations. The long absence of the appellant  from
    Sri Lanka was addressed at [22] of the  decision.  However,  the  judge
    also took into account that she was living  in  a  Tamil  community  in
    India for that time, and in fact returned  to  Sri  Lanka  for  some  6
    months before coming to the UK. At [26] the judge noted that Tamilnaudu
    shared much if not all of the cultural  and  linguistic  and  religious
    norms of Sri Lanka, even if there is a difference in accent. It was not
    irrelevant that there were no obstacles to integration there, as  there
    was no evidence that either the appellant or her  husband  was  of  any
    adverse interest to the Sri Lankan authorities.  Neither  of  them  are
    British citizens. Even though the husband has DLR in the  UK,  that  is
    not a barrier to his joining his  wife  in  Sri  Lanka  and  continuing
    family life there, with their children, neither of whom (the child then
    living and the child now born), are entitled to remain in the UK.

 7. The judge also spent considerable  time  in  the  decision  devoted  to
    assessing the best interests of the  appellant's  child,  applying  the
    case authorities to the circumstances. There was absolutely  no  reason
    to conclude that the child's best interests were to remain in the UK so
    that the mother and appellant should be permitted to  remain.  She  was
    only 3 years of age and the centre of her life would have been with her
    parent(s).

 8. That the appellant was pregnant at the time or that they had no  family
    in Sri Lanka does not seem to  be  particularly  significant,  as  this
    would be a family of both parents and child  returning  to  Sri  Lanka.
    There was  no  reason  to  consider  that  she  would  be  particularly
    vulnerable. It was, of course, up to the husband  whether  he  returned
    with them, but if an Appendix FM assessment had been made (they did not
    qualify), it is clear that the judge would have  concluded  that  there
    were no insurmountable obstacles  to  continuing  family  life  in  Sri
    Lanka.

 9. All of these considerations, including under Appendix FM and  paragraph
    276ADE  in  respect  of  family  life  are  the  Secretary  of  State's
    proportionate response to family  and  private  life  claims,  and  the
    assessments made in the decision  were  effectively  a  proportionality
    assessment. At [31] the judge concluded that there were  no  compelling
    circumstances to justify granting LTR outside the Rules.  Such  reasons
    could have been given for such a conclusion  would  only  have  been  a
    repetition of the assessments and findings already made. If there is no
    basis for going on to consider article 8 outside  the  Rules,  then  it
    suffices for the judge to say so. Frankly, it is difficult on the facts
    of this case to see what those compelling circumstances could be.

10. In the circumstances, I find  that  neither  ground  is  made  out.  No
    material error of law is disclosed by the grounds and thus  the  appeal
    must be dismissed.

Conclusion & Decision

11. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I have considered whether to make a fee award pursuant to  section  12(4)(a)
of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

