
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25679/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Sent to parties on:                  |
|On 5 October 2016                    |On 24 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SHAHIDA SAEED
                           (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Chaudhry (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (hereinafter "the Secretary of State") and the respondent is
    Miss Shahida Saeed, a national of Pakistan who was born on  2  February
    1971 (hereinafter "the claimant"). This is  the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with the permission of a Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal, from a decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Atkinson hereinafter "the Judge") allowing the claimant's appeal
    against the Secretary of State's  original  decision  of  1  July  2015
    refusing to grant leave to remain on Human Rights grounds.

Immigration history and background circumstances

 2. The claimant entered the UK on  21  June  2011  as  a  tier  4  student
    migrant. Her initial grant of leave took her up to 31 December 2012 but
    on 14 September 2012, and therefore prior to the expiry of that initial
    leave, she applied for further leave as a tier 4  student  migrant  and
    such was granted. On 23 January 2014,  again  within  the  currency  of
    previously granted leave, she applied for further  leave,  again  as  a
    tier 4 student migrant. On 10 February 2014 she  was  notified  by  the
    Secretary of State that an issue had arisen concerning a TOEIC  English
    language test she had undertaken at an ETS testing centre  on  17  July
    2012 and she was requested to take an alternative test. However,  on  8
    May 2014, without waiting for that test to be taken, the  Secretary  of
    State decided to refuse her application for further leave. She did,  it
    appears, subsequently take the further test in August 2014 and obtained
    satisfactory scores. Nevertheless, the Secretary of State, on 29 August
    2014, served upon her a standard IS151a Notice of Liability to Removal.
    It was said that she was liable to administrative removal under section
    10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 because she had used a  proxy
    test taker, an allegation she has always denied.

 3. On 9 September 2014 the claimant made an application for permission  to
    remain on Human Rights grounds based upon  her  relationship  with  one
    Mohammad Amir who is British. She  said  that  their  relationship  had
    commenced shortly after she had entered the UK and that, on  6  January
    2012, the two had entered into an Islamic marriage. She indicated  that
    he had  formally  divorced  his  previous  wife  in  May  2014  (though
    presumably the relationship had ended before that) and that he has  his
    own business.

 4. As noted above, the Secretary of State refused the  application  on  24
    June 2015. A detailed letter explaining the  reasons  for  refusal  was
    issued. In that letter it was said that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    concluded that the claimant did not meet the  suitability  requirements
    as contained in appendix FM to the Immigration Rules. That was because,
    it was said, she is a person who has sought leave to remain in  the  UK
    by deception.  The Secretary of State did consider, however,  that  she
    met the eligibility requirements but  pointed  out  that  in  order  to
    qualify for limited leave as a partner  she  would  now  have  to  meet
    additional requirements contained within appendix  EX.1.  The  relevant
    part read as follows;

         "EX.1. This paragraph applies if -

         (a) ....

         (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
         partner who is in the United Kingdom  and  is  a  British  citizen,
         settled in the United Kingdom or in the United Kingdom with refugee
         leave or humanitarian  protection,  and  there  are  insurmountable
         obstacles to family life with that partner continuing  outside  the
         United Kingdom."

 5. Accordingly, the Secretary of State refused the application  under  the
    rules relating to partners. The  application  was  also  refused  under
    rules relating to private life to be found  under  paragraph  276  ADE.
    That was on the basis that the claimant had not been in the  UK  for  a
    continuous period of at least twenty years and was not a person who had
    lived in the UK for less  than  that  time  but  who  would  face  very
    significant obstacles to integration  into the country of return.

 6. The Secretary of State then considered whether there  were  exceptional
    circumstances such as to justify a grant of leave in respect of  either
    private or family life under article 8 of the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights (ECHR) outside the rules but  concluded  that  there  were
    not.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The claimant's appeal was considered at  an  oral  hearing  which  took
    place on 29 March 2016. In summary, the claimant told  the  Judge  that
    she had been born in Lahore and that her parents had been killed  in  a
    car crash in or about 1981 when she would have been only ten years old.
    She and her brother had then been brought up by family friends but  she
    had been treated poorly by those persons with the exception of the male
    head of the household who had passed away in November  2010.   Her  own
    brother had been killed in a bombing incident  which  had  occurred  in
    1992. She had come to the UK for the purposes of  study  and  not  used
    deception as alleged. Her relationship with Mohammad Amir had commenced
    shortly after her arrival and they were now co-habiting  in  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship. The Judge  found  the  claimant  to  be  a
    credible witness. He accepted the genuine nature  of  the  relationship
    and he accepted that she had not engaged in deception with  respect  to
    the English language test. With respect to those  matters  and  to  the
    possible applicability of what might be  described  as  the  article  8
    related Immigration Rules the Judge said this;

         "17. I find that the  evidence  relied  on  by  the  respondent  is
         insufficient to  show  that  on  the  balance  of  probability  the
         appellant engaged in deception in obtaining  and  English  language
         certificate from ETS. That is because the  evidence  before  me  on
         which the respondent relies is almost wholly generic in nature with
         only limited consideration given to the individual circumstances of
         this appellant. I accept that the respondent's evidence shows  that
         there has been widespread abuse at certain ETS centres but that  in
         itself is not a sufficient basis on which to make  a  finding  that
         this particular appellant, in relying on test  certificates  issued
         by ETS, engaged in deception in obtaining them.

         18.  I find that  the  appellant  has  provided  a  consistent  and
         plausible account of the steps she has taken  to  properly  undergo
         testing of her competence in English. I find that her claimed level
         of English is consistent with the standard of English presented  by
         the appellant in giving oral evidence before me without the use  of
         an interpreter.

         19.  I further find that the appellant's  factual  account  of  her
         circumstances  is  consistent  and  detailed.  In  looking  at  the
         evidence as a whole, I  find  that  the  appellant  is  a  credible
         witness. I therefore find the appellant's narrative of events to be
         reliable; however I do not accept her opinion and  judgment  as  to
         the significance of  consequences  of  those  facts,  as  explained
         further below.

         20.  Accordingly, I make findings of primary facts as  set  out  in
         the above paragraphs which summarise the evidence adduced on behalf
         of the appellant and make further findings  of  fact  as  necessary
         below.

         21.  I note here for convenience that the  appellant's  application
         which forms the basis for the present appeal was framed in terms of
         a Human Rights claim rather than as an application under the  rules
         based on her marriage.

         22.  Accordingly, it is not open to me to make a finding on whether
         or not the appellant meets the requirements under the  usual  rules
         for leave to remain as a spouse.

         23.  So far as the application is based on family and private  life
         claims under the  rules,  I  find  that  the  appellant  meets  the
         suitability requirements  under  appendix  FM;  and  in  particular
         reject, for the reasons given above, the respondent's view that the
         appellant is not suitable because of deception relating to the  ETS
         test which is set to fall within S-LTR.2.2

         24.  Further, it is not  disputed  that  the  appellant  meets  the
         eligibility requirements on the R-OTRP1.1;  however  in  order  for
         leave to be granted under this part of  the  rules  paragraph  EX.1
         requires that where the appellant is in a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a partner who is a British citizen settled in the
         United Kingdom, as I find is the case  in  this  appeal,  then  the
         appellant needs to show that there are insurmountable obstacles  to
         family life continuing with her partner outside the United Kingdom.

         25.  In the present case I find that there are  not  insurmountable
         obstacles to the appellant and her partner continuing their  family
         life in Pakistan and reject Mr Ahmed's submissions to the contrary.
         That is because the appellant is a national  of  Pakistan  who  has
         spent most of her life there. She is highly educated, has worked in
         Pakistan in the past, and is likely to be able to secure  a  senior
         position in employment in Pakistan in the light of  her  additional
         qualifications  gained  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  appellant's
         partner has a business in the United Kingdom which  shows  that  he
         has an entrepreneurial flair which would stand him in good stead in
         Pakistan and his business in the United Kingdom is  not  a  tie  to
         which he is necessarily bound. In these circumstances the appellant
         and her husband would not face  very  significant  difficulties  in
         establishing  themselves  as  a  family  in  Pakistan.  Whilst  the
         appellant does not feel able to call on  the  support  of  extended
         family members and wishes to put  much  of  her  childhood  history
         behind her, I find that to be a matter of preference, rather than a
         very serious difficulty.

         26.  Accordingly, I dismiss the appeal so  far  as  it  relates  to
         leave to remain as a partner.

         27.  I turn next to Human Rights considerations outside the rules."

 8. Indeed, that is where the Judge did turn. In so doing he concluded that
    there were compelling circumstances, with respect to  private  life  as
    opposed to family life matters, such as to  enable  him  to  allow  the
    appeal under article 8 outside the  rules.  He  explained  his  careful
    reasoning in this way;

         "28.  In  considering  the  appellant's   circumstances   and   the
         application of the human rights convention, I am aware of a  number
         of cases that  give  guidance  as  to  the  correct  approach  when
         considering the relationship  between  the  immigration  rules  and
         article 8 of the human rights convention.

         29.  In particular the court of appeal in reviewing the  developing
         case law set out in SSHD v SS (Congo) & Ors  [2015]  EWCA  CIV  387
         confirmed the nature of the two state process involved.  In  brief,
         where there is a gap between the 'new' rules and  the  requirements
         of article 8, the secretary of state  has  a  discretion  to  grant
         leave outside the rules. Where there is a gap there would  need  to
         be compelling reasons outweighing the public interest  and  showing
         that the  interference  was  not  proportionate  (e.g.  in  foreign
         criminal cases or precarious cases such as Nagre there  would  need
         to very compelling reasons  [sic];  in  other  cases,  particularly
         leave to enter cases, there would need to be  compelling  reasons).
         If there is a reasonably arguable case under article  8  which  has
         not been sufficiently dealt with under the rules, the interests  of
         the appellant should be balanced against the  public  interest,  as
         expressed under the rules.

         30.  Accordingly, following that approach and taking  into  account
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended by  the
         introduction of a new Part 5A which contains sections  117A,  117B,
         117C and 117D, so  far  as  they  were  relevant,  I  make  further
         findings as follows.

         31.  I find that in the present case, there are compelling  reasons
         in this case that show that a material issue has not  been  covered
         under the immigration rules. In this case the appellant was wrongly
         refused leave to remain as a result of the  respondent  relying  on
         unreliable evidence in coming to the view that  the  appellant  had
         engaged in deception in undertaking an ETS test. This is  a  matter
         that has not been considered under the rules so far as  it  relates
         to the issue of private life.

         32.  For completeness, I note here that  there  are  no  compelling
         reasons to consider the appellant's claim  based  on  family  life,
         because these matters have  been  adequately  addressed  under  the
         immigration rules as found above.

         33.  I therefore turn to  a  more  detailed  consideration  of  the
         article 8, and in particular private life outside the rules as  set
         out below.

         34.  I have considered the  appellant's  circumstances  within  the
         structured approach in line with leading cases of Huang and  Razgar
         together with the amendments to the 2002 act.

         35.  Under article 8 the following separate questions  need  to  be
         considered:

             (i)  Is there an interference with the right  to  respect  for
             private life (which includes the right to physical  and  moral
             integrity) and family life?

             (ii) If so will the interference  have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of article 8

             (iii)    If so, is that interference in  accordance  with  the
             law?

             (iv) If so, is such interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
             society in the interests of national security,  public  safety
             or the economic well being of the country, for the  prevention
             of disorder and crime, for the protection of health or morals,
             or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

             (v)   If  so,  is  the  interference  proportionate   to   the
             legitimate public end sought to be achieved?

         36.  In considering whether or not the appellant has a private life
         under article 8, I note  the  appellant  had  been  in  the  United
         Kingdom lawfully whilst undertaking appropriate courses of study. I
         find that at the time when the respondent purported to curtail  the
         appellant's leave, the  appellant  was  part  way  through  an  MBA
         course, with 8 months of study remaining and having spent �4,500 in
         course fees. I find that the  appellant's  studies  and  associated
         activity constitutes a private life in the United Kingdom and  that
         removal of the appellant would amount to an interference  with  the
         right to respect private life. I find that  such  interference  may
         have consequences of such gravity  as  potentially  to  engage  the
         operation of article  8.  I  find  that  such  interference  is  in
         accordance  with  the  law,  using  such  term  as  being  properly
         understood within the context of the human rights convention.

         37.  In considering if such an  interference  is  necessary,  in  a
         democratic society, in the interests  of  maintaining  a  fair  and
         effective immigration policy, I take account of the fact  that  the
         amended immigration rules together with the amendments to the  2002
         act show  that  considerable  weight  is  to  be  attached  to  the
         respondent's view that removal  is  in  the  public  interest  when
         undertaking the balancing exercise inherent in considering  article
         8.

         38.  Turning next to the appellant's circumstances  in  the  United
         Kingdom, I take account of the  fact  that  it  is  in  the  public
         interest, and in particular in the interests of the economic  well-
         being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who  seek  to  enter  or
         remain in the United Kingdom are able  to  speak  English.  In  the
         present case I find that the appellant has competency in English to
         the extent her language skills do not amount to  an  impediment  to
         her integration in the United Kingdom, although this is a matter of
         limited weight in any event given the view  I  have  taken  of  the
         limitations of her right to private life. I also find that  if  the
         appellant were to remain in the United Kingdom  she  would  not  be
         reliant on public  funds,  given  the  financial  standing  of  her
         husband and the evidence showing  the  substantial  outlay  already
         made in pursuing her education in the United Kingdom.

         39.  I attach significant weight to the  fact  that  the  appellant
         arrived in United Kingdom in 2011 to pursue her studies and at  all
         times has diligently taken steps to ensure that she  complied  with
         immigration rules. I also attach to significant weight to the  fact
         [sic] that the appellant has suffered an injustice at the hands  of
         the respondent who failed to properly weigh  the  evidence  in  the
         appellant's case and  wrongly  concluded  that  the  appellant  had
         engaged in deception in obtaining her  language  certificates  from
         ETS.

         40.  Turning next to circumstances in Pakistan, I  find,  as  noted
         above, that there are  no  significant  obstacles  to  her  return.
         However, she would  not  have  the  benefit  of  obtaining  further
         qualifications  in  the  United  Kingdom.  I  find  that  to  be  a
         significant matter because qualifications from the  United  Kingdom
         attract considerable status and kudos. This is a  very  significant
         advantage over any other  qualification  that  she  may  obtain  in
         Pakistan.

         41.  In the circumstances of the present case, I find that  refusal
         of the appellant's application,  to  the  extent  that  it  engages
         private life as noted above  would  amount  to  a  disproportionate
         interference. There  are  compelling  reasons  showing  that  leave
         should be granted outside the rules: the appellant has at all times
         sought conscientiously to comply with the  immigration  rules:  the
         appellant has at all times sought conscientiously  to  comply  with
         the immigration rules; she has suffered unfairness at the  a  hands
         [sic] of the respondent; and if she  were  returned  the  appellant
         would be deprived of benefit that flows from having a post graduate
         qualification obtained in the United Kingdom and all the subsequent
         advantages that would flow from that  in  the  advancement  of  her
         career.

         42.  I therefore allow the appeal  on  the  grounds  of  a  claimed
         breach of article 8 of the human rights convention."

 9. So, in short, the Judge thought that there was an important  matter  on
    the facts of this appeal which had not been  covered  in  the  relevant
    immigration rules relating to private life and  that,  given  what  had
    been found to have been a mistaken basis for refusal  of  the  previous
    application for leave on the basis of study  and  given  the  value  of
    qualifications obtained in the UK, not only was article 8  engaged  but
    it would be disproportionate if the claimant were required to  have  to
    return to Pakistan.

The permission stage

10. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. In short, it was  contended  that  the  Judge  had  erred  in
    failing to adequately explain his rejection of  the  Home  Office  case
    regarding the ETS test results; in failing to adequately  explain  why,
    in light of relevant case law, article 8 on the basis of  private  life
    was engaged and in failing to explain, in light of that case law and in
    light of the content of section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002, why any interference with the  claimant's  private
    life which had been brought about by  the  decision  under  appeal  was
    disproportionate.

11. The Judge granting permission to appeal said this;

         "The grounds correctly identify an error of  law  in  the  decision
         which is that the FtTJ has  given  wholly  inadequate  reasons  for
         finding that A8 was engaged and had  failed  to  follow  and  apply
         tribunal case law regarding A8 including Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640,
         Nagre [2013] EWCA Civ 720, Nasim [2014] UKUT 0025 and has taken  in
         to account and apply section 117B.

         The grounds may be argued."

12. Pausing there, it is clear that the granting Judge intended to say that
    the grounds correctly identified an arguable error of law  rather  than
    an error of law. She was, of course, only considering arguability.

The hearing before me

13. Permission having been granted, the appeal was  listed  for  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal (before me) so that  consideration  could  be
    given to the question of whether the Judge had erred in law and, if so,
    what should flow from that. Directions made provision for any  remaking
    of the decision which might be necessary to be addressed  at  the  same
    hearing.

14. I heard submissions from the parties, first of all, as  to  whether  or
    not there was an error of law in  the  determination.  I  decided  that
    there was and I shall set out  my  reasoning  in  that  regard,  below.
    Matters  then  proceeded  to  evidence  and  submissions  relevant   to
    remaking. I heard some relatively brief oral evidence from the claimant
    and  from  Mohammad  Amir  and  then  further  submissions   from   the
    representatives, this time directed towards how the decision  ought  to
    be re-made. I have re-made the decision and my reasoning as to that, is
    also set out below.

Setting aside

15. It did not seem to me that the Judge could be faulted with  respect  to
    the part of his reasoning which  was  directed  at  the  allegation  of
    deception concerning the English language test. Much  of  the  evidence
    relied upon by the Secretary of State had  been  contained  in  witness
    statements from one Peter Millington and from Rebecca Collins  and  the
    Judge was right in pointing out, in effect, that the content  of  those
    statements was generic. Whilst it is argued in the grounds  that  there
    had been assessments by voice analysts it was, contrary to an assertion
    in the grounds, open to the Judge to take into account his view of  the
    claimant's ability to speak English insofar as it informed  as  to  the
    likelihood of her having to involve herself in deception.  Further,  he
    had found her evidence to be credible and persuasive in  general  terms
    and the assessment of her veracity was a matter for him. Mr Diwnycz did
    not seek to pursue that particular matter with any force before me  and
    I conclude that that ground is not made out.

16. As to the others, the Judge had clearly taken the view that having only
    been able to identify a consideration as to private life which had  not
    been adequately taken into account in the article 8 related immigration
    rules, that meant he was then limited to an assessment of private  life
    when considering matters of engagement and  of  proportionality.  I  am
    satisfied that in his assessment as to private life  he  did  not  take
    account of principles which are set out in relevant case law.   It  is,
    of course, not an error for a Judge to fail to refer to applicable case
    law or, indeed statute law, so long as it can  be  discerned  from  the
    determination that the proper approach has been applied. However, here,
    it does not seem to me that that is the case. In Nasim, cited above,  a
    case in which the Upper Tribunal was concerned with private life claims
    made by a number of individuals who were relying on their  presence  as
    students, this passage may be found;

         "20. We therefore agree with Mr  Jarvis  that  [57]  of  Patel  and
         Others is a significant exhortation from the Supreme Court  to  re-
         focus attention of the nature and purpose  of  Article  8  and,  in
         particular, to recognise its limited utility to an individual where
         one has moved along the continuum from that Article's core area  of
         operation towards what might be described as  its  fuzzy  penumbra.
         The limitation arises however, both from what will  at  that  point
         normally be the tangential effect on the individual of the proposed
         interference and from the fact that, unless  there  are  particular
         reasons to reduce the  public  interest  of  enforcing  immigration
         controls, that interest will consequently prevail in  striking  the
         proportionality balance (even assuming that stage is reached).

         21.  In conclusion on this first general matter we  find  that  the
         nature of the right asserted by each of the  appellants,  based  on
         their desire as former students, to undertake  a  period  of  post-
         study work in the United Kingdom lies at the outer reaches of cases
         regarding an affirmative answer to the second of the five  "Razgar"
         questions and that, even if such an affirmative answer needs to  be
         given, the issue of proportionality is to be resolved decisively in
         favour of the respondent, by reference  to  her  functions  as  the
         guardian of the system of immigration controls, entrusted to her by
         parliament."

17. Pausing there, the second of the five   "Razgar" questions  is  one  of
    whether any interference to the right to respect  for  family  and/  or
    private life is of such gravity as to potentially engage the  operation
    of article 8.

18. The Judge did not appear to have in mind the  reasoning  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal as set out in Nasim. He had decided article 8 was engaged,  in
    effect, because  of  the  wrongful  decision  regarding  deception  and
    because the claimant had studied in the UK and  had  paid  course  fees
    (see paragraph 36 of the determination). Ms Chaudhry sought to persuade
    me that that was sufficient reasoning and that the  Judge's  conclusion
    as to the engagement of article 8 had been open to him. She relied,  in
    that context, upon an earlier decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  CDS
    (PBS) "available" (Article 8) Brazil [2010] UKUT 305 (IAC).  I  suspect
    that she had in  mind  this  paragraph  from  the  head  note  of  that
    judgment;

         "Article 8 does not  give  an  immigration  Judge  a  free-standing
         liberty to depart from the immigration rules, and  it  is  unlikely
         that a person will be able to show an article 8 right by coming  to
         the UK for temporary purposes. But a  person  who  is  admitted  to
         follow a course that has not yet ended may build up a private  life
         that deserves respect, and the public interest  in  removal  before
         the end of  the  course  may  be  reduced  where  there  are  ample
         financial resources available."

19. The factual background here is not quite the same as it appeared to  be
    in CDS Brazil but I can see why Ms Chaudhry seeks to rely upon  it  for
    the general proposition that studying in the UK  might  assist  in  the
    establishment or the development of a private life  as  the  phrase  is
    used within the meaning  of  article  8.  However,  the  future  likely
    relevance of CDS was squarely addressed in Nasim. It was stressed  that
    the remarks regarding article 8 in CDS were obiter and whilst the Upper
    Tribunal in Nasim was not persuaded that CDS should be  disregarded  in
    future it stressed it was clear that there  was  no  justification  for
    extending the obiter findings in CDS any further. That does  not  sound
    to me like to be  a  ringing  endorsement  of  what  was  said  in  CDS
    regarding students and the establishment of private life. I do not  say
    it was not open  to  the  Judge  to  conclude  that  the  claimant  had
    established private life on the facts. What I do say, however, is that,
    if the Judge was to make that finding based solely on private life,  it
    was incumbent upon him to give a greater explanation than he did as  to
    how, bearing in mind that the facts of this case appeared to locate the
    private life towards the "fuzzy penumbra" referred to above, he had  so
    concluded. That is a material error of law because  if  the  Judge  had
    reached a different view as to the engagement of article 8 he could not
    even have gone on to assess the question of  proportionality.  So,  the
    error might have impacted upon the ultimate outcome of the appeal.

20. I am also satisfied that the Judge made the same  error  regarding  the
    approach to be taken  as  explained  in  Nasim,  when  considering  the
    question of proportionality. I am additionally satisfied that he  erred
    in failing to consider and address  relevant  provisions  contained  in
    section 117B. I fully appreciate that  the  Judge  did  refer  to  that
    section  more  than  once  in  his  determination.  I  also  accept  Ms
    Chaudhry's submission to the effect that what is said at paragraphs  37
    and 38 of the determination does show he had certain  aspects  of  117B
    specifically in mind being those  relating  to  the  ability  to  speak
    English and to financial independence. However, section  117B(5)  says,
    specifically and in clear terms, that little weight should be given  to
    a private life established to a person at  a  time  when  the  person's
    immigration status is precarious.  The  whole  basis  for  the  Judge's
    decision was related to private life. The Judge did not appear  to  ask
    himself whether that private life had been established by the  claimant
    at a time when her immigration status was precarious.  The  meaning  of
    that term was analysed in AM (S 117B) Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  0260  (IAC)
    which was referred to by the Secretary  of  State  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The Upper Tribunal  had  decided  in  AM
    that a person's immigration status is "precarious" if  their  continued
    presence in the UK will be dependent upon  their  obtaining  a  further
    grant of leave. Ms Chaudhry did not argue before me that what was  said
    about all of this in AM has been overtaken by any subsequent  case  law
    developments. I do think the Judge had taken the view that the  private
    life had been established at a time when  the  claimant  had  leave  as
    opposed to the period  after  which  she  ceased  to  have  leave  but,
    nevertheless,  that  does  mean  it  was  not  established   when   her
    immigration  status  was  precarious.  Accordingly,   the   Judge   was
    statutorily obligated to attach little weight to it. There  is  nothing
    in the determination to suggest that he appreciated that he  was  under
    such an obligation. Accordingly, then, this  is  a  further  basis  for
    concluding that the decision involved an error of law.

21. In the circumstances the Judge's determination has to be set aside.

My remaking of the decision

22. I was able to remake the decision, having received further evidence and
    submissions, and I would like to place on record my  gratitude  to  the
    representatives for their assistance in that regard.  It  seems  to  me
    there is often a marked reluctance to go on  to  re-make  at  the  same
    hearing where an error of law has been found. Sometimes that reluctance
    is justified but, perhaps, sometimes it may not be.

23. I did indicate, when I informed the parties  that  I  was  setting  the
    decision aside, that I would retain the positive credibility  findings.
    I also indicated that it did not seem to me that  the  Judge  had  been
    right to strictly limit himself to  a  consideration  of  private  life
    issues only simply because he had only identified what he regarded as a
    private life issue which had not been adequately catered for under  the
    rules. Mr Diwnycz accepted that that was the position (see below).

24. The bulk of the oral evidence I heard was concerned with the difficulty
    Mohammad Amir would have in re-locating with the claimant to  Pakistan.
    Essentially, he said he is settled in the  United  Kingdom,  he  has  a
    business to run which he does not wish to give up, he is locked into  a
    fifteen-year lease which he cannot simply surrender without  fulfilling
    his financial obligations in respect of it and  that  he  has  made  an
    attempt to sell his business but not successfully.  The  claimant  also
    gave evidence to the effect that she is no longer in touch with  anyone
    in Pakistan and would face problems as a single woman alone if she  had
    to return to that country. I did not find that evidence  of  particular
    assistance.

25. In submissions Mr Diwnycz said that he accepted this was a  case  where
    it was appropriate to consider article 8  outside  of  the  immigration
    rules and that  he  accepted,  when  taking  family  and  private  life
    together as he agreed was the  proper  approach,  that  article  8  was
    engaged.  He did not, though, concede anything else. Ms  Chaudhry  said
    that she accepted that  the  requirements  of  the  article  8  related
    immigration rules could not be met.  However,  there  were  substantial
    difficulties which meant it would be unreasonable to expect the  couple
    to re-locate to Pakistan together.  If  the  claimant  were  to  go  to
    Pakistan on her own and apply for entry clearance she would succeed  so
    requiring her to do so would amount to no more than a "paper exercise".
    She will not be a burden on public funds because she  is  supported  by
    Mohammad Amir. Accordingly, there was no public  interest  in  removing
    her. The relationship had been formed when she had valid leave. She had
    been placed in a difficult position through  the  Home  Office's  wrong
    decision regarding alleged deception. So, she had been  the  victim  of
    unfairness which was relevant to the proportionality consideration.

26. Though Ms Chaudhry did not seek to persuade me that the requirements of
    the rules had been met I do feel it is appropriate in this case for  me
    to say something about the content of those rules and the way in  which
    the claimant might or might not be able to fit herself within them.  Of
    course, a consideration of article 8 outside the rules will be informed
    by the content of those rules and it  is  necessary  to  look  at  such
    arguments through the prism of the rules.

27. The  first  thing  to  say,  here,  is  that  I  find  the  suitability
    requirements contained under appendix FM are met as did  the  Judge.  I
    have preserved his positive credibility findings and  that  takes  away
    the respondent's argument that she employed deception  in  relation  to
    the ETS test.  In looking at the eligibility requirements which  relate
    to entry clearance as  a  partner,  it  is  clear  from  the  preserved
    findings and from what is accepted that the appellant's  partner  is  a
    British citizen in the UK, that the various requirements regarding  the
    ages of the partners are met, that they are not in a prohibited  degree
    of relationship, that they have met and  that  the  relationship  is  a
    genuine and subsisting one. It is also clear that they intend  to  live
    together permanently in the UK.  As to  financial  mattes  it  was  not
    disputed before me that not only has the appellant not been a burden on
    public funds but that her partner will be able to continue to  maintain
    her.  As to the English language requirements, she gave her evidence in
    English and has, as noted above, been able to demonstrate competence in
    English bearing in mind the allegation regarding  deception  concerning
    the ETS test has been rejected and her passing of an alternative  test.



28. In looking at the respondent's reasoning as contained  in  the  reasons
    for refusal letter of 30 June 2015, it would appear that in  fact  with
    respect  to  the  consideration  of  the  application  based  upon  the
    appellant's relationship, it failed simply because of the  respondent's
    view that the suitability requirements had not been met as a result  of
    the deception allegation which the respondent has not subsequently been
    able to make out. That appears to be the only reason why the respondent
    then went on to consider the exceptions under EX.1. If  the  respondent
    had not done that (in other words if the respondent had been  satisfied
    as to suitability) it does not appear that there would  have  been  any
    consideration under EX.1. at all. So, had it not been for the deception
    allegation  which  is  now  regarded  as  false  it  appears  that  the
    respondent would have, in fact, allowed the application under the rules
    or at least may have done.

29. Mr Diwnycz, whilst not conceding the appeal, did not seek  to  actively
    persuade me that it should not succeed and made the concessions already
    mentioned.

30. It is not necessary, in light of the above, to reason out  why  I  have
    decided to carry out an article 8 assessment outside the rules nor  why
    I have decided that article 8 is engaged. It is accepted before me that
    it is appropriate to do so and that the article is  engaged.   I  would
    though, in line with established "Razgar" principles, accept  that  any
    interference with article 8 rights is lawful and is in pursuance  of  a
    legitimate aim which  is  that  of  immigration  control.  It  is  then
    necessary to consider proportionality.

31. In doing that I  start  by  reminding  myself  that  the  interests  of
    immigration control must carry significant weight and that I must  bear
    in mind, as a key aspect of the proportionality exercise, what is  said
    in section 117B referred to above.

32. In looking at those matters, as I say, I acknowledge the importance  of
    the public interest. The appellant is able to  speak  English  and  has
    been supported by her partner. Those are not matters  which  positively
    assist her but they do mean that her arguments under article 8 are  not
    damaged by her having been a burden on taxpayers, a likelihood that she
    will be so in future or an inability to speak English.  I do, as  I  am
    statutorily obliged to do, give little weight to her private life based
    upon her simple presence and her previous studying in  the  UK  because
    all of that has been established whilst her situation  in  the  UK  was
    precarious. However, Mr Diwnycz has accepted that once  this  stage  of
    analysis as to article 8 is reached  it  is  permissible  to   consider
    family life as well as private life and I accept that the  relationship
    is a  strong,  genuine  and  subsisting  one  and,  indeed,  there  are
    preserved findings to  that  effect.  I  also  take  into  account  the
    particular problems the appellant would  have  in  that  she  would  be
    returning to Pakistan as a single  woman  without  family  support.  In
    preserved findings the Judge accepted that she  had  given  a  credible
    account regarding such matters. I also take account of  the  fact  that
    she had suffered unfairness in that, as it has now transpired, she  has
    wrongly been accused of deception  and  that  it  was  that  accusation
    which, following the reasoning  in  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter,
    appears to have led at least in part  to  the  adverse  decision  being
    made.

33. In view of the above, in view of Mr Diwnycz's  various  concessions  as
    referred to above, in view of his not positively seeking to persuade me
    to reject the appellant's appeal and in view of all my findings and the
    preserved findings of the Judge, I conclude that  this  is  an  unusual
    case where, when matters are considered together, there are  compelling
    circumstances such that the appeal ought  properly  to  be  allowed  on
    article 8  grounds  outside  the  rules.  In  remaking  this  decision,
    therefore,  having  set  the  Judge's  decision  aside,  I  allow   the
    claimant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 1 July 2015.



Decision

34. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error of law.

    I set aside the decision.

35. I remake the decision in the appeal by allowing the  claimant's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision of 1 July 2015 on  article  8
    grounds.

Anonymity

I make no anonymity order.


     Signed

     M R Hemingway
     Judge of the Upper Tribunal

     Dated



To the Secretary of State
Fee award

I make no fee award


     Signed

     M R Hemingway
     Judge of the Upper Tribunal

     Dated
