
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/25928/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |        Decision & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 18 December 2017                    |        On 25 January 2018           |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                               Wajeeha Fakhri
                          (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Wajeeha Fakhri, was born on 6 April 1985 and is a female
    citizen of Pakistan.  By a decision dated 30 June 2015,  the  Secretary
    of State refused to vary the appellant's leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom.  She appealed against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Roots) which, in a decision promulgated  on  13  February  2017,
    dismissed the appeal.  She now appeals, with permission, to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The circumstances of this appeal are succinctly set  out  in
    Judge Southern's grant of permission dated 17 October 2017:

         I have hesitated in determining this application for permission  to
         appeal.  It may well be that the appellant  faces  such  formidable
         obstacles in succeeding this appeal that I  raise  false  hopes  in
         granting permission.  On the other hand,  it  is  plainly  arguable
         that the judge made an error of law in failing to make any  attempt
         to engage with the basis upon which the appellant sought to advance
         her appeal and that she is entitled to see that the case  she  puts
         forward is considered properly.  In particular, at paragraph  10-11
         of her witness statement (which was before the judge) the appellant
         explains why she made a request of the respondent for more time  to
         find a sponsor college, that being in part because the very fact of
         the respondent being in possession of certain of her  documents  in
         relation to the long delayed decision made the task of  securing  a
         new CAS all but impossible.  The appellant must recognise that such
         complaint will not be a cogent one if she  has  not  requested  the
         return of those documents or has some  other  explanation  for  not
         being able to do so.  The appellant must recognise also that  there
         is no prospect at all of her appeal succeeding simply on the  basis
         that the 60 days  allowed  was  insufficient.   She  will  need  to
         demonstrate that there was put before the judge something more than
         that which meant that in her particular case there  was  reason  to
         consider that she had been treated  unfairly  and  that  the  judge
         failed to have regard to that.

 2. Before the Upper Tribunal, the appellant explained that she had been to
    "lots of colleges" but that she had been unable to  obtain  a  new  CAS
    because she did not have her passport.  She acknowledged that  she  had
    been sent by the Home Office a certified copy  of  her  passport  under
    cover of a letter dated 29 April 2015.  However,  she  said  that  this
    certified copy had proved to be insufficient evidence of  her  identity
    and immigration status for  any  of  the  institutions  which  she  had
    approached.  The appellant acknowledged that  her  college  status  had
    been withdrawn and that she had been given 60  days  to  find  a  fresh
    college and CAS.  However, her attempt to do  so  had  proved  entirely
    fruitless.  The appellant told me that she  had  written  to  the  Home
    Office on 2 June 2015 to ask that her  application  be  "put  on  hold"
    until September 2015 and also requesting the  return  of  her  original
    passport to enable her to obtain a CAS.   Although  the  appellant  had
    brought to court a substantial number of documents, she had  failed  to
    bring a copy of the letter of 2 June 2015.  I told the appellant that I
    would delay preparing my decision until after 3 January 2018 to  enable
    her to send to me and to the respondent a copy of the letter of 2  June
    2015.  I am dictating this decision on 10 January 2018  and  I  confirm
    that I have to date received no document from the appellant.

 3. I find that the judge did not err in law.  As  Judge  Southern  pointed
    out, the appellant's appeal cannot succeed simply on the basis that the
    60 days allowed to her was insufficient to find a new CAS.  I have been
    provided with no evidence to show that the appellant did write  to  the
    Home Office as she claims in June 2015 to ask for an extension of  time
    and, even if I had been provided with such evidence, the  fact  remains
    that, as at the date of the Upper Tribunal hearing, the  appellant  has
    still not obtained a new CAS.  I have concluded that the appellant  has
    not been treated unfairly by either  the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  the
    Secretary of State.  The First-tier Tribunal's  decision  is  short  (I
    note that it was a paper appeal) but  the  judge's  conclusion,  namely
    that the appellant did not have a CAS and therefore could not meet  the
    necessary provisions, is unassailable.



Notice of Decision

 4. This appeal is dismissed.

 5. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 20 January 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 20 January 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
