
[pic]
Upper Tribunal         Appeal Number
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        IA/25425/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 4 June 2014         On 5 June 2014


                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                               Victoria Adjei
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                   Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:            No appearance.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Clapham promulgated on 27 February 2014, allowing  Ms  Adjei's  appeal
      against the Secretary of State's decision dated 30 May 2013 to  refuse
      to issue a residence card under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
      Area) Regulations 2006.


   2. Although before me the Secretary of State  is  the  appellant  and  Ms
      Adjei is  the  respondent,  for  the  sake  of  consistency  with  the
      proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer  to
      Ms  Adjei  as  the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
      Respondent.


Background

   3. The Appellant is a national of Ghana born on 24  August  1961.  On  27
      September 2012 an application for a residence card as confirmation  of
      a right to reside in the United Kingdom was made on  her  behalf.  The
      application was based on a Ghanaian customary  marriage  by  proxy  to
      Martinho Armando Nanque said to have taken  place  in  Ghana,  in  the
      absence of the parties to the marriage, on 17 August 2012.


   4. The Appellant's application was refused  for  reasons  set  out  in  a
      'reasons for refusal' letter dated  30  May  2013,  and  a  Notice  of
      Immigration Decision was issued on the same date. The  Respondent  was
      not satisfied that the marriage was valid.


   5. The Appellant appealed to the IAC. She requested that  her  appeal  be
      dealt with 'on the papers'. The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed  the
      Appellant's appeal without a  hearing  for  reasons  set  out  in  his
      determination.


   6. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Landes on 14 April 2014.


No appearance

   7. There was no appearance by or on behalf of the Appellant.


   8.  The  Tribunal  has   received   a   letter   from   the   Appellant's
      representatives, Geeta Patel & Co. dated 14 May 2014 acknowledging the
      fact of the listing of the  appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  but
      stating: "We confirm that our client wishes to withdraw  the  original
      appeal and will not be attending the forthcoming hearing".


   9. Necessarily this letter confirms that due notice of  the  hearing  was
      given.




  10. In my judgement it is too late  for  the  Appellant  to  withdraw  her
      original appeal. Such withdrawal would need to be pursuant to rule  17
      of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005,  which
      applies in respect of proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal.  The
      proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal have  been  concluded,  and
      the Appellant has the benefit of a favourable decision.



  11. I must consider the Appellant's stated position by  reference  to  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. Withdrawal is governed
      by rule 17 therein. In the circumstances  it  seems  to  me  that  the
      letter from the  Appellant's  representatives  may  be  treated  as  a
      "notice of the withdrawal of [the Appellant's] case" (which is  subtly
      different from a withdrawal of her appeal. Withdrawal  will  not  take
      effect  unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  consents.  Of  course,  if   the
      Appellant's case is 'withdrawn' and the proceedings terminated at this
      stage the consequence will be that the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
      stands. Accordingly I do not consent to withdrawal, but  rather  treat
      the Appellant's letter as indicating that she does not seek to  resist
      the Respondent's challenge to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.




  12. In any event, in all the circumstances  I  am  satisfied  that  it  is
      appropriate to proceed with the appeal in the Appellant's absence.


Consideration

  13. The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the Appellant's  appeal  on  the
      basis that he was satisfied that the  Appellant's  marriage  was  duly
      registered and valid.


  14. The Respondent's grounds of appeal seek to challenge  that  conclusion
      with particular reference to the decision in Kareem (Proxy marriages -
      EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC) - promulgated on 16 January 2014,  and
      therefore before  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  consideration  of  this
      appeal. It is pleaded that the Judge erred in  not  having  regard  to
      Kareem. Moreover it is pleaded that if Kareem had  been  applied,  the
      First-tier Tribunal would have been bound to dismiss the appeal.


  15. As noted above, I proceed on the basis that  the  Appellant  does  not
      resist this challenge to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


  16. Even if it were otherwise I have no hesitation in concluding that  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge misdirected himself by not having regard  to
      the relevant case law, pursuant to which he should have considered  as
      a starting point the question of whether  a  marriage  was  contracted
      between the Appellant and Mr Nanque according to the national  law  of
      the country of Mr Nanque's nationality (Portugal). The Judge  did  not
      do so. Indeed I am  unable  to  find  any  reference  in  the  Judge's
      determination to Mr Nanque's nationality at all.


  17. Moreover, the Appellant had produced no evidence as to the validity of
      the marriage under the  law  of  Portugal.  As  such,  the  First-tier
      Tribunal would indeed  have  been  bound  to  find  that  insufficient
      evidence had been provided to discharge the burden of proof.


  18. In all such circumstances I find that the decision of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge was flawed for material error  of  law  and  I  set  it
      aside.


  19. The decision in the appeal accordingly needs to be remade. In light of
      the Appellant's indication that she wishes  to  withdraw  her  initial
      appeal, I remake the decision  by  dismissing  the  appeal.  Following
      Kareem, and for the reasons already indicated above, the Appellant has
      not shown that a valid marriage was  contracted  between  her  and  Mr
      Nanque. The  Appellant  has  not  otherwise  provided  evidence  of  a
      'durable relationship' within the meaning of the Regulations.


Decision

  20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  contained  a  material
      error of law and is set aside.


  21. I remake the decision in the appeal. The appeal is dismissed.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     4 June 2014
