
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25658/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 May 2014                                |On 4 June 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                        mrs Sagunthaladevi Kandasamy

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State appeals  with  leave  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach allowing the appellant's  appeal  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 3 December  1948.   She
    first entered the UK on 2 November  2010  with  leave  to  enter  as  a
    visitor valid until 12 May 2011.  The appellant returned to  Sri  Lanka
    in March 2011 and re-entered the UK on 3 September 2012 with  leave  to
    enter as a visitor valid until 9 February 2013.  On  31  January  2013,
    she made an application for further leave to remain  as  the  dependent
    relative of a person present and settled in the UK.  On  11  June  2013
    the respondent refused her application and made a  decision  to  remove
    her by way of directions under Section 47 of  the  Immigration,  Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006.

3.   At the hearing before the  judge  on  13  December  2013,  the  parties
    decided that the matter could be dealt with by way of submissions only,
    after discussions between them.  The appellant was accompanied  to  the
    hearing by her daughter  and  son-in-law  all  of  whom  did  not  give
    evidence because of the agreement between the parties.

4.   The judge found that the appellant accepts that she cannot  fulfil  the
    requirements of paragraph E-ECDR of Appendix FM because  she  only  had
    leave to remain as a visitor.  It was submitted that  she  fulfils  the
    other  requirements  of  paragraph  E-ECDR  and  that   it   would   be
    disproportionate to expect her to return to Sri Lanka to  obtain  entry
    clearance.

5.   The judge considered an undated letter from Dr Whyte which stated:

         "[The Appellant] was seen previously by my colleague suffering from
         low mood; being tearful all the time, angry, and not wanting to  do
         much.  Her son in law who was with her reported that this has  been
         ongoing since her husband died.  Based  on  the  symptoms  she  was
         diagnosed as suffering from  depression  for  which  treatment  was
         started.  She has continued on her treatment  but  her  mood  still
         remains a bit low.  She is being reviewed on a regular basis ...".

6.   The judge also considered a psychiatric report from  Dr  Lawrence  MRCP
    MRC Psych dated 13 January 2013 which stated:

         "[The Appellant] was clearly subjectively and objectively depressed
         during the interview and at times she was quietly crying throughout
         the interview ...  She had a downcast gaze and only made  poor  eye
         contact when talking or sitting quietly.   There  was  evidence  of
         self-neglect - a slight lack of cleanliness.  She had a very marked
         'T sign of depression ...'.


         It was clear that [the Appellant] was suffering at a very low level
         ...  Mood was very, very low both objectively and subjectively  ...
         She was described as feeling helpless, hopeless and pointless.  She
         does not feel like  doing  anything.   She  has  been  treated  for
         clinical depression in the past in Sri Lanka ...


         I was told that [the Appellant] neglects herself and  is  withdrawn
         ...  She is a serious suicide risk which would increase during  the
         first two weeks of treatment ...  This woman is  suffering  from  a
         Major Depressive Episode, with marked apathy and sleeplessness  ...
         She currently has Psychotic symptoms and she is  not  currently  on
         any kind of treatment but needs Anti-Depressants, which would  help
         her sleep ..."

7.   The judge said that the credentials of Dr Lawrence were not  challenged
    by the respondent.  There was no reference to the medical report in the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter despite it  appearing  in  the  respondent's
    bundle and despite it being sent  with  the  representations  submitted
    with the application  form.   The  judge  found  that  Dr  Lawrence  is
    qualified to provide a report for the appellant.

8.   The judge found that  Dr  Lawrence's  report  is  consistent  with  the
    symptoms described by the appellant's family in the UK,  including  her
    grandson.  The family are all very concerned for the appellant's mental
    health.  It appears that she requires encouragement to perform everyday
    tasks and that if she were left  alone  in  Sri  Lanka  she  would  not
    undertake these everyday tasks.  Even whilst living with her family  in
    the UK the psychiatrist  commented  on  a  lack  of  cleanliness  which
    suggests a person who struggles  to  complete  everyday  tasks  without
    significant input from others.  A letter from the family friend in  Sri
    Lanka confirms that the appellant would not accept his  assistance  and
    that he did not feel able to continue to provide his assistance.  There
    are no family members in Sri Lanka to provide this assistance.

9.   The judge took account of the COIR which  states  that  antidepressants
    are available in Sri Lanka.  There was no suggestion by the  family  in
    the UK that they would not provide financial support to  the  appellant
    in Sri Lanka if she had to pay for this medication.   The  issue  there
    was whether  the  appellant  would  independently  access  the  support
    available and whether she would be able  to  undertake  everyday  tasks
    alone.

10.  The judge then relied on MF (Article 8 - new rules)  Nigeria  UKUT  393
    (IAC) which was referred to by  the  appellant's  Counsel.   The  judge
    found that whilst MF and subsequent case law refer to Immigration Rules
    regarding deportation, the same  principles  must  also  apply  to  the
    Immigration Rules regarding private life.

11.  The judge then made the following findings:

         "30. The Appellant has lived with her daughter and grandson in  Sri
             Lanka until the Appellant's daughter and grandson moved to the
             UK in 2010.  The Appellant tried  to  live  with  her  son  in
             Germany but this did not work out.  She visited her family  in
             the UK in 2010/2011 and again in 2012 (on  this  occasion  she
             remained in the UK having made her application).  There  is  a
             letter  from  the  Appellant's  grandson  in  the  bundle   of
             documents before me in which he speaks of  a  very  close  and
             loving relationship with the Appellant and of his concern  for
             her and for him if she has to return to Sri Lanka.   There  is
             clearly a close family relationship in  this  particular  case
             partly as a result of the Appellant's  daughter  and  grandson
             living with the Appellant in Sri Lanka whilst  separated  from
             the Appellant's son in law and as a result of the  Appellant's
             mental health problems which have led to a particular reliance
             by  the  Appellant  on  her  family  in  the  UK.   In   those
             circumstances, I find that the  Appellant  has  established  a
             private and family life in the UK.


         31.  If the Appellant were removed from the UK then this would lead
             to an interference with the  Appellant's  family  and  private
             life and I find that the interference would be  of  sufficient
             gravity as to engage Article 8.


         32.  The Appellant accepts that she cannot fulfil the  requirements
             of  the  Immigration  Rules  relating   to   adult   dependent
             relatives.  I find therefore that the  interference  with  the
             Appellant's family and private life is in accordance with  the
             law and is necessary for the purposes of democratic society.


         33.  I therefore consider the proportionality of the decision.  The
             Appellant has a very close family relationship with her family
             in the UK.  This relationship was formed in Sri Lanka but  has
             continued in the UK as a result of visits by the Appellant  to
             the UK.  The Appellant is suffering a major depressive illness
             and has been suffering from depression for some time.  She  is
             extremely reliant on her family in the UK.  The removal of the
             Appellant from the UK would also have an adverse effect on the
             Appellant's daughter and on the Appellant's grandson who has a
             particularly close relationship with her.  The opinion  of  Dr
             Lawrence is that the Appellant is at a high risk  of  suicide.
             This is extremely likely to increase if she is returned to Sri
             Lanka where she has no family members  to  support  her.   The
             likelihood of the Appellant seeking help in Sri Lanka  is  low
             because she has rejected help already from a family friend and
             had to be taken to the GP by her family in the UK  rarer  than
             seeking assistance herself.   This  would  have  an  immediate
             adverse impact on her mental health because she would not then
             be receiving relevant treatment.   In  light  of  the  medical
             evidence before  me  and  the  unchallenged  evidence  of  the
             Appellant's son in law, daughter and grandson  in  the  UK,  I
             find that the Appellant is suffering from a  major  depressive
             illness, that she requires help and encouragement in  everyday
             tasks including her medication and that she is at real risk of
             suicide if  she  is  returned  to  Sri  Lanka  without  family
             support.  Even a short return in order to make an  application
             for entry clearance as an adult dependent  relative  would  be
             extremely likely to have an immediate and  adverse  effect  on
             the Appellant.


         34.  In those circumstances and taking account of all the  evidence
             as well as relevant case law including the judgments in  Huang
             [2007] UKHL 11,  Chikwamba  [2008]  UKHL  40  and  Beoku-Betts
             [2008] UKHL 39, I find that the Respondent's decision is not a
             proportionate decision."

12.  The grounds of appeal submitted by the respondent complained about  the
    judge's approach to Article 8.  The grounds stated  that  MF  (Nigeria)
    confirms that the Immigration Rules are a complete code.   That  formed
    the starting point for the decision maker.   Furthermore  it  was  made
    clear in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) that the Article 8 assessments
    shall only be carried out where there are compelling circumstances  not
    recognised by the Immigration Rules.  It was argued that  the  Tribunal
    did not identify such compelling circumstances  and  its  findings  are
    therefore unsustainable.  It  was  also  submitted  that  the  Tribunal
    failed to provide adequate reasons for their findings that it would  be
    disproportionate to remove the appellant.  It was  submitted  that  the
    appellant has suffered from mental health problems since 2002  and  her
    family chose to return to the UK leaving her without any support in Sri
    Lanka.  The Tribunal failed to provide adequate reasons why it would be
    unreasonable for her family here or in Germany to return to  Sri  Lanka
    to help care for her.  Even if they could  not,  it  was  open  to  her
    family to seek additional support from the state, family or friends  to
    help her and they can maintain contact with each other via  visits  and
    via modern means of communication as they have been able to do to date.

13.  Permission was granted because it was not apparent  that  the  guidance
    in Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach  [2013]  UKUT  640
    (IAC) had been followed by the judge.

14.  Mr Nath relied on the grounds.  He submitted that  MF  endorses  a  two
    stage approach to the consideration of Article 8.  The first stage is a
    consideration of Article 8 within the Immigration Rules and  the  judge
    failed to set out the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  in  her
    determination.   Mr  Nath  accepted  that  the  second   stage   is   a
    freestanding consideration of Article 8 ECHR.  However, he argued  that
    in her consideration of this  second  stage  the  judge's  findings  on
    proportionality were inadequate.  There was no  consideration  of  what
    other support the appellant could receive in Sri Lanka.  There  was  no
    evidence of the medication the appellant was  taking  and  whether  the
    medication would be available in Sri Lanka.  She  was  not  taking  any
    medication when the psychiatrist saw her. More evidence  needed  to  be
    obtained with regard to the appellant's medical problems.

15.  Counsel relied on his skeleton argument.

16.  I accept Counsel's  submission  in  his  skeleton  argument  that  this
    appeal  was  heard  on  13  December  2013  whereas  Gulshan  was   not
    promulgated until 17 December 2013.  The judge could therefore  not  be
    faulted for failing to mention it.

17.  The judge remarked that Dr Lawrence's report was before  the  Secretary
    of State at the date of the application  but  the  respondent  made  no
    reference to the report in the Reasons for Refusal Letter.  I note that
    the judge's reliance on the medical reports by  Dr.  Lawrence  and  Dr.
    Whyte was not challenged by the respondent.

18.  As regards the two stage approach to  Article  8,  the  judge  accepted
    that the appellant's application could not succeed under  paragraph  E-
    ECDR of Appendix FM because she only had leave to remain as  a  visitor
    and could not fulfil the requirements of the Immigration Rules relating
    to  adult  dependent  relatives.   Consequently,  the  judge   properly
    followed the approach in MF (Article 8 - new rules)  Nigeria  UKUT  393
    (IAC) (although MF is a deportation case) by considering whether  there
    are circumstances which are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the
    public interest in requiring the appellant to return to Sri Lanka.  Mr.
    Nath  accepted  that  MF  endorses  a   two-stage   approach   to   the
    consideration of Article 8.  I find that the judge did precisely that.

19.  I accept Counsel's argument that the respondent's Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter, which the HOPO below relied on,  failed  to  grapple  with  the
    issues advanced on the appellant's behalf and which were set out in  Dr
    Lawrence's report.  The appellant's husband had died in 2002.  She  was
    living in Sri Lanka with her daughter and  grandson  until  2010.   The
    grandson is very close to his  grandmother.   The  appellant  has  been
    living in the UK since 2012 and there is  a  clear  dependency  on  the
    family members here.  The judge's findings at paragraph 33  as  to  why
    the appellant's circumstances were compelling  were  properly  reasoned
    and on the evidence, she was entitled to reach those findings.

20.   Mr.  Nath  submitted  that  more  information  was  needed  about  the
    appellant's medical condition and  medication.   That  evidence  should
    have been sought at the First-tier level but it  was  not  because  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer below agreed that the  appeal  could  be
    disposed of by way of submissions only.   Consequently,  there  was  no
    challenge by  the  respondent  to  the  evidence  put  forward  by  the
    appellant about  her  circumstances  in  Sri  Lanka  and  the  evidence
    contained in Dr Lawrence's report about the nature of her illness,  all
    of which evidence the judge was entitled to rely on.  The  respondent's
    grounds amount to no more than a disagreement  with  the  judge's  well
    reasoned findings.

21.  The judge's decision does not disclose an error of  law.   The  judge's
    decision allowing the appellant's appeal shall stand.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

