

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/25788/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 October 2013                             |On 5 December 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


                                   Between

                               Muhammad Azeem

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Azhar Chohan, instructed by United Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of Pakistan,  applied  to  the  Secretary  of
    State on 25 July 2012 for further leave as a Tier 4  (General)  Student
    Migrant.  On 7 November 2012, his application was refused, and  at  the
    same time a decision was  made  to  give  directions  for  his  removal
    pursuant to s.47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006.
    He appealed against those decisions to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    appellant did not seek an oral  hearing.   Judge  Hubball  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal against the latter decision (as, on the authorities,
    he was bound to do), and dismissed the appeal against  the  substantive
    decision refusing him leave.

 2. The only issue is maintenance; and  the  only  question  in  regard  to
    maintenance is the extent to which  the  appellant  complied  with  the
    formal requirements of paragraph 1B of Appendix C to the  Statement  of
    Changes in Immigration Rules, HC395.  The relevant part of the  judge's
    determination is as follows:

          "10.  I  now  turn  to  the  Respondent's  decision  refusing  the
              Appellant leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a  Tier  4
              (General) Student Migrant.  The Respondent  has  stated  that
              the bank statements submitted in support of  the  Appellant's
              application for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  as  a
              Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant,  do  not  contain  all  the
              mandatory  information  as  stated  under  paragraph  1B   of
              Appendix C to the Immigration Rules.  The bank statements  do
              not show the following information: the name of  the  account
              holder,  and  the  account  number,  and  the  date  of  each
              statement, and the  financial  institution's  name,  and  the
              financial institution's  logo  and  that  the  funds  in  the
              account have been at the required level during the  specified
              period.  In these circumstances the Respondent has refused to
              award the Appellant 10 points under Appendix  C  (Maintenance
              (funds))  and  refused  the  Appellant's  application   under
              paragraph 245Z(d) of HC 395.


          11. In  his  Notice  of  Appeal  the  Appellant  stated  that  the
             Respondent has lost the top page of the bank  statements.   The
             Appellant provided the  Respondent  with  three  pages  of  the
             statements and the top page held all of the  required  details.
             The Respondent returned the two pages of the bank statement  to
             the Appellant and has lost the top  page.   The  Appellant  had
             discussed the situation with the caseworker  who  advised  that
             the bank statement did not confirm his account number, date  of
             statement, bank's name, bank's logo and the required  level  of
             available funds.


          12. It is clear that the bank documents provided by the  Appellant
             in support of his application of  25th  July  2012  is  a  view
             statement of entries relating to bank account  stamped  by  the
             Bank of Scotland on 25th July 2012.  The name  of  the  account
             holder is not given, the account umber is not given,  the  date
             of the bank statement is not given, the  statement  of  entries
             does not contain the financial  institution's  name  and  logo.
             And there is reference in the document to statement number 4.


          13. In these circumstances these documents which appear at  D1  of
             the Respondent's bundle are clearly not compliant with Appendix
             [sic] 1B of Appendix C of the Immigration Rules.


          14. The Appellant has not provided  the  top  page  of  this  view
             statement  of  entries  which  he  says   complies   with   the
             requirements of paragraph 1B of Appendix C to  the  Immigration
             Rules.


          15. The burden of proof in this appeal rests upon the Appellant to
             satisfy me on a balance of probabilities that paragraph  1B  of
             Appendix C of the Immigration Rules has been complied with.  On
             the evidence before me, the Appellant has failed  to  discharge
             this burden of proof".


 3. The appellant now has permission to appeal to this Tribunal.

 4. So far as formal compliance with the Rules is concerned, the  appellant
    has always said, as recorded by the judge at  paragraph  11,  that  the
    Secretary of State failed to consider all the documents  he  had  sent.
    His bank statement consisted of three pages: the two that were returned
    to him as unable to satisfy the requirements of the Rules, and a  third
    which contained his name and address and the other details required  by
    paragraph 1B.  The appeal to this Tribunal is on the  ground  that  the
    judge failed to consider all the evidence, and in  addition  failed  to
    appreciate what impact the Secretary of State's  "flexibility  policy",
    allowing partially defective documents to be corrected before they  are
    considered, might have on the appellant's case.

 5. We heard submissions from Mr Chohan on both those  issues.   Mr  Mullen
    pointed out  that  the  documents  in  the  bundle,  two  outline  bank
    statements each marked "page 1 of 1" could not comply with  the  Rules.
    But he was unable to  show  us  any  evidence  counteracting  what  the
    appellant had said about there having been another page with them.

 6. The judge was faced with a clear assertion of fact.   It  is  very  far
    from clear from the determination  why  that  assertion  was  rejected.
    Nothing in the documents before the judge seemed to  indicate  that  it
    was unreliable.  On  the  contrary,  the  judge  had  ready  access  to
    information showing that the Secretary of  State's  assessment  of  the
    document was unreliable.  The evidence included both pages of the  bank
    statements that the Secretary of State accepted had been sent, and  her
    assessment of them.  That assessment was correctly set out by the judge
    in paragraph 10.  It is not accurate: the statements produced did  show
    the account number, did bare a date stamp, and did show that the  funds
    had been at the required level during the specified period.  We do  not
    quite know what is meant by a "logo" or  how  precisely  it  is  to  be
    defined for these purposes,  but  the  rubber  stamp  of  the  Bank  of
    Scotland is applied to each page.  Faced with a clear assertion by  the
    party bearing the burden of proof and no evidence to the contrary,  but
    clear evidence that  the  party  with  an  interest  in  asserting  the
    contrary has made other errors in assessment  of  the  application,  it
    seems to us that the judge erred in law by failing to explain  properly
    the reason for saying that the appellant had failed  to  discharge  his
    burden of proof.

 7. As we have said, the only issue in this  appeal  is  formal  compliance
    with the Rules.  Given the defects in the decision  to  which  we  have
    adverted, and the lack of any evidence from the Secretary of State that
    only two pages of bank statements were supplied, we are content to  set
    aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision for error of law and,  on  our
    assessment of the  appellant's  evidence,  substitute  a  determination
    allowing the appeal.



                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 13 November 2013

















