
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25145/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 27 June 2014 and 5 August 2014               |On 06th Aug 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                               mr Padam Sharma
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (27 June) and Mr P. Duffy (5 August),
                    Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the decision  by  the
    respondent to refuse to grant him further leave to remain as a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant.  The First-tier Tribunal  did  not  make  an
    anonymity order, and I do not consider that such an order  is  required
    for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant had leave to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant until 23 February 2013.  Before the expiry of
    his leave, he attempted to apply for  leave  to  remain.   His  Tier  4
    application was acknowledged by a letter  from  the  UK  Border  Agency
    dated 11 February 2013.  On 26 February 2013 he was notified by  letter
    that his application was invalid, and  that  UKBA  were  returning  the
    application form and supporting documents which they had received  from
    him.  The ground of invalidity was that he had not made any payment and
    had  not  completed  the  payment  page  of   the   application   form.
    Accordingly, the specified fee had not been paid in connection with his
    attempted application which he had made by post on 8 February 2013.

 3. The appellant made a second application on 28 March 2013 which was also
    rejected on invalidity grounds. On this occasion, the  application  was
    rejected on the ground that, although  credit/debit  card  details  had
    been provided, the issuing bank rejected the payment.

 4. The appellant made a third application on 24 April 2013.   His  Tier  4
    sponsor was Spinnaker College  in  London.   He  was  studying  for  an
    extended diploma in business management.  The course began on 29  March
    2013 and ran until 5 September 2014.

 5. On 10 June 2013 the Secretary of State gave her  reasons  for  refusing
    the application.  The Secretary of State was not  satisfied  he  had  a
    valid CAS because the Tier 4 Sponsor Register was checked  on  10  June
    2013, but Spinnaker College was not listed as of this date.   Therefore
    he had not met the requirements to be awarded 30 points under  Appendix
    A of the Rules.  Furthermore, as he had failed to provide a  valid  CAS
    in support of his application, the Secretary of  State  was  unable  to
    assess the amount of funds he was required to show in  support  of  his
    application.  So he also did not achieve 10 points under Appendix C.

 6. The appellant originally asked for an oral hearing, but his  solicitors
    notified the Tribunal on 26 March 2014 that he wished  to  convert  his
    oral hearing into a paper hearing.  At the same time, they  attached  a
    witness statement signed by the appellant on that date.   He  contended
    that he had entered the correct details of  his  bank  account  in  his
    original application.  Someone might have entered some digits  wrongly.
    The onus of proof was on the respondent  to  prove  invalidity.   As  a
    result of his original application being wrongly returned  as  invalid,
    he had been treated as an overstayer and as having no right of  appeal.



 7. On 8 August 2013 the First-tier Tribunal issued the following notice to
    the appellant and respondent:

         Following  the  decision  in  Basnet  (Validity  of  application  -
         respondent) [2012] UKUT 00113 (IAC) the onus of  proof  is  on  the
         respondent to show that the  correct  fee  was  not  paid.   It  is
         therefore directed the appeal be listed for a substantive  hearing;
         that at that substantive hearing the issue of validity be  decided;
         that at least fourteen days prior to the  substantive  hearing  the
         respondent lodge with the Tribunal and serve upon the appellant any
         information showing that the correct fee was not paid.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Meates sitting at Taylor House
    on 26 March 2014.  There was no appearance by the appellant, but  there
    was an appearance by Miss Jones, Counsel, instructed on behalf  of  the
    respondent.   The  judge  received  submissions  from  Miss  Jones  who
    acknowledged that the onus was on the respondent to  show  the  correct
    fee had not been paid.  She  could  not  provide  the  court  with  any
    information to show that the correct fee had not been  paid.   But  she
    asked that the judge dismiss the appeal in any event.

 9. In his subsequent determination, Judge Meates held that the  respondent
    had  failed  to  discharge  the  burden  upon  her  to  show  that  the
    appellant's application was not accompanied by a fee, and  so  was  not
    valid. But that was not the end of the matter.  While the burden was on
    the respondent, it was clearly also open to the appellant  to  show  by
    way of evidence that he had completed the fee  payment  page  providing
    the correct bank details by way of production of the relevant  page  of
    the application form.  The appellant had not done this.

10. The appellant had also failed to provide an explanation as  to  why  he
    had not taken any steps to resubmit the application within 28 days, his
    application having not been resubmitted  to  the  respondent  until  24
    April 2013, which was almost two months after its  original  rejection.
    Had he done so, he would have been afforded a right of  appeal  against
    any further refusal.  Accordingly, the judge  concluded  there  was  no
    valid appeal before the Tribunal.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

11. The appellant applied for permission to appeal, arguing that the  judge
    had erred in law by blowing hot and cold.  At one stage the judge found
    that the respondent had failed to comply with  directions.   The  judge
    also found that the appellant failed to discharge the  burden  on  him.
    The judge did not take  into  account  that  the  appellant  could  not
    furnish the particular payment page to prove that his  application  was
    accompanied by the necessary payment details, as the  respondent  would
    not return the payment page back to the appellant.   It  was  for  that
    reason that the  direction  was  made  to  the  respondent,  which  the
    respondent had failed to comply with.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

12. On 12 May 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer granted  permission  to
    appeal for the following reasons:

         It is arguable that the judge may have made an error with regard to
         the failure of the respondent to comply with  directions  from  the
         Tribunal regarding the production of evidence of  payment  or  non-
         payment of fees and resulting evidential consequences  as  outlined
         by  the  appellant's  representative.   The  grounds  disclose   an
         arguable error of law on this aspect.

The Rule 24 Response

13. On 4 June 2014 Mr Tom Wilding of the Specialist  Appeals  Team  settled
    the  Rule  24  response  opposing  the  appeal.   The  reason  why  the
    application made "in time" was not valid was down to the appellant  not
    providing payment details at all and this was something that he, and he
    alone, was solely responsible for.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  was
    therefore correct in finding that the first application was invalid and
    therefore there was no right of appeal.

The Error of Law Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

14. At the hearing before me, there was no appearance  by  the  appellant's
    legal representatives for funding reasons.

15. Mr Bramble took a different line from that taken  by  Mr  Wilding.   He
    conceded that the judge had erred in law in finding that  the  original
    application was invalid.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

16. While the stance taken by Mr Bramble was not determinative of the issue
    before me, I have exercised my own independent judgment on the  matter,
    and consider that the concession was reasonably  open  to  Mr  Bramble,
    albeit that his colleague took a different line.

17. The respondent had been specifically directed  to  provide  documentary
    evidence to show that the first application had been validly  rejected,
    and the production of the payment page by  the  respondent  would  have
    resolved the question one way or the  other.   Having  found  that  the
    respondent had failed to comply with directions, and thus to  discharge
    the burden of proof, the judge ought to have resolved the  question  of
    invalidity in the appellant's favour.  It was  wrong  and  procedurally
    unfair to resolve the issue against the appellant on  the  ground  that
    the appellant had failed to discharge the onus of proof,  when  it  was
    accepted that the onus of proof lay with the respondent.

18. Accordingly, I find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contains an error of law, such that it should be set aside and  remade.



Reasons for the Directions given on Future Disposal

19. In the ordinary course of events, the proper course would be  to  remit
    the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  as  the  appellant  has  been
    deprived of a fair hearing on the merits.  But a de novo hearing is not
    necessary, as Mr Bramble accepts  that  the  original  application  was
    valid, and that therefore the appellant enjoyed 3C leave from the  date
    of the expiry of his existing leave to remain.  Accordingly, he was not
    an overstayer at the date of the third application, and nor was  he  an
    overstayer at the date of decision.  Although he did not have  a  valid
    CAS at the date of decision, the appellant is potentially eligible  for
    relief on common law fairness grounds: that is to say, it is  arguable,
    depending on the precise facts, that  instead  of  making  the  adverse
    immigration decision, the respondent should have given the appellant 60
    days to find a new Tier 4 sponsor and to obtain a new CAS.

20. It appears from the respondent's bundle that the appellant notified the
    Secretary of State before the date of decision that there  had  been  a
    material change of circumstances. I also note that the CAS document  in
    the respondent's bundle contained the  following  information:  current
    CAS status: cancelled; current CAS status date: 7 May  2013;  date  CAS
    assigned: 26 March 2013.

21. The information in the CAS raises two questions.  The first question is
    whether the appellant had obtained a valid CAS before making his  first
    application?  The second question is when the  appellant  became  aware
    that the licence of the college  had  been  revoked,  and  whether  the
    appellant should have sought to vary his application?  It is not  clear
    from the change of circumstances document that the appellant was  doing
    anything more than notifying the  respondent  that  he  had  instructed
    Legend Solicitors as his representatives. It is  regrettable  that  the
    appellant was not present at the hearing before me, as if he had  been,
    he would have been able to answer these questions  and  it  would  have
    been possible to remake the decision without a further hearing. However
    Mr Bramble asked me not to  remake  the  decision  without  giving  the
    appellant an opportunity to provide further evidence to  show  that  he
    should be granted relief on common law fairness grounds.

Directions given

22. The directions I made were as follows:

         There will be a further hearing in the Upper Tribunal to remake the
         decision, which will take place  on  5  August  2014  with  a  time
         estimate of one and a half hours.

         Not less than seven days before the resumed hearing, the  appellant
         shall serve on the Upper Tribunal and  on  the  Specialist  Appeals
         Team a copy of the first application, and details of  the  CAS  (if
         any) he relied upon for the first application.

         I also give  permission  to  the  appellant  to  adduce  additional
         evidence supportive of his claim to be entitled to relief on common
         law fairness  grounds.   Any  such  additional  evidence,  and  any
         further written representations  from  his  legal  representatives,
         should be served on the Upper Tribunal and the  Specialist  Appeals
         Team not less than seven days before the resumed hearing.

Subsequent Developments

23. The day before the hearing  the  appellant's  solicitors  informed  the
    Upper Tribunal that  they  no  longer  acted  for  the  appellant,  and
    notified a change of address on the part of the appellant.







The Resumed Hearing

24. At the resumed hearing, Mr Duffy produced a copy of the letter dated 16
    April 2013, and other documents showing that  the  appellant  had  made
    three applications altogether. No further documents were received  from
    the appellant.

Remaking

25. When conceding an error of law, Mr Bramble was not aware of the  failed
    application referred to in paragraph 3 above, evidence  of  which  only
    emerged today. The significance of the new evidence is  that  it  lends
    support to the respondent's contention that the first  application  was
    not accompanied by any payment details, as  this  would  be  consistent
    with the fact that the appellant then re-submitted his application with
    the missing  payment  details.  Although  the  second  application  now
    contained payment details, the Home Office was unable  to  collect  the
    fee. While it is possible that the appellant could have been  a  victim
    of misfortune on two successive occasions (i.e. he had  the  misfortune
    to have  his  application  wrongly  rejected  on  invalidity  ground  A
    followed by his application being wrongly rejected on invalidity ground
    B) it cannot be said to be a likely scenario.

26. Mr Duffy does not however invite me  to  set  aside  my  error  of  law
    ruling, but instead he invites me to dismiss the appeal on the merits.

27. The appellant has had ample opportunity to  provide  evidence  to  show
    that he has been a victim of common law fairness, and he has not  taken
    this opportunity. While it was reasonable for  his  solicitors  not  to
    attend at the previous hearing for reasons of cost, there was  no  good
    reason for the appellant's personal non-attendance. The fact  that  his
    solicitors have now withdrawn their representation also does not excuse
    his non-attendance today.

28. The appellant has not shown that he is eligible for  relief  on  common
    law fairness grounds and he has  thus  not  discharged  the  burden  of
    proving that the decision appealed against was not in  accordance  with
    the law.

Decision

29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law,  and
    accordingly the decision is set aside and  the  following  decision  is
    substituted: the appellant's appeal is dismissed.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

