
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25599/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |            Decision and Reasons     |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 9th June 2015                       |            On 16th June 2015        |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                   Mrs OG
                               PG (dependant)
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER CONTINUED)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Cole, Counsel instructed by Wimbledon
                    Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I  will  refer  to
    the parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a citizen of Russia, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against a decision of the Secretary of  State  dated  23  May  2014  to
    refuse her application for leave to remain in the UK on  the  basis  of
    her private and family life.  Her son is her dependant in this  appeal.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Chowdhury allowed the appeal.  The  Secretary
    of State appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 3. The background to this appeal is that the appellant entered the UK as a
    visitor in July 2004. She was granted a visa on three further occasions
    as a dependant, a visitor and a student during 2005 and 2006.  She  was
    last granted a visa as the dependant of her then husband for the period
    between 26 September 2009 and 10  September  2012.  She  submitted  two
    further applications on the basis of private and family life;  she  did
    not appeal against the decision to refuse  the  first  application  but
    appealed against the instant decision. The appellant and  her  now  ex-
    husband have three children. One is in Russia and the other two are  in
    the UK. The appellant's son who is her dependant in this appeal is  the
    youngest; he was born on 26  June  2005.  Her  ex-husband  returned  to
    Russia in 2013 and the appellant said that he has  a  new  relationship
    and  three  new  children  there.  The  end  of  the  relationship  was
    acrimonious and the appellant has obtained  a  Prohibited  Steps  Order
    from the Family Court to prevent her  ex-husband  from  removing  their
    child from the jurisdiction. The appellant has been in  a  relationship
    with a British citizen since January 2013.

 4. The respondent refused the application because the  appellant  did  not
    qualify for leave to  remain  as  a  partner  because,  whilst  it  was
    accepted that she and her partner  are  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship, they had not been together  for  the  required  two  year
    period, and therefore did not meet the requirements of Appendix FM  for
    leave to remain as a partner. The respondent did not consider that  the
    appellant met the requirements of Appendix FM for leave to remain as  a
    parent because it was not accepted that the child had lived in  the  UK
    continuously for five years. The respondent also decided that, even  if
    the child had lived in the UK continuously for five years, although  it
    was  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship with the child, it would be reasonable for  the  child  to
    leave the UK with his mother. The respondent did not  accept  that  the
    appellant met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE in relation  to  her
    private life. The respondent also considered the private  life  of  the
    child and concluded that he could return to Russia.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the child had resided  in  the
    UK continuously for five years. She allowed the  appeal  of  the  child
    under paragraph 276ADE (iv) of the Immigration Rules and the appeal  of
    the appellant under Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.

 6. In her grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal the Secretary  of  State
    contends that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made five errors of law. It
    is firstly contended that the Judge  erred  in  considering  the  son's
    appeal  under  276ADE  because  the  appellant's  son  has  no  appeal.
    Secondly the Secretary of State contends that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge erred in failing to consider the  appellant's  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  It is thirdly contended that  the  Judge  erred  in
    considering  the  son's   case   without   reference   to   the   wider
    circumstances; this is related to the fourth ground which is  that  the
    Judge erred in considering the son's private  life  in  isolation  from
    that of his family life.  It is finally contended that the Judge failed
    to properly consider the  factors  set  out  in  Section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 7. Having heard submissions from both  representatives  I  have  concluded
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did err  in  her  treatment  of  the
    appeal in relation to the Immigration Rules.  Whilst it was appropriate
    for the Judge to consider the child's situation with reference  to  the
    Immigration Rules, there was no appeal by the child before the Judge as
    there had been no removal decision made in relation to  the  child  and
    therefore there was no jurisdiction to purport  to  allow  the  child's
    appeal.  In considering  the  appeal  of  the  appellant,  the  child's
    mother, the Judge said that her appeal 'does not fall for consideration
    under the Immigration Rules' for the reasons determination out  in  the
    Reasons for Refusal letter [50].  However the Judge failed to carry out
    her own analysis as to whether the appellant meets the requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules.

 8. I consider that  these  two  errors  are  interlinked.  However,  I  am
    satisfied that they  are  not  material  because  the  question  to  be
    considered in relation to the child is  the  same  as  that  which  she
    should have considered in relation to the  appellant.  To  qualify  for
    leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE 1 (iv) it must be shown that  it
    is  not  reasonable  to  expect  a  child  under  18  who  has  resided
    continuously in the UK for at least seven years to leave the  UK.  This
    is the same as the requirements in Appendix FM for the  person  is  the
    parent of a child has lived in the UK for at least seven years and Ex 1
    (a)(i)(cc) applies. Ex 1 applies where a child has lived in the UK  for
    at least seven years and it would not be reasonable to expect the child
    to leave the UK. Mr Nath accepted that no other aspects of Appendix  FM
    are in issue.

 9. The Judge's finding that the child has been in the UK for  seven  years
    is not challenged.  The Judge accepted oral evidence of  the  Appellant
    and her partner and considered all of the documentary  evidence  before
    her.  This is set out in paragraph 49.  The Judge considered the  issue
    as to whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave the  UK  in
    paragraphs 52, 53 and 58.  At paragraph 52  of  the  determination  the
    Judge said:

         "[the child] I find, has never spent any significant length of time
         in Russia.  I have been presented  with  copies  of  [the  child]'s
         school letters and reports.  I find that this  Appellant  is  fully
         integrated into the UK.  I have given weight and have considered at
         great length the legitimate aim of maintaining a  firm  immigration
         control.  However I find that it would be  unreasonable  to  remove
         this child to Russia.  I have noted the  difficulties  [the  child]
         had at school in  the  UK  during  the  break-up  of  his  parents'
         marriage (from the headteacher's letter) and his success  now  that
         he has some stability in his life.  I find that  having  regard  to
         his substantial private life in  the  UK  that  any  removal  would
         constitute a disproportionate interference with his private life as
         encoded in the Immigration Rules."

10. In the third ground of appeal the Secretary of State contended that the
    Judge erred in considering the child without  reference  to  the  wider
    circumstances but I accept Mr Cole's submission that the findings  were
    based on the assumption that it was in the best interests of the  child
    to be with his mother.  I accept Mr Cole's submission that paragraph 22
    of the reasons for refusal letter considers the  circumstances  of  the
    child where it says that it is in the best interests of the child to be
    with his mother.   There  is  also  significant  evidence  recorded  at
    paragraphs 16 to 38 as summarised in paragraph 52 of the determination,
    and I am satisfied that the  Judge  took  all  of  this  evidence  into
    account.

11. In the fourth ground the Secretary of State  contends  that  the  Judge
    should have considered whether it was reasonable to expect the child to
    leave the UK in the context of him leaving the UK as a family unit with
    his mother.  Mr Nath submitted that the Judge  should  have  considered
    the Appellant and his mother as  a  family  unit  and  that  the  Judge
    considered private life separate  from  family  life.   However,  I  am
    satisfied on reading paragraphs 52 and 53 as well as paragraph 60  that
    the Judge did consider the child as a family unit with  his  mother  as
    well as considering whether it would be reasonable to expect the  child
    to be separated from his mother in paragraph 60.

12. The fifth ground of  appeal  contends  that  the  Judge  erred  in  her
    treatment of Section 117B.  However, the Judge set out Section 117B  at
    paragraph 55 and took into account that the  Appellant  is  an  English
    speaker and is financially independent.  I accept that  the  Judge  did
    not expressly take into account Section  117B  (4)  which  states  that
    little weight should be given to a private life or a relationship  with
    a qualifying partner established at a time when the person is in the UK
    unlawfully.  However, I note that the Judge did not take  into  account
    as a positive factor the fact that the Appellant met the provisions  of
    Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Had  the  Judge  correctly
    considered Appendix FM she would not have had  to  go  on  to  consider
    Article 8.  Therefore the factors set out in  Section  117B  would  not
    have had to be taken into account.  In  these  circumstances  I  accept
    that the failure to take into account Section 117B(4) is not material.

13. In the context of all of the evidence set out in the decision  and  the
    reasoning put forward I am satisfied that the reasoning is adequate and
    the decision that it is not reasonable to expect the child to leave the
    UK was open to the Judge. Accordingly the errors  in  relation  to  the
    determination of the  child's  purported  appeal  and  the  interlinked
    failure to consider Appendix FM are not material.

Conclusion

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

