
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA252632014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard  at  Field   House                                        Decision   &
                                             Reasons promulgated
On 3 March  2016                                                On  10  June
                                  2016

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                                     I S
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr E Nicholson of Counsel instructed by BMAP.
For  the  Respondent:     Ms  N  Willocks-Briscoe,  Home  Office  Presenting
                       Officer.


                     DECISION AND REASONS: ERROR OF LAW

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Moxon promulgated on 14 August 2015 dismissing the Appellant's  appeal
      against a decision of the Respondent dated 3 June 2014  to  refuse  to
      issue a Residence Card.


Background

   2. The Appellant is  a  national  of  Algeria  born  on  [  ]  1980.  His
      application for a Residence Card - and in turn his appeal - was  based
      upon his relationship to [AO] (date of birth [ ] 1988), a national  of
      Hungary, ('the sponsor') to whom he was married on 20 April 2013.


   3. The background to the appeal  is  helpfully  set  out  in  summary  at
      paragraph 2  of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the
      following terms:

"The Appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally by  lorry  from  Algeria
      on 6 December 2006. He initially applied for a Residence Card in April
      2013 but that was considered withdrawn due to the failure  of  he  and
      the Sponsor to  attend  interviews  with  Home  Office  officials.  He
      applied for a Residence Card on 17 October 2013 as the  spouse  of  an
      EEA national,  the  Sponsor.  That  application  was  refused  by  the
      Respondent [on] 3 June 2014 who asserts:

      1) The Appellant had failed to provide documentation to show that  the
           Sponsor is a "qualified person"; and

      2) The Appellant and the Respondent [sic  -  should,  obviously,  read
           Sponsor] are not in a genuine and subsisting relationship."


   4. The basis of the Respondent's  decision  in  respect  of  the  marital
      relationship was expressed in these terms in the 'reasons for refusal'
      letter ('RFRL') of 3 June 2014:

"Furthermore in  relation  to  your  relationship  our  department  must  be
      satisfied that  your  relationship  is  genuine,  we  assess  this  by
      inviting applicants to attend a marriage interview.

In your previous application dated 05 April 2013 you were invited to  attend
      an interview on 2 occasions but failed to do so and again  you  failed
      to attend with this application. As result of this we have  doubts  as
      to whether your relationship is genuine, if you were to submit another
      application then the procedure of conducting a marriage interview will
      be put in place again."


   5. The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


   6. The day before the hearing listed before Judge Moxon, the  Appellant's
      representatives faxed the Tribunal to indicate that an application for
      an adjournment was to be made  on  the  basis  that  the  sponsor  was
      abroad, having become pregnant and having returned to Hungary for  her
      confinement. It was indicated that  it  had  been  expected  that  the
      sponsor would return to the UK in time for the hearing, but  that  she
      now had concerns about travelling with a very young child -  it  being
      said, with no greater specificity, that her child was born in July. In
      the event the application for an adjournment was not pursued, given in
      particular that the Judge drew  to  the  Appellant's  representative's
      attention the fact  that  there  was  a  witness  statement  from  the
      Sponsor, and no representative for the Respondent such that she  would
      not have been cross-examined even if she had attended. (See further in
      this context paragraphs 4 and 5 of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.)


   7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  for
      reasons set out in his 'Decision and Reasons'. The Judge did not  find
      the Appellant to be credible (paragraph 29), was  not  satisfied  that
      the relationship between the Appellant  and  the  sponsor  is  genuine
      (conclusion stated at paragraph 36), and declared  herself  "satisfied
      on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the  marriage  is  one   of
      convenience" (paragraph 36). The Judge did accept that the sponsor was
      a 'worker' from 2 June 2014 until 28 February 2015 (paragraph 25), but
      did not otherwise accept that she was a self-employed  person  at  the
      time of the application or decision (paragraph 24), or  that  she  had
      subsequently been employed (paragraph 26).


   8. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was initially  refused
      by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  M  Davies  on  15  December  2015,  but
      subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Rintoul  on  20  January
      2016.


   9. The grant of permission to appeal was in these terms:

"It is arguable that, in light of the decision in Agho v  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA
      Civ 1198 and Rosa v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 14, both of  which  post-date
      the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Moxon (and the  decision  to
      refuse permission), that Judge Moxon misdirected himself on  the  law.
      Ground 1 is thus arguable. Ground 2 is also arguable.

Given [AO]'s employment history, the parties will be expected to address

      1. The basis on which she was a qualified person after ceasing to work
           for ATK on 28 February 2015;

      2. The extent to which she can benefit from Jessy St Prix v DWP [2014]
           CJEU C-507/12 (see Weldemichael [2015] UKUT 540);

      3. The extent to which she has continuity  of  residence  pursuant  to
           regulation 3 (2) (c) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006."


  10. It is to be noted that Ground 1, as referred to by Judge  Rintoul,  as
      drafted in Appellant's renewed application for  permission  to  appeal
      carries the heading 'Misdirection as to burden of proof in relation to
      marriage of convenience (determination paras 6 to 12, 36)'.  Ground  2
      is headed 'Failure to make findings of fact in  relation  to  material
      facts canvass matters material to his determination'.


Consideration

  11. In respect of Ground 1 - which relates to the issue  of  'marriage  of
      convenience' - it is to be noted  that  in  the  Appellant's  Skeleton
      Argument before the First-tier  Tribunal  (drafted  by  Mr  Nicholson,
      dated 6 August 2015),  it  was  emphasised  that  the  Respondent  had
      concluded in the  RFRL  that  "we  have  doubts  as  to  whether  your
      relationship is genuine". The Skeleton Argument  went  on  to  submit,
      with reference to the Respondent's own  internal  guidance,  that  the
      burden of proving that a marriage was one of convenience  rested  upon
      the Respondent: the following was  quoted  from  the  guidance  -  "An
      applicant must show  that  they  are  the  family  member  of  an  EEA
      national. This would usually come from a valid  marriage  certificate.
      If you suspect the marriage is one  of  convenience,  it  is  for  the
      Secretary of State to prove this" (Skeleton at paragraph  6).  Further
      reference was made to the Respondent's European Casework  Instructions
      (Skeleton at paragraph 7), and to the case of Papajorgji  [2012]  UKUT
      00038 (IAC) (Skeleton at paragraph  8).  In  this  latter  regard  the
      following passage from paragraph 37 was particularly  emphasised:  "It
      is not enough that the ECO honestly suspects there is  a  marriage  of
      convenience;  the  claimant  will  only  be  disqualified  if  it   is
      established that it is." With  reference  to  the  instant  case,  the
      Skeleton went on to argue that "The Respondent neither  suggests  that
      the Appellant's is a marriage  of  convenience  nor  relies  upon  any
      evidence to prove such an assertion" (paragraph 12), and asserts  that
      "the  Respondent  has  failed  to  discharge  the  evidential  burden"
      (paragraph 13), whilst contending that in such circumstances there  is
      no basis to conclude anything other than that  the  Appellant  is  the
      sponsor's family member within the meaning of the EEA Regulations.


  12. It is indeed to be  noted  that  the  RFRL  does  not  expressly  make
      reference to the concept of a marriage of convenience at all. Nor,  on
      its face, does it express a clear conclusion as to the nature  of  the
      marital relationship, but is rather couched in terms of  doubt  as  to
      genuineness. In this context I note that the concept of a  non-genuine
      marital relationship is not congruent with the concept of  a  marriage
      of convenience: it is for example possible for a genuine  relationship
      to deteriorate to an extent that the marriage is in effect no longer a
      genuine marital  relationship;  however,  a  marriage  of  convenience
      within the meaning of immigration law is one which is a sham from  the
      beginning and only entered into for immigration purposes.


  13.  As  identified  in  the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal,   further
      clarification in respect of these matters has recently  been  provided
      in the cases of Agho and Rosa. In what appears to be an  obiter  dicta
      made  without  the  benefit  of  submissions  from  the  parties,  but
      inevitably of significant persuasive weight, the Court  of  Appeal  in
      Rosa made the following observations at paragraph 13:

"What it  comes  down  to  is  that  as  a  matter  of  principle  a  spouse
      establishes a prima facie case that he or she is a family member of an
      EEA national by providing the marriage certificate  and  the  spouse's
      passport; that the legal burden is on the Secretary of State  to  show
      that any marriage thus proved is a marriage of convenience;  and  that
      that burden is not discharge merely by showing "reasonable suspicion".
      Of course in the usual way the evidential  burden  may  shift  to  the
      applicant by proof of facts  which  justify  the  inference  that  the
      marriage is not genuine, and the facts giving rise  to  the  inference
      may include a failure to answer a request for documentary proof of the
      genuineness of the marriage where  grounds  for  suspicion  have  been
      raised. Although, as I say, the point was not argued before  us,  that
      approach seems to me to be correct - as does the UT's  statement  that
      the standard of proof must be the civil standard, as explained by  the
      House of Lords in Re B (Children) [2008] UKHL 35".


  14. Paragraph 13 of Agho is in the context of a discussion  of  Papajorgji
      and  the  "considerable  reservations"  expressed  therein  about  the
      approach  suggested  in  the  earlier  case  of   IS   (Marriages   of
      Convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT 31, wherein it was held that  it  was
      for an appellant  to  prove  before  an  immigration  judge  that  his
      marriage was not a marriage of convenience. As identified in Rosa (see
      below) the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Agho  preferred  the  clarification
      contained in Papajorgji.


  15. In Rosa the matter was more authoritatively summarised at paragraph 24
      in these terms in the judgement of Lord Justice  Richards  with  which
      the other members of the Court agreed:

"In my judgement, the legal burden lies on the Secretary of State  to  prove
      that an otherwise valid marriage is a marriage of convenience so as to
      justify the refusal of an application for a residence card  under  the
      EEA Regulations. The  reasoning  to  that  effect  in  Papajorgji,  as
      endorsed in Agho, is compelling."


  16. Lord Justice Richards also observed  that  the  key  paragraph  in  IS
      Serbia "was seriously confused" (see paragraph 29). His Lordship  went
      on to conclude, also at paragraph 29:

"The result that I think the tribunal must have intended is achieved if  the
      legal burden of proof lies on the Secretary of  State  throughout  but
      the evidential burden can shift, as explained  in  Papajorgji.  In  my
      judgement, that is the correct analysis."


  17. Although the First-tier Tribunal Judge directed himself to Papajorgji,
      quoting "It is not enough that the ECO honestly suspects  there  is  a
      marriage of convenience; the claimant will only be disqualified if  it
      is established that it is" (Decision at paragraph 10), in my judgement
      it is not apparent that the Judge  in  practice  applied  the  nuanced
      approach discussed in Papajorjgi and subsequently in Agho and Rosa.  I
      note in particular, given what is said about  the  evidential  burden,
      that on the facts here the Respondent did not either assert  in  terms
      that she had concluded that the Appellant had entered  a  marriage  of
      convenience, or identify an evidential basis for such a  conclusion  -
      but rather in substance merely opined that the  facts  (non-attendance
      at interviews) justified a suspicion ("we have doubts", to  quote  the
      RFRL) of a non-genuine marital relationship. The Judge's own  analysis
      of the relationship, set out at paragraphs 29-35, is essentially based
      on rejecting aspects  of  the  Appellant's  testimony  and  supporting
      evidence, and is not based on accepting any specific evidence advanced
      on behalf of the Respondent; indeed the Respondent  advanced  no  such
      evidence beyond the circumstance of the non-attendance at interviews -
      which whilst justifying a suspicion did not amount to  evidence  of  a
      sham marriage, and was not even contended by the Respondent to  amount
      to evidence of a sham marriage.


  18. It seems to me that both the decision of the Respondent, and  in  turn
      the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  substance  follows  the
      approach in IS Serbia: a  suspicion  having  been  raised,  the  Judge
      appears to have required the Appellant to prove that his marriage  was
      not one of convenience rather than requiring the Respondent  to  prove
      it was - which would have  required  the  Respondent  to  adduce  some
      evidence beyond that which informed the suspicion  (or  "doubts").  In
      short, what is required is some positive evidence  of  a  sham  rather
      than the mere absence of evidence of a marriage genuinely entered into
      for reasons not related to immigration. As the Appellant  puts  it  in
      his Grounds, there was an "absence of any evidence from the Respondent
      to prove the assertion (which she never made in any event)".


  19. Accordingly I find a material error of  law  which  is  sufficient  to
      require that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal be set aside.


  20. I turn to the implications of  this  conclusion,  in  particular  with
      reference to the issues identified  as  potentially  requiring  to  be
      addressed, below. However, it is appropriate that I first consider the
      other basis of challenge brought by the Appellant.


  21. Ground 2 comprises a sustained attack on  the  Judge's  evaluation  of
      evidence and fact-finding. It seems to  me  that  in  some  part  this
      constitutes what is essentially a disagreement of  outcome;  in  other
      parts there is a theoretical riposte rather  than  an  evidence  based
      challenge - for example an assertion that people in offices in  theory
      may sometimes be paid in cash, rather than an evidence-based assertion
      that the sponsor was indeed paid in cash; or possible explanations  as
      to the significance of  numbers  appearing  on  payslips  rather  than
      evidence as to the actual meaning of such numbers. There are, however,
      aspects of the challenge which more obviously  constitute  submissions
      in respect of error of law, in particular submissions  to  the  effect
      that the Judge failed to put  to  the  Appellant  potentially  adverse
      matters not hitherto raised by the Respondent.


  22. In the event it seems to me unnecessary to reach a concluded  view  on
      all elements of this aspect of the  Appellant's  challenge  because  I
      have concluded that the appeal will require to be  reheard  anew  with
      all issues at large before a different First-tier Tribunal Judge.


  23. As indicated at paragraph 19 above, the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal requires to  be  set  aside.  In  considering  those  matters
      identified by Judge Rintoul as likely necessary  to  be  addressed,  I
      find that further oral evidence will be  required  to  be  heard,  and
      documentary evidence filed and served: see  further  below.  Moreover,
      and irrespective of the particular bases of challenge  raised  by  the
      Appellant in respect of the Judge's fact-finding - though  nonetheless
      ultimately inter-related - there seems to me to be a more  fundamental
      difficulty in respect of the procedure before the First-tier Tribunal.


  24. In this latter regard I am troubled by the decision of the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge to proceed in the absence of the sponsor.  Although  it
      was not the sponsor's appeal it was very much her  rights  as  an  EEA
      national that were at the core of the appeal - and indeed  formed  the
      foundation of the Appellant's own claimed rights. This was not a  case
      where the Judge was faced with an application for an  adjournment  and
      determined that no good reason  for  non-attendance  had  been  given:
      indeed  the  Judge  appears  to  have   encouraged   the   Appellant's
      representative not to pursue an adjournment: see paragraph 5.  Without
      more, and irrespective of the Appellant's willingness to  proceed,  it
      is difficult to see  on  what  basis  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      determined that this was not a case that  would  have  benefited  both
      from the  presence  of  a  Presenting  Officer  and  -  as  I  say  in
      circumstances where the  Judge  did  not  find  as  justification  for
      proceeding that there was no good reason for the sponsor's  absence  -
      the presence of the sponsor: see the so-called 'Surendran' guidelines.
      The effect was that the sponsor's  rights  as  an  EEA  national  were
      determined in her absence.


  25.  Not  only  were  there  materials  before  the  First-tier   Tribunal
      purportedly  relating  to  the  sponsor's  employment  that  were  not
      previously before the Respondent (and in respect of  which  the  Judge
      went on to make findings), but moreover, the Judge also had regard  to
      factors not  raised  by  the  Respondent  and  not  addressed  in  the
      sponsor's witness statement upon which the sponsor would  likely  have
      been able to offer testimony relevant to the marital relationship - in
      particular with regard to the issues surrounding her pregnancy, and in
      particular confusions/discrepancies  in  relation  to  relevant  dates
      (e.g. see paragraphs 19, 20, 22),  and  the  paternity  of  her  child
      (paragraphs 21, 33).


  26. This is not to say that in any EEA case where an EEA national  sponsor
      whose rights are 'in play' is absent at an appeal  hearing,  or  where
      the  Respondent  is  not  represented,  or  where  both  circumstances
      pertain, the appeal must be adjourned irrespective of the  absence  of
      any application for an adjournment. It  is  merely  to  recognise  the
      reality of the particular facts and circumstances of  this  case,  and
      the  appropriateness  of  both  affording  the   sponsor   a   further
      opportunity of attending and having the benefit of the  input  of  the
      Respondent in respect of matters upon which  the  Respondent  had  not
      indicated a position. Indeed, it may well be that had  an  application
      for an adjournment been pursued, and the Judge refused it (perhaps for
      similar reasons given in his  subsequent  exploration  of  matters  at
      paragraph 33 to the  effect  that  there  was  no  supporting  medical
      evidence of either postnatal depression or any other issue that  might
      impact upon the sponsor's ability to travel to the UK with or  without
      her child), and subject to any issues in respect of  cross-examination
      of the Appellant himself, it may have been open  to  the  Tribunal  to
      refuse the application for an adjournment and proceed in the sponsor's
      absence. However, that is not the procedure that was followed.


  27. Looking at the matter in the round I am satisfied  that  there  was  a
      denial of natural justice to both the Appellant  and  the  sponsor  in
      proceeding with the appeal in the  absence  of  the  sponsor,  and  in
      making adverse evaluations of aspects of her evidence without adequate
      opportunity for the sponsor to address germane matters. Again this  is
      not to deny that in general terms the Appellant and the sponsor had an
      opportunity to bring  forward  relevant  evidence,  in  particular  in
      respect of her exercise of Treaty Rights, but also in respect of their
      relationship; what they did not have the opportunity to address -  and
      the sponsor in particular - were points then taken  by  the  Judge  in
      respect  of  certain  aspects  of  such  evidence,  most  notably  the
      purported employment  with  London  Flats  For  You  Limited  and  the
      sponsor's pregnancy and the paternity of her child. Such  matters  are
      indeed raised in the grounds of challenge - though not specifically by
      reference to the sponsor's  absence  -  and  I  find  them  to  be  of
      substance.


  28. Notwithstanding the foregoing, I do not detect any particular error in
      the Judge's approach to the issue of the failure to attend any of  the
      interviews arranged by the Respondent: see paragraphs 29-32, and I can
      understand his reasoning and conclusion as to the lack of  credibility
      of the Appellant as set out at paragraph 29. Both  the  Appellant  and
      the sponsor failed to attend interviews on  18  June  2013,  6  August
      2013, and 7 May 2014 (paragraphs 17 and 18). Although explanations for
      non-attendance were offered by the Appellant, these were addressed  at
      paragraphs 29-32  with  the  Judge  concluding  "I  am  therefore  not
      satisfied that the Appellant and Sponsor had  reasonable  excuses  for
      not attending those interviews". In  my  judgement,  on  the  evidence
      available to the Judge, that was an  entirely  sustainable  conclusion
      adequately reasoned across paragraphs 29-31.


  29. However, such matters are not in themselves  determinative  of  either
      the issue of 'marriage of convenience' or of the status of the sponsor
      as a 'qualified person'. In any event, given the flaws  identified  in
      the decision-making  process  it  is  not  realistically  possible  to
      preserve any of the findings of primary fact - positive or  adverse  -
      in remaking the decision in the appeal.


  30. In this latter regard I also have in mind the one favourable finding -
      "that the sponsor was a  "worker"  from  2  June  2014  up  until  the
      conclusion of her employment with ATK Diner  Limited  on  28  February
      2015" (paragraph 25). I do not  find  it  possible  to  reconcile  the
      Judge's acceptance of the sponsor's  credibility  and  the  supporting
      evidence provided in this regard, with the Judge's  rejection  of  the
      sponsor's testimony and supporting evidence in respect of previous and
      subsequent employment.


  31. In this context it is appropriate that I draw to the attention of  the
      parties one further matter that I have noticed from the  documents  on
      file, so that in advance of the rehearing either or both  parties  may
      consider whether they wish to look further  into  the  matter  and  or
      offer any explanation. It  is  this:  the  accountancy  firm,  Zakroom
      Financial Services, purportedly used by the  sponsor  to  prepare  the
      profit and loss accounts submitted to the Respondent in support of the
      Appellant's application appears to operate out of the same address  as
      the sponsor's purported most recent employer,  London  Flats  For  You
      Limited. This may just be coincidence, but if there is any  connection
      then that might cast substantial doubt on the veracity not only of the
      documents  in  relation  to  the  sponsor's  self-employment  and  her
      employment with London Flats, but in relation to the veracity of other
      documents  submitted  by  the  Appellant,  including   the   documents
      purported to  relate  to  the  sponsor's  employment  with  ATK  Diner
      Limited.


  32. Such documents did not emerge until the appeal process - the purported
      date of commencement of employment with ATK pre-dated the Respondent's
      decision by one day - and to date there has been  no  formal  position
      stated in respect of such documents by  the  Respondent.  Indeed  very
      little information is provided by either the Appellant or the  sponsor
      as to the nature of such employment, and it is not apparent  that  the
      Respondent has run any company search on any of the sponsor's supposed
      employers to establish whether or not they were ever actually trading,
      or - given the possible connection between Zakroom Financial  Services
      and London Flats, whether there might be any similar  connection  also
      with ATK by way of a common address or common directors or  otherwise.
      It is not, for  example,  clear  whether  the  address  given  on  the
      Appellant's contract of employment with ATK Diner Ltd is the company's
      registered address, or the trading address.


  33. Of course it is a matter for the Respondent as to the extent to  which
      she wishes to consider further the evidence that  has  been  filed  in
      this appeal. It is,  however,  to  be  emphasised  that  much  of  the
      evidence comprises materials  that  were  not  part  of  the  original
      application  and  were  not  considered  in  the  RFRL,  or  seemingly
      otherwise. As it stands not only is the  Appellant  and  the  Tribunal
      faced with a degree  of  uncertainty  as  to  the  Respondent's  exact
      position on the status of the marriage, but  is  also  faced  with  no
      considered or reasoned position in respect of most of  the  supporting
      documentary evidence relating to whether  or  not  the  sponsor  is  a
      'qualified person'. In the event that the Respondent does wish to look
      into such matters and state a position - and does so on the  basis  of
      maintaining the decision of 3 June 2014, rather  than  withdrawing  it
      and making a fresh decision - it will be necessary to file  and  serve
      any further reasons for maintaining the refusal in good time to permit
      the Appellant an opportunity to  address  such  matters  within  these
      proceedings.


  34. I turn then to address those matters  referred  to  in  the  grant  of
      permission to appeal.


  35. In doing so it is relevant to note  that  they  are  premised  on  two
      matters: that it has not been shown that the Appellant's  marriage  to
      the sponsor is a marriage of convenience; and the  favourable  finding
      of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  respect  of  the   sponsor's
      employment with ATK.


  36. For the reasons given above - essentially  my  broad  acceptance  that
      there is substance to aspects of the Appellant's challenge to the fact-
      finding of the First-tier Tribunal to  an  extent  that  none  of  the
      primary findings of fact, whether adverse or favourable, may safely be
      preserved - the latter premise no longer stands. It is required to  be
      re-determined whether the sponsor has ever been a  'qualified  person'
      within the meaning of the EEA Regulations.


  37. As regards the former premise -  that  the  marriage  is  not  one  of
      convenience - that is the natural corollary of the conclusion that the
      Judge erred in this regard,  and  that  moreover  the  Respondent  had
      neither asserted  that  there  was  a  marriage  of  convenience,  nor
      advanced any evidence to support such a  notion  in  the  decision.  I
      recognise  that  it  is  entirely   possible   that   the   RFRL   was
      infelicitously drafted - and indeed the Respondent's resistance of the
      challenge herein both by way of the Rule 24 response (dated 26 January
      2016) and the submissions of Ms Willocks Briscoe sought to uphold  the
      notion of a marriage of convenience - although it is not clear  to  me
      that this might not have been opportunistically in light of the First-
      tier Tribunal Judge's  finding,  rather  than  because  that  was  the
      intended original decision. Going forward, it seems to me that  it  is
      appropriate that the Respondent now be required to state her  position
      in this regard with clarity and reasons.


  38. Be that as it may, and in deference to the helpful discussion in which
      both  representatives  participated,  and  the  supplementary  written
      submissions I invited after the hearing to assist  in  clarifying  the
      applicable principles, it is appropriate that I say something  further
      in respect of those matters referenced in the grant of  permission  to
      appeal.


  39. The issues raised in the grant of permission to appeal relate  to  the
      circumstances of an EEA national present in the UK who ceases  working
      in consequence of a pregnancy. (These issues were not canvassed before
      the First-tier Tribunal, and no reference is to be found  to  them  in
      the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.)


  40. A woman who removes herself from the  job  market  by  reason  of  her
      pregnancy, and is not otherwise a self-sufficient person or a student,
      on the face of it appears to cease to be a 'qualified  person'  within
      the meaning of regulation 6 of the EEA  Regulations.  Nor  is  such  a
      person covered by regulation 5 - a worker or self-employed person  who
      has ceased activity, because a pregnancy does not satisfy any  of  the
      conditions of subparagraphs (2)-(5), and does not thereby  retain  the
      status of a worker or self-employed person.  Nor,  initially,  was  it
      immediately  apparent  to  me  that  the  situation  was  covered   by
      regulation 4, which does not overtly extend the status of 'worker'  to
      a person who has ceased working by reason of pregnancy.


  41. However, it is indeed within regulation 4 that  the  answer  lies,  by
      reference  to  the  definition  of  worker  at  regulation  4(1)(a)  -
      "'worker' means a worker within the  meaning  of  Article  45  of  the
      Treaty on the Functioning of the European  Union".  As  identified  at
      paragraph 15 of Weldemichael with reference to Jessy St Prix there  is
      in fact a body of  European  caselaw  which  extends  the  meaning  of
      'worker' beyond those actually in work to include, amongst  others  "a
      woman who gives up work, or seeking  work,  because  of  the  physical
      constraints of the late stages of pregnancy and the aftermath of child
      birth... provided she returns to work or finds another  job  within  a
      reasonable period after the  birth  of  her  child".  Necessarily,  it
      follows that such a person does indeed (and  contrary  to  my  initial
      impression) continue to be a 'qualified person' within the meaning  of
      regulation 6.


  42. In Weldemichael the Tribunal considered  what  constituted  'the  late
      stages  of  pregnancy',  the  'aftermath  of  child  birth'  and   the
      'reasonable period'  in  which  to  return  to  work.  The  Tribunal's
      conclusions are helpfully set out in the headnote,  which  essentially
      replicates the summary at paragraph 59. The headnote reads:


"An EEA national woman will retain continuity of residence for the  purposes
      of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the 2006
      EEA Regulations) for a period in which she was absent from working  or
      job-seeking owing to the physical constraints of the  late  stages  of
      pregnancy and the  aftermath  of  childbirth  if,  in  line  with  the
      decision of the CJEU in Jessy St Prix:

      a) at the beginning of the relevant period she was either a worker  or
         seeking employment;

      b) the relevant period commenced no more  than  11  weeks  before  the
         expected  date  of  confinement  (absent  cogent  evidence  to  the
         contrary that the woman was physically constrained from working  or
         seeking work);

      c) the relevant period did not extend beyond 52 weeks; and,

      d) she returned to work.

So long as these requirements are met,  there  will  be  no  breach  of  the
      continuity of residence for the purposes of regulation 15. Time  spent
      in the United Kingdom during such periods counts for the  purposes  of
      acquiring permanent residence."




  43. I pause to note that the key issue that arose in Weldemichael  related
      to continuity of residence in the context of a claim to be entitled to
      permanent residence by  reason  of  having  been  present  in  the  UK
      pursuant to the Regulations for 5 years. Whilst status as a 'qualified
      person' and 'continuity of residence' are not inevitably congruent, on
      the particular facts and circumstances the continuity of residence did
      indeed depend upon having had the status of a worker at  all  material
      times, and therefore the ratio in  Weldemichael  is  relevant  to  the
      issue of 'qualified person' that arises in the instant case.


  44. The Respondent, by way of Ms  Willocks-Briscoe's  Written  Submissions
      dated 9 March 2016 accepts in principle that where an EEA national can
      show that she was on maternity leave and her contract of employment is
      still subsisting, she will retain the status of worker, whether or not
      such maternity leave was paid or unpaid. However in the absence  of  a
      specific relevant contract of employment it is not accepted  that  the
      Appellant has demonstrated that  the  sponsor's  terms  of  employment
      provided for maternity  leave.  As  regards  the  possible  continuing
      status  as  a  worker  by  reference  to  the  guidance  provided   in
      Weldemichael, the Respondent does not accept that it  has  been  shown
      that the sponsor falls within  the  timetable.  In  particular  it  is
      submitted that the available evidence even if accepted as reliable and
      credible indicates that the sponsor ceased work  more  than  11  weeks
      prior to her expected date of confinement, and  that  accordingly  her
      absence from employment cannot be classed as an  absence  due  to  the
      physical constraints of pregnancy.


  45. Mr  Nicholson,  in  his  Further  Submissions  dated  10  March  2016,
      identifies that notwithstanding that the estimated date of confinement
      (or estimated date of delivery), was 27 August 2015, the sponsor's son
      was actually born on 6 July 2015. In this context Mr Nicholson  argues
      "that it would be  curious  if  in  a  case  where  a  baby  was  born
      prematurely the mother could be deprived of the status of  worker  due
      to her leaving work earlier than the stipulated period", and prays  in
      aid SSWP v SFF, ADR v SSWP, CS v LB Barnett & SSWP [2015] UKUT  UT0502
      (AAC).


  46. It was recognised in SFF and others, as indeed it was in Weldemichael,
      that the notion of physical constraint arising in the late  stages  of
      pregnancy is fact specific, and accordingly whilst 11  weeks  provided
      an appropriate yardstick a contrary proposition could be  accepted  on
      the facts of a particular case if supported by cogent evidence. For my
      own part, and bearing in mind both that it is not necessary for me  to
      reach a conclusion in this regard, and I have not had the  benefit  of
      amplified submissions from either party,  my  initial  observation  is
      that I am not readily persuaded that the  mere  fact  of  a  premature
      birth is cogent evidence of 'physical constraint' such that  it  would
      have been reasonable to give up work or seeking work 11 weeks prior to
      the expected date of delivery; more information and evidence is likely
      required to establish such a circumstance.


  47. Nor in this context do I consider it appropriate in the light  of  the
      adverse credibility findings generally (which now must be reconsidered
      and remade), and the absence of translated documentation, to  infer  -
      as Mr Nicholson invites at paragraph 9 of his  Further  Submissions  -
      from the Appellant's own assertions in respect of fertility  treatment
      and the removal of an  ovarian  cyst,  that  there  was  any  specific
      difficulty or problem with the actual pregnancy.  Without  more,  such
      circumstantial matters even if established do  not  obviously  provide
      cogent evidence to justify departing from the 11 week period specified
      in Weldemichael. The decision whether or not to do so will  ultimately
      be a matter for evaluation by the First-tier Tribunal Judge to whom it
      falls to remake the decision in  this  appeal  on  the  basis  of  all
      available evidence, which might be expected to include further medical
      evidence from those responsible for the care of the sponsor during and
      after her pregnancy, and will necessarily also  involve  consideration
      of the credibility of both the Appellant and the sponsor afresh.


  48. Further to the above, and in any event, it is  to  be  noted  that  Mr
      Nicholson's submissions  are  implicitly  premised  on  the  Appellant
      having been  employed  by  London  Flats  up  until  just  before  her
      departure from the UK. The supporting evidence in this  regard  refers
      to the sponsor being on maternity leave from 1 June 2015.  The  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge did not accept that evidence  (paragraphs  26-27).
      The Judge found that the Appellant had last worked on 28 February 2015
      - which is considerably more than 11 weeks prior to both the estimated
      date  of  confinement  and  the  actual  date  of  giving  birth.  The
      Appellant's claim in this regard is inevitably premised on being  able
      to establish that she was indeed employed by London Flats up until her
      departure for Hungary, or continues to be employed but  is  on  unpaid
      maternity leave. Inevitably this underscores that it is  not  possible
      to remake the decision in the appeal  without  a  rehearing  with  all
      issues at large.


  49. As also identified in the grant of permission to appeal, there remains
      the issue of continuity of residence,  with  particular  reference  to
      regulation 3(2)(c). Regulation 3(2)(a)  provides  that  continuity  of
      residence is not affected by  periods  of  absence  from  the  UK  not
      exceeding 6 months in total  in  any  year,  irrespective  of  reason.
      Regulation 3(2)(c)  provides  that  continuity  of  residence  is  not
      affected by any one absence from the UK not exceeding 12  months  "for
      an important reason such as pregnancy and childbirth".  On the face of
      it, and on the premise that the sponsor has returned to the  UK,  this
      would not appear to be likely to be problematic for the Appellant  and
      the sponsor. However, this is ultimately,  again,  a  matter  for  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge remaking the decision herein,  who  will  no
      doubt expect to see some proof of the sponsor's departure  and  return
      within a timescale appropriate to the Regulations.



Summary

  50. The decision of Judge Moxon contained a  material  error  of  law  and
      requires to be set aside. In all the circumstances the decision in the
      appeal requires to be remade after a fresh consideration of all of the
      evidence with all issues at large, and the most appropriate  forum  in
      this regard is the First-tier Tribunal.


  51. The following matters will likely require particular consideration  by
      the parties, and in turn the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  to  whom  the
      task of remaking the decision falls. However, for the avoidance of any
      doubt I offer such matters as guidance only,  and  nothing  herein  is
      designed to constrain the jurisdiction or independence of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge who will ultimately  consider  and  determine  all
      such matters as he or  she  thinks  appropriate  irrespective  of  any
      observations herein.

(i)   The Respondent will need to clarify her position as to whether or  not
      it is contended that the Appellant's marriage  to  the  sponsor  is  a
      marriage of convenience.

(ii)  If the marriage is not a marriage of convenience it will be  necessary
      to consider the sponsor's status as a 'qualified  person'.  This  will
      require findings in respect of her claimed employment history.  It  is
      plainly an issue between the parties as to  whether  the  sponsor  was
      ever a worker as claimed, and more  particularly  whether  she  was  a
      worker at or just before the time she left for Hungary.

(iii)  Moreover,  given  the  sponsor's  departure  from  work  during   her
      pregnancy it will be necessary to make findings as to  relevant  dates
      of ceasing to work and expected date of confinement. In particular  it
      may be necessary to consider  whether  there  is  cogent  evidence  to
      justify relaxing the 11 week period identified in Weldemichael because
      of any issues in respect of her pregnancy such that she was physically
      constrained from working by  reason  of  her  pregnancy,  for  example
      because of complications or other factors relating to health risks  to
      either herself or her unborn child.

(iv)  It may also be necessary for the  parties  to  address  the  issue  of
      returning to work - which may in part depend upon any findings  to  be
      made in respect  of  previous  employment  (which  if  accepted  might
      demonstrate  a  propensity  to  work,  but  if  not   accepted   might
      demonstrate a propensity not to work), and may  in  part  depend  upon
      postpartum attitudes and any complication  in  relation  to  postnatal
      depression.  There  is  no  specific  evidence  currently  before  the
      Tribunal in respect of the sponsor's attitude to  work  subsequent  to
      the birth of her child: the sponsor's witness statement of 14  January
      2015 is silent on the issue. This is a matter that may very much  turn
      on her oral testimony both in-chief and under  cross-examination.  (No
      further witness statement had been filed and served at the date of the
      hearing before me, and the sponsor was - again - not in attendance.)

(v)   I pause to note in this  context  that  the  grant  of  permission  to
      appeal carried with it an overt expectation that the  Appellant  would
      have been in a position to address such matters as are  identified  at
      (iii)  and  (iv)  -  both  in  terms  of  legal  submission  and  more
      particularly supporting evidence - by the date of the  hearing  before
      the Upper Tribunal.  This  was  not  the  case:  in  the  event  of  a
      continuing failure to provide an evidential basis for any  submissions
      in this regard, the Appellant might expect the  Tribunal  to  draw  an
      adverse inference, and in any event cannot  reasonably  expect  to  be
      permitted further time beyond the time inherent in relisting the  case
      to obtain such evidence.

(vi)  The parties may also need  to  address  the  issue  of  continuity  of
      residence.


  52. Further to the above, I make the following Directions.

                                 Directions

(i)   In the event that the Respondent undertakes any further checks on  the
      documents filed in the appeal, or  conducts  any  other  inquiries  or
      investigations relevant to the  Appellant's  application  and  appeal,
      (e.g. see paragraphs 31-33 above) the  written  results  of  any  such
      inquiries are to  be  filed  with  the  Tribunal  and  served  on  the
      Appellant, together with any relevant disclosable supporting materials
      within 28 days of the date of promulgation of this Decision.

(ii)  The Respondent is in any event to state her  position  in  respect  of
      the status of the Appellant's marriage - specifically whether  or  not
      it is contended that it is a 'marriage of convenience'. If it is,  the
      Respondent is also to state her reasons for  such  a  conclusion.  The
      Respondent's statement  of  her  position  in  this  regard,  and  any
      supporting reasons and any further supporting evidence are to be filed
      with the Tribunal and served on the Appellant within 28  days  of  the
      date of promulgation of this Decision.

(iii) The  Appellant  is  to  file  with  the  Tribunal  and  serve  on  the
      Respondent any further evidence upon which he wishes to rely within 28
      days of the date of promulgation of this Decision. In this context the
      Appellant and his advisers should give consideration to  the  contents
      of this Decision in identifying those areas where he might  reasonably
      be expected to provide evidence to address relevant issues.

(iv)  The appeal is not to be re-listed for hearing until at least  56  days
      after the promulgation of this Decision to provide adequate  time  for
      the parties to comply with Directions (i), (ii) and (iii)  above,  and
      to permit the parties a reasonable time to make any response  pursuant
      to Direction (v)  below,  and  also  to  consider  any  response  thus
      received.

(v)   The parties are at liberty to file and serve  any  further  supporting
      statements or other supporting evidence in response to  any  materials
      filed by the other party up to 14 days prior to the re-listed  hearing
      before the First-tier Tribunal.

(vi)  Both parties are at liberty to seek  variation  in  the  timetable  of
      these Directions  -  but  the  Appellant  should  be  mindful  of  the
      observations at paragraph 51(v) above in  respect  of  having  already
      been afforded an opportunity of addressing the  issues  identified  in
      the grant of permission to appeal herein.


  53. Finally, because in the course of this decision I  have  of  necessity
      expressed views as to the sustainable nature of some  of  the  adverse
      findings of fact of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  I  consider  it
      appropriate that I recuse myself from remaking this  decision  in  the
      First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

  54. The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error of
      law, and is set aside.


  55. The decision in the appeal is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Moxon or First-tier Tribunal Judge I A Lewis.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     8 June 2016



