
IAC-AH-SC-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25621/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 February 2015                  |On 17 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SAFEER AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwinycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Harris, UK Immigration Advisors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, Safeer Ahmed, was born on 31 December  1987  and  is  a
    male citizen of Pakistan.  I shall hereafter refer to the respondent as
    the appellant and the appellant as the  respondent  (as  they  appeared
    respectively before the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. The appellant appealed against the decision of the respondent to refuse
    him leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student.   The  decision  was
    taken on 17 January 2014.  The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hillis) in  a
    determination promulgated on 4 November 2014, allowed the appeal.   The
    respondent now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal were as follows:

         "8.  It is agreed that  the  Appellant  submitted  his  application
         online on the 18th  December,  2013.  As  it  was  made  online  it
         required the Appellant send the original mandatory documentation by
         post. The Appellant sent this documentation to the UKBA  Office  at
         Durham by recorded delivery and the letter from  Royal  Mail  shows
         that it was delivered on the 23rd December, 2013.

         9.   It was not until three days later, namely, the 26th  December,
         2013 (I bear in mind that this was the  Christmas  holiday  period)
         that a letter was sent from  the  UKBA  Office  at  Bootle  to  the
         Appellant stating that his documents had not been received, namely,
         the required photographs and evidence of  identity  documents  that
         are required to enable his application to be considered.  There  is
         no agreed date for the receipt of this letter but I  bear  in  mind
         that the 26th December, 2013 was a  bank  holiday  and  the  period
         between the 26th December, 2013 and the 10th January, 2014 included
         the New Year period and a weekend on the 28th  and  29th  December,
         2013 and the 4th and 5th January, 2014. It is, therefore, not clear
         that the Appellant had seven working days  from  the  date  of  the
         request being made to him which I infer must mean the date it would
         normally be received by him through the postal system.

         10.  The letter from the Bootle Office dated  26th  December,  2013
         was clearly sent after the Appellant had sent his documents to  the
         UKBA Durham Office. There is no submission before me that prior  to
         the receipt of that letter the Appellant was  on  notice  that  the
         documents were required to be sent to the Bootle Office and not any
         other UKBA  Office.  I  do  not  appear  to  have  a  copy  of  the
         Appellant's original Tier 4 online application before me and  infer
         that it did not state that the mandatory documents must be sent  to
         the Bootle Office of the UKBA. The Home Office Guidance  of  making
         Tier 4 student visa applications in the Section entitled "Documents
         you will need to send with your application"  does  not  appear  to
         specify that they be sent to the Bootle Office. It states, the Home
         Office will refuse any application where a request is made for  the
         supporting documents to be submitted, if  the  specified  documents
         are not  provided  to  us  within  the  period  specified  in  that
         request."

         11.  The Respondents wrote a letter to the Appellant  on  the  29th
         January, 2014 from their Bootle Office stating, "You  were  sent  a
         document reminder letter dated 26th January, 2013, reminding you to
         send in the required documents by 10th January.  We  received  your
         documentation on the 14th January, 2014 as you had sent them to the
         incorrect address. However your case had previously  been  rejected
         due to not receiving the required documents in time. We, therefore,
         cannot process your application."

         12.  There is no acknowledgment in that letter that  the  documents
         had, in fact been  received  at  the  Durham  Office  on  the  23rd
         December, 2013, three days  prior  to  the  date  on  the  document
         reminder letter of the 26th December, 2013, nor that  it  took  the
         Durham Office 22 days  to  forward  the  documents  to  the  Bootle
         Office. I also note here that the 10th January, 2014 was  a  Friday
         and that the documents were received by the Bootle Office from  the
         Durham Office two working days after they should have been.

         13.  I find that the Appellant, on the evidence before me, had,  in
         fact, submitted the required documents to the UKBA  at  the  Durham
         Office on the 23rd December, 2013. I also conclude  that  paragraph
         245 AA cannot apply to this Appellant's application as  the  letter
         of the 26th December requesting documentation to  be  sent  to  the
         Bootle Office was  after  the  UKBA  had,  in  fact,  received  the
         documents.

         14.  I find that had the Appellant contacted the Durham  Office  to
         have his documents returned to him to meet the requirements of  the
         letter of the 26th December, 2013 it is highly  unlikely  he  would
         have received them back in time to then send  them  to  the  Bootle
         Office on the 10th January, 2014 as it took them 22 days to forward
         them directly to the Bootle Office."

 4. The grounds of appeal state:

         "Nowhere in the determination  does  the  judge  identify  what  he
         considers to be an  immigration  decision  appealed  against,  that
         gives him jurisdiction to hear an appeal under Section 82(1) of the
         2002 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (sic).   He  has
         respectively submitted that the rejection of an invalid application
         does not quality as an immigration decision  within  the  terms  of
         Section 82(2) of that Act and so the judge was not entitled to hear
         an appeal against it."

 5. Judge Hillis concluded his decision as follows:

         "15. There is no submission before me that anything in the Home
         Office Guidance on making a Tier 4 Student Visa application or the
         application form itself instructing the Appellant that he was
         required to send the required documents only to the Bootle Office.
         I, therefore, find that the Appellant had submitted the mandatory
         documents with his online application by sending them by recorded
         delivery to the UKBA at the Durham Office and her decision to
         refuse to accept the Appellant's application as valid pursuant to
         paragraph 245AA is not in accordance with the relevant Immigration
         Rules and law.

         Conclusions


         16.  The burden of proof is on the Appellant and the usual civil
         standard of balance of probabilities applies.  I conclude, on the
         evidence taken as a whole, that there is an error in the Secretary
         of State's decision and that this appeal is allowed to the extent
         that it is a valid application that must be considered on its
         merits pursuant to the relevant Immigration Rules."

 6. As regards the grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  I  find  that
    these do not have merit.  I say that having regard to the  decision  of
    the Upper Tribunal in Basnet (validity  of  application  -  respondent)
    [2012] UKUT 00113 (IAC).  It is clear from Basnet that the  appeal  was
    properly before the Upper Tribunal:

         "The first matter for us to consider was whether the appellant  had
         a right of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  against  the  First-tier
         Tribunal's decision declining jurisdiction. The Presenting Officer,
         no doubt advisedly, did not dispute that the appellant has  such  a
         right of appeal. The case is on all fours with Abiyat.  The  First-
         tier Tribunal reached its decision to decline jurisdiction  not  by
         way of a Rule 9 notice, but following  full  consideration  of  the
         matter at a hearing, and expressed its conclusion in the form of  a
         determination. The appeal was therefore validly  before  the  Upper
         Tribunal. [16]"

 7. The Tribunal in Basnet went on to consider  what  constituted  a  valid
    application to the respondent:

         "The next question was whether the First-tier Tribunal was right to
         decide that it had no jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of the  First-
         tier Tribunal turned on whether a valid application had  been  made
         prior to the expiry of leave on 28 May  2011.  That  leads  to  the
         Immigration & Nationality (Fees) Regulations 2011 (2011  No  1055),
         which provide at Regulation 37:

             Consequences of failing to pay the specified fee.

             Where an application to which these Regulations refer is to be
             accompanied by a specified fee, the application is not validly
             made unless it has been accompanied by that fee.

         The question whether the  first  application  was  valid  therefore
         depends not upon whether the payment  was  successfully  processed,
         but on whether the application was accompanied by the fee.

         BE was concerned with the terms of the 2007 Regulations, but  there
         is no practical distinction for present purposes.  As held in  that
         case, an application is "accompanied by" a fee if it is:

             "... accompanied by such authorisation (of  the  applicant  or
             other person purporting to pay) as will enable the  respondent
             to  receive  the  entire  fee  in  question,  without  further
             recourse having to be made by the respondent to the payer."

         Accordingly we conclude that the Judge erred  at  paragraph  32  in
         considering that non-payment, for  whatever  reason,  even  if  the
         fault  of  the  respondent,  was  fatal  to  the  validity  of  the
         application  and  of  the  subsequent  appeal.  Validity   of   the
         application is determined  not  by  whether  the  fee  is  actually
         received but by whether the application is accompanied by  a  valid
         authorisation to obtain the entire fee that  is  available  in  the
         relevant bank account."

 8. The facts in the present case, of course, are different for  Basnet  in
    that it is not disputed that the appellant paid the required fee to the
    respondent.  The question here is whether  or  not  the  appellant  had
    failed to make a valid  application  because  he  sent  his  supporting
    documents to the  "wrong"  address.   Mr  Harris,  for  the  appellant,
    provided me  with  a  copy  of  the  Home  Office  guidance  (specified
    application forms and procedures) valid from 30 May 2014.  At page 7 of
    76 it is stated that:

         "Valid online application under the standard route.

         The applicant must:

         .    Submit any supporting documents specified  'mandatory'  within
             fifteen  working  days  from  the  date  the  application  was
             submitted.  The 'mandatory' documents are:

             .    Passport and/or travel document.

             .    Passport-style photographs.

             .    Biometric residence permit (if owned).

             .    Police registration certificate (if applicable).

         .    Attend an appointment  to  provide  biometric  information  if
             requested they must provide the biometric information  in  the
             timescale set out by the request."

 9. The respondent's officers are instructed  to  carry  out  a  validation
    check when an application has been  submitted  in  particular  checking
    "mandatory documents were submitted within fifteen  working  [days]  of
    the application being submitted."  The guidance indicates that "if [the
    requested mandatory documents] have not [been submitted within  fifteen
    working days of the application] the application must  be  rejected  as
    invalid."

10. The point made by Mr Harris is that nowhere in this guidance, even less
    in the Immigration Rules themselves, does it state that  the  documents
    must be submitted to a particular address of the  respondent.   In  the
    present case, the appellant was particularly quick  off  the  mark  and
    sent the documents to what he assumed to  be  the  correct  address  in
    Durham.  By the  time  that  he  was  subsequently  told  to  send  the
    documents to an address in  Bootle,  he  was  left  in  the  impossible
    position of being unable to meet the deadline  for  submission  of  the
    documents, given that he would have had to have received them back from
    Durham and then resubmitted them to Bootle. There would  have  been  no
    time to do so before the deadline was reached.

11. In these particular and  unusual  circumstances,  I  agree  with  Judge
    Hillis that there was no requirement on this appellant  to  submit  the
    documents to the Bootle office.   There  was  no  suggestion  that  the
    appellant acted incorrectly by sending the documents to  Durham  before
    he received the letter directing him to send them to Bootle; indeed, it
    is difficult to see why the appellant  should  be  criticised  for  his
    alacrity.  What is even more problematic from the point of view of  the
    respondent is the fact that the Durham office did not simply reject the
    documents and return them to the appellant  but  rather  forwarded  the
    documents to the Bootle office.  Having decided to do this on behalf of
    the appellant but having taken 22 days to do so, it seems extraordinary
    that the respondent should then  reject  the  application  because  the
    appellant  had  failed  to  meet  the  deadline.   I  find   that   the
    respondent's case is significantly weakened by the reason of the Durham
    office having agreed to forward the documents  to  Bootle  rather  than
    return them to the appellant.  If the Durham office had acted  at  with
    greater efficiency the documents would have  been  received  in  Bootle
    before the expiry of the deadline.

12. In conclusion, therefore, I find that: (a)  there  is  a  valid  appeal
    before the Upper Tribunal; (b) given that there was no  requirement  in
    the Immigration Rules to send the specified documents to  a  particular
    address of the respondent, the appellant complied with the  requirement
    to submit to the respondent the specified documents by sending then  to
    the Durham office; (c) even if there remains some doubt as to (b),  the
    Durham office effectively acted as the appellant's agent by agreeing to
    forward the documents to the office in Bootle.  Any failure  to  ensure
    that those documents reached Bootle before the expiry of  the  deadline
    for submission of the documents  was  the  fault  of  the  respondent's
    officers at Durham, and not the appellant himself.  In any event, it is
    my primary finding that Judge Hillis was right  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant had complied with the requirement by sending the documents to
    Durham; (d) as noted above, Judge Hillis allowed the appeal but only to
    the extent that the application of the appellant should  be  considered
    by the respondent on its merits.  That, in my view,  was  entirely  the
    appropriate outcome.  It is now for  the  respondent  to  consider  the
    application and the documents to make a decision on the merits; (f)  in
    my decision I have gone beyond the grounds of appeal as pleaded to  the
    Upper Tribunal by the respondent.  Those grounds deal exclusively  with
    the question of whether  there  was  an  immigration  decision  validly
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  Following the Tribunal's determination
    in Basnet, I find that Judge Hillis was right to conclude there  was  a
    valid application made to the respondent and that this only  ground  of
    appeal, therefore, is without merit.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 15 April 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

