

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25052/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18th September 2013                        |On 4th October 2013          |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before


                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE   D E TAYLOR
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                          DONALD ONOSEDEBA OKPEKPE

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Spio-Aidoo, of E Spio Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal brought by the Appellant from a  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Napthine who dismissed an appeal by  the  Appellant
    against a decision to refuse to issue him with  a  permanent  residence
    card in  accordance  with  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations") as a family member.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 1st January 1968.
     On 11th August 2003 the Appellant married Margaret Pamela Okpekpe  in
    Vienna.  It is asserted on behalf of the Appellant  that  he  moved  to
    London along with his wife on 23rd August 2003 and that they  lived  at
    an address there from August 2003 until June 2004.  On 24th August 2004
    he presented himself to UKBA as the spouse of Margaret Pamela  Okpekpe,
    an EEA national  who  exercising  her  treaty  rights  in  the  UK  and
    accordingly on 5th October 2004 was issued with an EEA  residence  card
    on this basis.  It is said that the marriage between  the  parties  was
    annulled by Margaret Okpekpe on 4th May 2004  in  Vienna,  however  the
    Appellant claims to have been unaware of that fact until a date in 2008
    and it is claimed that she carried out those  proceedings  without  his
    knowledge.  It is asserted on behalf  of  the  Appellant  that  despite
    that, the parties lived together between 2003 until their separation in
    2008.

 3. On 1st October 2009 the Appellant made a human rights  application  for
    leave to remain in the UK on the basis that his mother was residing  in
    the United Kingdom and that he had previously been married  to  an  EEA
    national.  That application was refused.

 4. On 7th January 2012  the  Appellant  applied  for  permanent  residence
    stating that in 2008, whilst the relationship was ongoing  between  the
    Appellant and Margaret Okpekpe, he discovered  that  she  had  had  the
    marriage annulled and it was upon discovering  of  the  annulment  that
    that brought around the end of the relationship, on the basis  that  he
    was a family member of an EEA national and that he had resided  in  the
    UK with an EEA national in accordance with the EEA  Regulations  for  a
    continuous period of five years.

 5. In a notice of  immigration  decision  dated  30th  October  2012  that
    application was refused because the Respondent was not  satisfied  that
    the Appellant  had  five  years'  lawful  residence  as  an  "unmarried
    partner".  Full reasons for the decision were set out in  a  Notice  of
    Refusal of the same date.

 6. The Appellant exercised his right  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Napthine)  on  25th
    February 2013.

 7. In a determination promulgated on 4th March 2013, the judge found  that
    the Appellant was never married to Margaret Pamela Okpekpe  during  the
    time that he had been in the United Kingdom on  the  basis  that  their
    marriage was annulled on 4th May 2004, which had the effect of voiding
    it ab initio, that is, as if they had  never  been  married,  therefore
    there was no marriage to  refer  back  to.   At  paragraph  11  of  the
    determination, the judge  reached  the  conclusion  that  even  if  the
    marriage were not void ab initio, in the light of the ruling  of  Ahmed
    (Amos; Zambrano; Regulation 5A(3)(c) 2006 EEA Regulations) [2013]  UKUT
    00089 (IAC) the spouse  of  an  EEA  national/union  citizen  does  not
    acquire a retained right of residence upon a  divorce  unless  the  EEA
    national was in the United Kingdom and exercising treaty rights at  the
    date of the lawful termination of the marriage: Amos  [2011]  EWCA  Civ
    552 was followed.  Thus the judge concluded the Appellant would not  be
    assisted in the light of that  decision  and  that  he  had  no  rights
    flowing from any marriage that he may  have  contracted  with  Margaret
    Pamela Okpekpe.

 8. The judge made reference to the application that the Appellant had made
    to a court in Vienna to have the annulment set aside  which  was  still
    outstanding.  The judge therefore found that at the date of the hearing
    the marriage was still annulled and thus there was no marriage to refer
    to.  The judge also observed that matters may be different if and  when
    the court in Vienna acts to reinstate the marriage if it was minded  to
    do so but that at the present time "there is no reason to  suppose  the
    court will so act."

 9. The judge therefore concluded that the Appellant  had  not  established
    five years' residence in the UK to enable him to claim under Regulation
    15.

10. The rest of the determination dealt with the Appellant's removal in the
    light of Article 8 of the ECHR.  At paragraphs  15  to  23,  the  judge
    dealt with Article 8 and with particular reference to his  family  life
    and private life but did not  find  that  Article  8  was  engaged  and
    dismissed the appeal.

11. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision  on  the  basis
    that the judge had failed to consider evidence placed before the First-
    tier Tribunal demonstrating that the Appellant and his  wife  had  been
    living together from 2003 until their separation in or about  2008  and
    that she had been exercising treaty rights in the UK  whilst  together.
    Therefore, the judge had failed to consider the fact that  the  parties
    had been living together as unmarried partners and whether  or  not  he
    had been in a  durable  relationship  with  an  EEA  national  and  had
    therefore satisfied the Regulations, demonstrating that he had  resided
    in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of five years. There  was
    no challenge raised in the grounds to the decision reached by the First-
    tier Tribunal in respect of Article 8 of the ECHR.

12. Permission was granted on 26th March 2013 on the following grounds:

         "1.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Napthine dismissed  the  Appellant's
             appeal against the decision of the  Respondent  to  refuse  to
             issue a residence card as confirmation of a right of residence
             of the family member of  an  EEA  national  having  regard  to
             Regulation  8(5)  and  10(1)(b)  of  the   Immigration   (EEA)
             Regulations 2006, and on human rights grounds.

          2.  Although reference is made in the grounds for Regulation 15(1)
             the grounds,  submit  in  terms,  that  the  judge  failed  to
             consider Regulation 8(5) of the Regulations.

          3.  It is arguable that the judge  concentrated  only  on  whether
             there had been a valid marriage and its duration  that  failed
             to consider whether, even outside marriage there  had  been  a
             durable relationship and the length of time  it  had  endured.
             This amounts to an arguable error of law."

Error of Law

13. Thus the  appeal  came  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on the 15th  May  2013,  the  Upper  Tribunal  reached  the
    conclusion that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  disclosed
    an error of law for the following reasons:

         "18. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Napthine)
             made a material error of  law.   The  Regulations  demonstrate
             that a family member of an EEA national who is not himself  an
             EEA national but has resided in the United  Kingdom  with  the
             EEA  national  in  accordance  with  the  Regulations  for   a
             continuous period of five years acquires a permanent right  of
             residence.  The question raised in this appeal was whether  or
             not the Appellant had established that he had been resident in
             the United Kingdom for a period five years on the  basis  upon
             which it was asserted by the Appellant that he had lived  with
             Margaret Okpekpe notwithstanding the annulment of the marriage
             between 2003 and 2008.

         19. It is clear from the determination that the judge  dealt  with
             the case on the basis of the validity of the marriage and  its
             duration and the circumstances surrounding  the  annulment  of
             the marriage but had failed to consider whether, even  outside
             marriage if there had been  a  durable  relationship  and  the
             length of time this had endured.  Despite the  marriage  being
             annulled, this was a case in which it was asserted  on  behalf
             of the Appellant that the parties continued to  live  together
             between 2003  and  2008  and  thus  the  issue  of  a  durable
             relationship was raised based on their living together  as  an
             unmarried couple.  It is clear from the determination, and the
             concession made on behalf of the Secretary of  State  by  Miss
             Pal that this was an error of law.  It  is  right  to  observe
             that Miss Pal did not concede that it was  a  material  error.
             However I consider that the error was material.  If  a  person
             can demonstrate that they have  five  years  of  residence  in
             accordance  with  the  Regulations  that  person  acquires   a
             permanent  right   of   residence.    If   that   relationship
             subsequently comes to an end, the permanent right of residence
             is not lost unless that person leaves the UK for a  period  of
             two years (I refer to the Regulation  15(2)).   Thus  in  this
             case it was incumbent upon the judge to make a decision  based
             on the evidence placed before the Tribunal as  to  whether  or
             not  there  had  been  a  durable  relationship  between   the
             Appellant and Margaret Okpekpe and the length of time that  it
             had endured.  The Regulations demonstrate that if  a  claimant
             could not establish five years' residence, they would  not  be
             able to acquire a  permanent  right  of  residence  and  would
             therefore have to show a durable relationship at the  date  of
             the hearing (see Regulation 8(5)).  The Appellant would not be
             able to show that because he was not in  a  relationship  with
             Margaret Okpekpe since a date in 2008.

         20. The following relevant issues remain and were not  dealt  with
             by the FtT principally because no findings of fact  were  made
             concerning the circumstances of  the  annulment,  the  alleged
             relationship which was said to continue between 2003 and  2008
             and whether it was established that they were living  together
             nor whether the Appellant's former wife was exercising  treaty
             rights during the period. On the basis of his case as was  put
             before the FtT (although no findings were made  upon  it)  was
             that he was in a relationship irrespective of  the  annulment.
             The relevant Regulations would  demonstrate  that  he  may  be
             deemed to be family member under Regulation  7(3)  if  he  was
             firstly  an  extended  family  member  and  secondly,  had   a
             residence card. The fact that a residence card  as  issued  in
             October 2004 on the basis of the marriage may have  relevance.
             It was issued on the basis of his marriage and not as an  EFM.
             Thus the questions  remain;  was  there  a  relationship  that
             continued from 2003-2008 and the nature of it, was his  former
             wife exercising treaty rights during the relevant  period  and
             what was the status of  the  residence  card  issued  in  2004
             (which was based on marriage and not as an EFM) and whether it
             was a nullity in the light  if  the  annulment  and  does  the
             Appellant fall within Regulation 7(3).

         21. Thus I am  satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal is materially flawed in law and  consequently  I  set
             the decision aside.  There will have to be a  resumed  hearing
             before the Upper Tribunal to consider this issue further which
             will involve a consideration of the Appellant and his  witness
             giving evidence and for the evidence to be considered  in  the
             light of the documents provided before the First-tier Tribunal
             and the relevant Regulations.  "

14. Thus the decision in respect of the EEA Regulations was set aside to be
    re-made at a resumed hearing.

The re-making of the decision:

15. The Appellant was represented by Ms Spio-Aidoo and the Respondent by Ms
    Everett, Senior Presenting Officer.  At the outset of  the  hearing  we
    heard from Ms Everett concerning the matters set  out  in  the  refusal
    letter.  She informed the Tribunal that the  refusal  letter  had  been
    decided under a misapprehension of the law and of the  facts  and  that
    accordingly there was no concession on the part  of  the  Secretary  of
    State concerning the issue of whether the  Appellant  had  demonstrated
    that he was in a durable relationship with an EEA national  during  the
    requisite  period.   Ms  Spio-Aidoo  confirmed  that  the  appeal   had
    proceeded before the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis that the  issue  was  to  determine  whether  the  Appellant  had
    demonstrated that he was in such a relationship and that that  was  the
    purpose of the hearing before this Tribunal.

16. It was also common ground between the parties that the issues  that  we
    must determine were two-fold; whether the Appellant was  in  a  durable
    relationship for the requisite period and whether the EEA national  was
    exercising treaty rights or was otherwise  a  qualified  person  during
    that time period, namely August 2003 until August 2008.

The Evidence

17. The Appellant's bundles were numbered A and B for convenience.   Bundle
    A consisted of the  original  bundle  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    numbering pages 1 - 50 (not 60 as erroneously set out  in  the  index).
    Bundle B consisted of other documentation such as bills provided before
    the Upper Tribunal.  There were also some additional documents provided
    on the morning of the hearing which formed bundle C.  Ms Everett relied
    upon the Respondent's bundle and in  addition  provided  a  copy  of  a
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Blair-Gould) concerning
    an application made by this Appellant  in  2010  for  leave  to  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules.

18. We also heard oral evidence from the Appellant.  The Appellant  adopted
    his statement (see pages 10 and 11 of bundle A).  He confirmed that  he
    had entered the United Kingdom in August 2003.  He  had  not  travelled
    with his wife Margaret because he had come  by  himself.   A  few  days
    later she later joined him.  He said  in  his  evidence  that  she  had
    worked for the same company but she worked in Ealing and he had  worked
    in Shepherds Bush.  He said that when they first lived together it  was
    at an address Southall but they moved from that address on a date  that
    he could not remember in 2004 and thereafter lived  at  an  address  at
    Westminster Road in Hanwell.

19.  He was asked about his relationship with Margaret and stated  that  it
    was a good relationship in fact it was a great relationship.   He  said
    that they did not have children but that at one point his  partner  was
    expecting a baby and made reference to K6 of  the  Respondent's  bundle
    document (dated 9/10/2006).  He was asked about the time when  she  was
    pregnant and he had claimed that she had lost the baby and then she had
    had fibroids.  When asked what year that was the Appellant stated "2005
    or 2006 I can't remember which".   He  claimed  that  she  was  working
    throughout the time she was in the United Kingdom.   He  was  asked  in
    evidence-in-chief to remember the exact time that he had moved  out  of
    the property.  The Appellant said that he had moved out "some  time  in
    2009".  He gave an explanation that he was disturbed when he found  out
    about the annulment and moved out.  He took his stuff and then called a
    friend.  He spoke to friends from the church and they tried to "put  us
    together" he said that they were always in contact  with  Margaret  and
    that there was a lot of "coming and going" with a lot of people talking
    to them from the church about the relationship.  He was  asked  whether
    in 2008 they were in a relationship.  He stated that  they  had  always
    lived as a couple.

20.  In  cross-examination  he  was  asked  about  his  witness   statement
    (paragraph 8) in which he had stated he had moved out in 2008 after  he
    had discovered the annulment.  The Appellant stated that that  was  not
    correct and that he did not move out.  He gave an explanation  that  he
    tried to ask her about it (the annulment) to figure out why she did it.
     He claimed that he had just left and spoke to friends who were  trying
    to "put them back together".  He claimed that it was in April 2009 that
    he moved out fully.  He was asked when he discovered this deception and
    he stated that it was "April 2008".  When asked why it was  April  2008
    he then said it was early 2008 but he was not sure.  He was  asked  why
    they finally separated in 2009 on his own evidence.  He  said  that  he
    wanted to know why she had done it (by  reference  to  the  annulment).
    When asked by the Presenting Officer to give the  reason  why  she  had
    annulled the marriage the  Appellant  stated  that  "I  have  no  idea,
    everyone came to talk to us and wanted to know. I can't understand  why
    she did it."  He was asked if he had stayed in touch with  her  and  he
    said that he had not although friends have seen her and she had been to
    the local church.

21. He was asked in cross-examination  about  the  documents  that  he  had
    produced and he how he had obtained them.  He gave an explanation  that
    they put all the documents in one place including bills  etc.   He  was
    asked specifically how he had obtained Margaret's  payslips.   He  said
    that when he left he tried to sort out  his  stuff  and  "somehow  some
    stuff came with me."  He was asked whether he  had  taken  the  medical
    documents when he had left in 2009.   He said that he had  taken  those
    documents and had kept them since 2009.  When asked  why  he  had  kept
    them he claimed that "everyone keeps documents".  He was asked that  in
    making the application he would have to  provide  evidence  as  to  her
    circumstances and whether or not he had got in touch with Margaret?  He
    said that he had not.

22. He was then asked in cross-examination about her medical  problems  and
    asked to tell the court what they were.  He said he could not tell  the
    court of any details.  When asked why he did not know he  said  he  did
    not know about her medical problems.  He said  that  he  had  had  some
    tests.  The only thing he said he remembered was that she had fibroids.



23. As to the proceedings in Vienna, his statement was put to him where  he
    claimed to be in "constant contact with the lawyer".  He was  asked  if
    the proceedings were still ongoing and he said that they were.  He  was
    asked what the current situation was.   The Appellant replied "I  don't
    know".  He then claimed that he had been in contact with  his  Viennese
    lawyer and that the "Vienna court was contacting someone in London.   I
    don't know the details."  He was then asked why he  wanted  to  reverse
    the annulment and declared in his evidence that he was not  seeking  to
    do so.  He said that he was just seeking to find out an explanation  as
    to why it had occurred.  He claimed that he had obtained legal  aid  in
    respect of the proceedings.  He confirmed that he had never received an
    explanation from Margaret as to why she had annulled the marriage.

24. We heard no further evidence from any other witness called on behalf of
    the Appellant.

Submissions

25. We heard submissions from each of the advocates.  Ms Everett  submitted
    that the Appellant had not given credible evidence before the Tribunal.
     This was a situation which beggared belief and there was  no  evidence
    from the absent party involved as to why she would obtain an  annulment
    when it was asserted that the parties had carried on  living  together.
    The Appellant's claim is that he has never had an explanation for  this
    which is surprising.

26.   As to the date in which he had ended  the  relationship  and  he  had
    moved out, the evidence before the court had always been on  the  basis
    that it was in 2008 although the month had never been  specified.   His
    oral evidence now was inconsistent with that  by  claiming  it  was  in
    2009.  Even if there was evidence to demonstrate there  was  a  durable
    relationship after the date of the annulment, the Appellant  could  not
    discharge the burden  upon  him  to  show  that  there  was  a  durable
    relationship between August 2003 and August 2008.

27. The Appellant had not given a credible account of how he had kept  hold
    of his wife's documents.  The account given of keeping  important  ones
    in the box and then taking some documents  but  not  others  is  not  a
    credible explanation for the failure  to  produce  a  coherent  set  of
    documents.  There are also no cogent reasons given as to why he had not
    contacted his wife to obtain the documentation he required, if it  were
    the position that he  had  been  in  a  durable  relationship  for  the
    requisite period and that she had been exercising treaty rights.   This
    was not a case of it being deeply acrimonious and the court should  not
    accept the explanation as to why there is insufficient documentation.

28. As to  the  proceedings  in  Vienna  they  have  been  ongoing  for  an
    extraordinarily long length of time.  It is not clear why he would wish
    to rectify the annulment but then only seek an explanation  as  to  the
    reasons for seeking such an order given the length  of  time  that  had
    elapsed.  There is no  reliable  or  plausible  account  given  by  the
    Appellant concerning those proceedings.  As to the health  problems,  a
    further extraordinary detail is that it is claimed that the couple were
    trying to have a baby but the Appellant could not give any  details  as
    to  what  the  outcome  was  and  his  evidence  in  this  respect  was
    implausible.  Ms Everett submitted  that  the  documentation  taken  in
    conjunction with the evidence was not  reliable;  whilst  she  did  not
    claim that the documents were fraudulently obtained  there  was  little
    upon their contents to demonstrate that this was a durable relationship
    between the requisite dates.

29. Ms Spio-Aidoo relied upon the skeleton argument that she had  produced.
    In addition she submitted that the Appellant  moved  out  in  2009  and
    never returned to  the  property.   She  said  that  he  had  submitted
    documents to show that in November 2008 it was in the document making a
    paying for visa card at bundle C.  Whilst the date of payment was  said
    to be 3rd December 2008 she conceded it  did  reflect  historically  an
    earlier period.

30. As to his history, she submitted that he had demonstrated that  he  had
    entered the United Kingdom in August 2003 and had shown evidence of his
    previous address.  There were documents to show that there was  council
    tax addressed to both of them and a tenancy agreement  in  their  joint
    names.  She submitted that Margaret was still living at the address  at
    7 Westminster Road.  However there was no evidence in support  of  that
    provided.  She submitted that the Vienna proceedings have no bearing on
    the current case and that he had given a credible account as to why  he
    continued with the proceedings because he wished to know  why  she  had
    sought an annulment of the marriage and that was understandable.

31. She submitted that they had lived together for five years  having  been
    granted a residence permit in 2004.  He had never travelled outside the
    UK for two years and thus if he could  demonstrate  and  establish  the
    five year period he would be entitled to permanent residence.  Thus  on
    the documentation  taken  in  conjunction  with  his  evidence  he  had
    discharged  the  burden  upon  him  to  demonstrate  that  he  met  the
    Regulations.

32. We reserved our determination.



Findings of fact and analysis of the evidence:

33. From the evidence before us we find that the Appellant married Margaret
    Pamela Okpekpe on 11th August 2003.  There does  not  seem  to  be  any
    dispute between the parties that she moved to London and  that  he  and
    his wife set up home at an address  in  Southall  between  August  2003
    until a date in June 2004.  On 24th August  2004  he  presented  before
    UKBA as a spouse of Margaret Pamela Okpekpe who was said to be  an  EEA
    national exercising treaty rights in the  UK  and  accordingly  on  5th
    October he was issued with a residence card on this basis.

34. What happened during this period of time we find to be an extraordinary
    set of events.  The  evidence  before  us  demonstrates  that  Margaret
    Okpekpe travelled from the  United  Kingdom  to  Vienna  to  obtain  an
    annulment of the marriage.  The documents before  us  demonstrate  that
    she obtained a judgment in this respect  on  12th  March  2004  in  the
    Hernals District Court to annul the marriage that had only taken  place
    a  matter  of  some  seven  months   previously.    The   documentation
    demonstrates the marriage  was  formally  annulled  on  4th  May  2004.
    However it is the Appellant's case that he was unaware of this until  a
    date in 2008 and that she had carried out those proceedings without his
    knowledge and that notwithstanding the  annulment,  the  parties  lived
    together in a durable relationship until  their  separation  some  five
    years later.  It is on the basis of this  account  that  the  Appellant
    claims that he was in a durable relationship with the EEA national  and
    had completed five  years'  residence  and  is  therefore  entitled  to
    permanent residence under the EEA Regulations.

35. As we say this is an extraordinary state of affairs  that  two  parties
    can remain living together in a relationship against the background  of
    one party taking the step of obtaining an order for annulment which  by
    its  effect  undermines  the  whole  basis  of   their   marriage   and
    relationship.  We have therefore considered with care  and  scrutinised
    the evidence of the Appellant and the documents that have been produced
    in  support  of  his  claim  that  notwithstanding  this  extraordinary
    position, the parties remained together for a period of five years.

36. We should say something about the nature of  the  evidence  before  us.
    Despite  the  Appellant's  case  that  this  was  a  relationship  that
    continued for a lengthy period of time notwithstanding  the  annulment,
    the only evidence to confirm this is from the Appellant himself and  by
    the production of some documentation.  There is no oral  evidence  from
    any of the friends whom he claimed during his oral  evidence  had  been
    involved in keeping the parties together nor any statements from  those
    who were members of the same church that both parties attended.   There
    is no evidence from Margaret herself in any form whatsoever.

37.   The documentary evidence that has been produced  we  consider  to  be
    piecemeal and does not appear to have been disclosed in  its  entirety.
    It consists of copy bills including  council  tax  bills  although  the
    payment of the  council  tax  is  not  shown,  "letters"  addressed  to
    Margaret from banking or other services and some medical documents that
    do not follow sequentially.   Therefore we have evaluated the  evidence
    with care and remind ourselves that the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
    Appellant to demonstrate on the balance of probabilities that he was in
    a durable relationship for the requisite period of time.

38. We have also had the opportunity to  hear  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and for this to be the subject of  cross-examination  in  the
    light of the documents provided by  both  parties.   Having  heard  his
    evidence, we have not found the  Appellant  to  have  been  a  credible
    witness upon whose evidence we can place weight and reliance.  We  have
    reached this conclusion for a number of reasons which will be  apparent
    from our determination of the factual elements of this case.  We do not
    find  that  he  has  been  truthful  concerning  the  nature   of   the
    relationship between himself and his former wife.  The steps  taken  by
    her to annul the marriage are indicative of serious problems within the
    relationship itself.  It is of significance that she  did  not  seek  a
    divorce but sought an order that would mean that the marriage was  void
    ab initio as if it had never taken place.

39. The Appellant was asked a number of questions concerning the  knowledge
    he had of the reasons why she would have  taken  such  a  step  if  she
    intended to continue the  relationship  as  he  had  claimed.   He  was
    specifically asked why she had done this.  The Appellant claimed in his
    evidence to have no idea whatsoever and could  provide  no  explanation
    before us as to why such steps had been taken by his partner.

40. We do not accept that he would have no idea as  to  why  she  had  done
    this.  The Appellant's evidence was that after she had found out  about
    the annulment the parties remained together with the  assistance  of  a
    number of friends and colleagues from their church  who  had  tried  to
    mediate between them.  According to his oral account  this  took  place
    over a number of months.  We find it inconceivable that  the  Appellant
    during  this  period  did  not  find  out  any  information  whatsoever
    concerning the reasons for the annulment.

41. Furthermore the Appellant has instructed solicitors in Vienna to  begin
    proceedings to set aside the annulment of the Hernals  District  Court.
    The basis of the appeal appears to be that the Appellant  was  deprived
    of an opportunity to be "tried before the court"  and  that  there  had
    been a "failure to notify him of the proceedings" (see  document  dated
    29th November 2010).  Despite that, the Appellant  claims  to  have  no
    idea whatsoever as the reasons given by his former wife to support  the
    annulment.  We do not believe the Appellant's account.  The proceedings
    have been ongoing since 2010 and according to the evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal in February 2013 the proceedings were still  active
    and ongoing whereby the Appellant was seeking to set  aside  the  order
    (see First-tier Tribunal determination and also skeleton  argument  for
    this hearing at paragraph 6).  He has therefore been a party  to  these
    proceedings for a number of years and has been a party  that  has  been
    legally represented and able  to  obtain  disclosure  of  the  original
    petition for the annulment and judgment setting  out  the  reasons  for
    such an order.  We do not believe that he would be in ignorance of  the
    reasons given or evidence produced to support  an  annulment  when  set
    against the background of his own evidence  regarding  the  proceedings
    that he has taken himself.

42. We also find that the documentary evidence the Appellant  has  produced
    concerning the proceedings is selective and piecemeal.  It consists  of
    a decision of the Hernals District Court for Mr Okpekpe (known  as  the
    defendant) to "submit the appeal on 8th June 2010 in an improved  form"
    (see 28 - 29 bundle A).  There is an appeal  against  the  judgment  of
    12th March 2004 dated 29th November 2010 (pages  31  -  34).   Some  of
    those documents at pages 22 to 23 are not translated.  The most  recent
    document is a letter from his legal representative in Vienna dated  3rd
    February 2012 attaching the documents for the appeal stating "till  now
    I did not reach a decision of the court.  We will have  to  wait  until
    the upper court will send."

43. The current state of the proceedings was a subject of cross-examination
    before us.  In particular his witness statement (paragraph 14) was  put
    to him in which he had stated that he was "in constant contact with  my
    lawyer in Vienna".  Thus he  was  asked  about  that  claim  to  be  in
    constant contact but  yet  to  have  no  information  to  provide  this
    Tribunal with concerning the proceedings, their outcome and the reasons
    for seeking the annulment in the first place.  He then claimed  in  his
    oral evidence the lawyer had been contacting someone but that "I  don't
    know the details". When asked "what does the lawyer say  about  finding
    out?" (in relation to the  details  of  the  annulment)  The  Appellant
    replied "not much."

44. We  found  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant  to  be  unimpressive  and
    consequently do not believe his account that he has no idea as  to  why
    his former wife sought to annul the marriage and we do not find him  to
    have been entirely truthful about the nature  of  the  relationship  at
    that time.

45. Notwithstanding the annulment there is some evidence before us that the
    couple were involved in the early stages of fertility treatment.  Again
    the documentary evidence is piecemeal and has not been fully disclosed.
     Indeed the documents do not appear to follow each other  sequentially.
    The first document in time is a letter dated 6th April 2005 sent  to  a
    doctor in respect of Margaret Okpekpe from  a  consultant  obstetrician
    and gynaecologist.  The diagnosis/problem is stated  to  be  "secondary
    infertility".  It refers to a review in the clinic which took place  on
    4th March 2005 and refers in its contents to initial steps taken by way
    of endocrine screening but that she had not had an HSG  or  ultrasound.
    It makes reference to semen analysis on her partner.  The  document  at
    page 36 is consistent with the contents of  that  letter  and  page  35
    refers to a semen  analysis  for  a  sample  that  was  taken  on  27th
    September 2004.  This relates back to the clinic review  on  4th  March
    2005.  Thus we conclude from that evidence the parties were involved in
    the initial stages of undergoing tests concerning infertility  problems
    during 2004 and 2005.

46.   However we do not accept his account that at a  later  date  she  had
    become pregnant.  He was cross-examined about this issue and when asked
    about the pregnancy he could not remember any details  whatsoever  even
    down to the year stating that it might be 2005 or 2006.  We  find  this
    to be significant bearing in mind his account is  that  they  had  been
    undergoing fertility treatment together and it is reasonable to  expect
    that given an event of this nature the Appellant would have  been  able
    to remember the details concerning the pregnancy and in particular  the
    year that it occurred.  The document relied upon dated 9th October 2006
    (pages 32 bundle B) consists of a  sole  page  of  a  lab  sample  with
    clinical details  stating  "nausea/vomiting".   It  is  a  biochemistry
    report concerning it appears blood  tests  including  a  test  for  TSH
    (thyroid stimulating hormone).   The  document  does  not  support  the
    account given by the Appellant that she had been pregnant at the  given
    date.  Thus we conclude that whilst the documents demonstrate they were
    undergoing tests concerning infertility problems in 2004/2005 we do not
    accept that the  letter  from  2006  demonstrates  that  she  had  been
    pregnant at that stage or that the relationship  was  ongoing  at  that
    time.

47. We have considered the evidence before us concerning  the  period  2007
    onwards.  As we have observed there is no supporting evidence of  those
    who knew the couple during this period who  would  be  best  placed  to
    provide confirmation of the durability of this  relationship.   Nor  is
    there any evidence of any kind from Margaret herself either in the form
    of a witness statement or even a letter.  The only evidence comes  from
    the oral evidence of the Appellant who we do not find to be a  credible
    witness and a number of disparate piecemeal documents.   The  documents
    from 2007 consist of the following.  The council tax bill 2007/2008  in
    the names of both Donald Okpekpe and  Margaret  Okpekpe.   However  the
    bank giro credit is not filled in and  the  document  itself  does  not
    demonstrate that they were either living together at the time  or  even
    if they were, that the relationship was ongoing.   There  is  a  letter
    from British Gas dated March 2007 it is addressed to  Margaret  Okpekpe
    at the address in Hanwell but it is simply entitled "good  news  energy
    rates".  It is a non-specific open letter sent by a gas  company  to  a
    person who may once have lived at that address.  There  is  nothing  in
    that letter to support the fact that she was actually living  there  or
    in a relationship with him  at  that  time.   There  are  similar  open
    letters of that type provided by this Appellant.

48. There is a letter from Ealing Council dated 13th June 2007 addressed to
    Margaret Okpekpe (page 18) asking for  financial  information  required
    for an application that had been made in relation to Donald Okpekpe and
    his student financing.  This is simply a request  made.   There  is  no
    evidence  to   demonstrate   that   Margaret   Okpekpe   provided   any
    documentation of a financial nature in response to this letter.  Indeed
    in a letter exhibited by the Appellant and addressed to Donald  Okpekpe
    dated 31st January 2008 in respect of such an application  for  funding
    there is no reference in that letter to Margaret's financing whatsoever
    (see page 3 bundle B).  There is nothing therefore to demonstrate  from
    those documents that she provided financial information to  demonstrate
    that in 2007 and 2008 they were living together and were pooling  their
    resources which would be a relevant point when making an assessment  of
    Mr Okpekpe's financial circumstances for funding.

49. The document in respect of the Register of Electors seeking information
    for those resident at the address as at 15th October 2007  is  a  final
    reminder.  It is plain from the documents produced that it has not been
    signed by either party nor has the declaration been  completed.   As  a
    piece of evidence, it does not  demonstrate  that  they  were  resident
    together at that date.  There are no documents after  the  council  tax
    bill concerning the period April 2007 - March  2008  that  are  in  the
    joint names of the parties to demonstrate that the parties were  living
    together or in a  durable  relationship  past  this  time  even  if  we
    accepted that the documents had constituted reliable evidence of  their
    cohabitation and relationship.  The rest of the documentation  produced
    is in the sole name of the Appellant and is largely historic (including
    a Sky bill referring to an account in arrears and a  visa  credit  card
    where credit had been withdrawn).

50. We have also taken into account the evidence concerning the  date  upon
    which this relationship ended.  The oral evidence before us is that the
    parties did not separate  until  an  unspecified  date  in  2009.   His
    account as to the chronology of the events in  his  oral  evidence  was
    that he could not remember the exact date that he had moved out in 2009
    but that it was "some time then".  He found that  he  discovered  about
    the deception in 2008 and thereafter friends  had  been  attempting  to
    reunite them and gave a description of there being "coming  and  going"
    but that he had moved out finally in 2009.

51. We find the account given by this Appellant in his oral evidence to  be
    wholly inconsistent with the evidence  that  he  presented  before  the
    Tribunal on previous occasions.  In the determination of  Judge  Blair-
    Gould (19th May 2010) and therefore more contemporaneous to the  events
    themselves at paragraph 4 the history of the relationship  is  referred
    to as follows:

         "In the meantime the relationship with his wife collapsed and  they
         separated in 2008."

52. At paragraphs 11 and 12 his account is recorded as discovering his wife
    "divorcing him" in 2008 and authorised a friend to obtain the  marriage
    certificate and found it endorsed for the record  that  they  had  been
    divorced on 4th May 2004.  The only date given for  the  separation  is
    2008.  Indeed we are satisfied  that  contrary  to  the  oral  evidence
    before us, the date given when he first became aware of  the  annulment
    was February 2008 as that is the date that is stamped upon the marriage
    certificate.

53. The refusal letter refers to evidence provided by the Appellant to  the
    relationship ending in 2008 and the current skeleton argument  prepared
    by his legal representatives in the chronology at  paragraph  3  states
    "the couple lived together at the following addresses (ii) June 2004  -
    2008".

54. We are satisfied that none of the documents that we  have  referred  to
    from 2010 to 2013 provide any support for his oral  evidence  that  the
    relationship continued until 2009 and that the  separation  took  place
    then.  All the evidence refers to 2008 and not 2009.  We find it to  be
    of significance and weight that the  Appellant  has  been  deliberately
    vague about when in 2008 and has chosen at a number  of  points  within
    the proceedings from 2010 onwards to provide no details of the month in
    2008. We have accepted that there is evidence  that  demonstrates  that
    the relationship was a durable one during the time of  the  infertility
    treatment in 2005 /2006.  However we do not find that he has discharged
    the burden of proof upon him to demonstrate that he was  in  a  durable
    relationship for the entire period of August 2003 until August 2008 and
    therefore he cannot satisfy the requisite Regulations.

55. Furthermore we are not satisfied that the Appellant has discharged  the
    burden of proof upon him to demonstrate that during that period of time
    Margaret Okpekpe was  exercising  treaty  rights  or  was  otherwise  a
    qualified person.  The only  evidence  before  us  consists  of  a  few
    disparate payslips from alleged employment  with  Goldlink  Travel  and
    Tours UK Limited.  The payslips are of a generally obtainable type  and
    the earliest is from 21st April 2006.  There are no documents from  her
    employers, no documents from  the  Inland  Revenue  nor  any  documents
    showing that she was  exercising  treaty  rights  or  was  otherwise  a
    qualified person emanating from  other  independent  party  upon  whose
    evidence we can place weight.   There  is  no  evidence  from  Margaret
    herself or from her employment during that period.  In any  event,  the
    earliest payslip is 21st April 2006 and there is nothing to demonstrate
    that she was exercising treaty rights throughout the period  of  August
    2003 to August 2008 supported by reliable and cogent documentation.

56. For the foregoing reasons, we are not satisfied that the Appellant  has
    discharged the burden of proof  on  him  to  show  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that he was in a durable relationship  from  August  2003
    until August 2008 (the requisite period) nor that he has discharged the
    burden upon him to demonstrate that  Margaret  Okpekpe  was  exercising
    treaty rights or was otherwise a qualified person  during  that  period
    either.  Consequently the appeal fails.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.  The decision is re-made as follows:-

The appeal is dismissed under the EEA Regulations.






Signed                              Date:  4/10/2103


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

