

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
IA/25860/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |        Decision & Reasons        |
|                                   |Promulgated                       |
|On 15th March 2016                 |        On 20th May 2016          |
|                                   |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                 SHOHEL RANA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:       Mr Islam of London Law Associates

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-Tier Tribunal. I find that no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case that give rise to the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.       The Appellant in this case is the Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department and the Respondent was the Appellant before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. For ease of reference I refer to them  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Claimant respectively.

2.       The Claimant applied for further leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as the spouse of a person settled here.  The Secretary of State
    refused that application in a decision dated 4 June 2014 on the grounds
    that the  Claimant  did  not  meet  the  suitability  requirements  for
    consideration of limited leave to remain in the UK as a partner under E-
    LTRPT.  The Secretary of State also considered the  Claimant's  private
    life under paragraph 276ADE and concluded that  the  Claimant  did  not
    meet the requirements either within or without the Immigration Rules on
    the basis of R (Nagre) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) exceptionality.

3.       The Claimant appealed that decision  and  the  matter  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Wilshire on 3  August  2015.  In  a  decision
    promulgated on 17 September 2015 he allowed the  appeal  on  the  basis
    that the eligibility requirements were met. The  appeal  was  therefore
    allowed under the Immigration Rules as a partner.

4.       The Secretary of State took issue with  that  decision  and  sought
    permission to appeal. Permission was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hollingworth on 19 January 2016 on the  basis  that  an  arguable
    error of law had arisen in relation to the construction placed  by  the
    Judge on  the  evidence  made  available  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    appertaining to the question of whether deception had  been  used.   It
    was arguable that the analysis set out by the Judge was insufficient in
    identifying deficiencies with such evidence and it was further arguable
    that the Judge took into account or attached an inappropriate degree of
    weight to other factors in reaching the conclusions set out.

          The Grounds

5.       The Secretary of State asserts that the First-tier Tribunal  failed
    to give adequate reasons for findings on a  material  matters.   It  is
    submitted that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal finding that the
    Secretary  of  State  had  not  discharged  the  burden  of  proof   in
    demonstrating  that  the  Claimant  had  used  deception  was  entirely
    inadequately reasoned.  It is asserted in the grounds that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal found that the witness statements and  the  extract  from
    the spreadsheets did not assist the Secretary  of  State's  case.   The
    Secretary of State asserts  that  this  is  incorrect  as  the  witness
    statements when  read  in  conjunction  with  the  one  another  detail
    extensively the investigation undertaken by ETS on this Claimant's case
    along with thousands of other applicants and the process of identifying
    those tests were found to be invalid.  It is asserted on behalf of  the
    Secretary of State that it  is  clear  from  the  statements  that  ETS
    identified this Claimant after a lengthy and systematic  investigation.



6.       The Secretary of State asserts that the First-tier Tribunal  should
    have had due consideration to the specific  evidence  which  identified
    this Claimant as an individual who  had  exercised  deception  together
    with the witness statements outlined in the investigation  process  and
    that the Secretary of State maintains that the Claimant does  not  meet
    the suitability requirements of Appendix FM  of the  Immigration  Rules
    and as such the Claimant's application cannot succeed with reference to
    the eligibility requirements.

7.       It is further asserted in the grounds that in reaching  a  material
    finding the  First-tier  Tribunal  relied  on  the  Claimant's  English
    ability and was satisfied that  it  was  entitled  to  take  this  into
    account in determining whether the Secretary of State had to  meet  the
    evidential burden in this case.  It  is  asserted  that  there  may  be
    reasons why persons able to speak the English language to the  required
    level would nonetheless permit proxy candidates to take an ETS test.

          The Hearing

8.       Mr Melvin made an application for an adjournment on  the  basis  of
    the upcoming guidance from the Upper Tribunal and  requested  that  the
    matter be adjourned pending the result, submitting that there would  be
    no lengthy adjournment.

9.       Mr Islam opposed that adjournment request on the basis  that  there
    would be further delay and that  would  affect  the  Claimant's  family
    life.  I found that there was no  Upper  Tribunal  guidance  indicating
    that "ETS" appeals should be adjourned  pending  further  clarification
    and concluded that I was able to determine the appeal justly and fairly
    without an adjournment.

10.     Mr Melvin submitted that there was substantial evidence  before  the
    First-tier  Tribunal.   There  were  witness  statements  from   senior
    managers and there was part of a  computer  printout  identifying  this
    Claimant as someone who did not  take  the  test  himself.   Mr  Melvin
    submitted that the Judge had relied on the evidence of the Claimant and
    had not fully considered  the  evidence  of  the  Secretary  of  State.
    Whilst the Judge took the point that it was not  put  to  the  Claimant
    that he used a proxy to sit the test he asked me to find that the Judge
    had not properly considered the evidence. He argued that  the  decision
    should be set aside and be reheard in the Upper Tribunal.

11.     Mr Islam submitted that the Claimant had sat  an  IELTS  test  as  a
    result of a request from the Secretary of  State  and  that  meant  the
    matter was resolved in favour of the Claimant.  He  scored  6  in  that
    test.  He gave his evidence in fluent  English  and  the  Secretary  of
    State had failed to provide credible  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in relation to the allegation of  deception.   The  subjective
    evidence was  necessary.  He  agreed  that  there  were  three  witness
    statements before the First-tier Tribunal produced by the Secretary  of
    State but it was submitted on behalf  of  the  Claimant  there  was  no
    evidence produced to demonstrate a proxy sat the test.   The  deception
    was  not  there  and  the  Claimant  therefore  met   the   suitability
    requirements. There were no other aggravating features or  factors  and
    therefore there was no error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

    Discussion and Findings

12.     The First-tier Tribunal considered the evidence of the Secretary  of
    State at paragraphs 13 to 15 the decision:

          "13.   I have (given) careful consideration to the  evidence  that
    I have seen filed in this case both oral and documentary. I turn  first
    to the question of the validity of the appellant's test score taken  on
    22 August 2012. I note that the methodology used  by  ETS  to  appraise
    tests taken  under  its  umbrella  is  still  the  subject  of  ongoing
    litigation.

          14.      The  most  recent  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Judicial Review proceedings was  R  (on  the  application  of  Gazi)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  (ETS  -  Judicial  Review)
    (IJR) [2015] UKUT 327. In that the President set out the summary of the
    evidence on behalf of both the Home Office and the expert opinion of Dr
    Harrison filed by a group of appellants at paragraphs  6-15  and  16-20
    respectively.

          15.     Having considered that summary and it is plain to me  that
    there are serious disputes as regards the methodology used. It  is  not
    for me to resolve the disputes however I must bear in that in mind when
    considering whether or not the Respondent has discharged the burden  of
    proof based upon the evidence so far considered.  I  have  reached  the
    conclusion that the burden has not been discharged in this case on  its
    own particular facts. I say this for several reasons."


13.     The First-tier Tribunal Judge then considered  the  evidence  relied
    on by the Claimant.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge  correctly  directed
    himself in relation  to  the  burden  of  proof.  What  the  First-tier
    Tribunal does not do is to engage with the evidence  submitted  by  the
    Secretary of State in the form of three witness statements and  in  the
    form of print out sheets where it was stated that the  Claimant's  test
    result was invalid.

14.     The Upper Tribunal in the judicial review proceedings  of  Gazi  did
    not pronounce on the generic evidence and  there  is  nothing  in  that
    judgment that  obviates  the  First-tier  Tribunal  from  the  need  of
    addressing the specific evidence produced by the Secretary of State  in
    such cases.  It is clear from paragraphs 39 to 41 of Gazi that all  the
    evidence must be engaged with, that is the evidence submitted  both  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State and on behalf of an appellant, and  it
    is commented at paragraph 41 that it is "difficult to  envisage  how  a
    single decision of the Upper Tribunal in a TOEIC judicial review  might
    be determinative of large numbers of other such cases, the more  so  in
    the absence of a group or representative challenge."

15.     In these circumstances it was incumbent on the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to specifically engage with the evidence submitted by the Secretary  of
    State in relation  to  this  particular  Claimant  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed so to do and that must amount to an error of law.  That
    error of law must also be material because it cannot be said  that  the
    outcome would not have  been  different  had  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    engaged properly with that evidence.  That  is  not  to  say  that  the
    Claimant has used deception, it is just  that  no  proper  or  adequate
    reasons have been found for deciding that the appeal should be allowed.

Notice of Decision

16.   I therefore find having that there is a material error of law  in  the
    decision that the decision should be set aside.  In the  light  of  the
    ongoing litigation and in the light of the fact that guidance is likely
    to be given in the reasonably near future I consider  that  this  is  a
    case that should properly be reheard in the First-tier Tribunal  having
    regard to Part 7.2 (a) of the Practice Statements for  the  Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber of the First-tier Tribunal and  Upper-Tier  Tribunal
    and the extent of fact  finding  required.  No  findings  of  fact  are
    preserved.

Signed
   Date 18 March 2016



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

