
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Numbers: IA/25721/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On November 22, 2017                         |On December 05, 2017          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                               MR ELECHI EDEH
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not  present
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeetie, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity direction in this matter.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria and on May 20,  2015  he  applied
    for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on family  and  private  life
    grounds. The respondent considered the application but  refused  it  on
    June 24, 2015.

 3. The appellant appealed that decision on July 8,  2015  and  the  appeal
    came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Ransley  on  October  28,
    2016. In a decision promulgated on January 27,  2017  she  refused  the
    appeal under both the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

 4. The appellant appealed that decision on February 9, 2017  arguing  that
    the Judge had erred in her approach. In short,  she  argued  the  Judge
    failed to consider the appeal under section EX.1 of Appendix FM of  the
    Immigration Rules and by failing to attach more weight to the arguments
    advanced.

 5. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Boyes considered the grounds of appeal
    on August 25, 2017 and found there was an error of law  in  respect  of
    the applicability of section EX.1 of Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and gave permission generally.

 6. Neither the  appellant  nor  his  legal  representatives  attended  the
    hearing. Contact was made  with  the  solicitors  who  faxed  a  letter
    stating (a) they believed the appellant was leaving the country and (b)
    they were no longer instructed.

 7. By 12 noon the appellant had not arrived. The respondent's file did not
    suggest the appellant had left the country although it seemed he wanted
    to. The notice had  been  properly  served  so  I  proceeded  with  the
    hearing.

 8. The grounds argued that the Judge erred by failing to consider  section
    EX.1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules before considering article
    8 ECHR. It was also argued that  the  outcome  of  the  proportionality
    assessment should have been different.

 9. At the hearing before me Mr McVeetie adopted the Rule 24  letter  dated
    September 26, 2017 and submitted there was no  material  error.  Whilst
    the Judge should have considered  the  appeal  under  section  EX.1  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules it was not  material  because  she
    had gone on to consider the appeal on article 8  grounds  which  was  a
    lower threshold. Section EX.1 of Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules
    required the Judge to  consider  "insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
    life" whereas article 8 was a proportionality  assessment.  He  further
    submitted the Judge properly considered all factors  being  finding  it
    would be proportionate for him to return to Nigeria.

    FINDINGS

10. Having heard submissions I indicated to Mr McVeetie that there  was  no
    material error.

11. Whilst the Judge clearly erred  in  not  looking  at  section  EX.1  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules in  circumstances  where  she  was
    required to, it did not amount to a material error.

12. The Judge wrongly concluded that section EX.1 of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules did not apply because he was an overstayer  but  this
    is one of the exceptions  (see  Section  E-LTRP  2.2(b))  allowed  when
    considering section EX.1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

13. However, the test under that heading is higher than the test applied on
    article 8 ECHR. If the appellant could not satisfy article 8 ECHR  then
    he could  not  succeed  under  section  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

14. The Judge considered all the facts and her  findings  under  article  8
    ECHR were open to her.

15. Accordingly, there is no material error.

    NOTICE OF DECISION

16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.  The original decision  shall
    stand.


Signed                              Date     22/11/2017


[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award because I have dismissed the appeal.




Signed                              Date     22/11/2017


[pic]



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

