
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
ia/25913/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st March 2018                       |     On 11th April 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                         MR OLALEKAN SUNDAY ODEBUNMI
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 31st  January  1982.   On
    27th January 2015 the Appellant's solicitors applied on his behalf  for
    a residence card as a confirmation of a right to reside in  the  United
    Kingdom.  That application was refused by the  Secretary  of  State  by
    Notice of Refusal dated 6th July 2015.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Designated  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Manuell sitting at Hatton Cross on  10th  March
    2017.  The Appellant's appeal was dismissed on the basis that following
    the decision in Sala [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC)  there  was  no  statutory
    right of appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  not  to
    grant a residence card to a person claiming to be  an  extended  family
    member.   Following  that  decision  Judge  Manuell  felt  he  had   no
    alternative but to dismiss the appeal for want of jurisdiction.

 3. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper  Tribunal.   On  10th  March
    2017 Designated Judge McClure  granted  permission  to  appeal.   Judge
    McClure noted that the appeal had been dismissed in accordance with the
    guidance given in Sala but noted that the decision  in  Sala  had  been
    overturned by the Court of Appeal in Khan v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1755.

 4. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge.   The  appellant  appears  in  person.   He
    advises  that  he  is  not  legally  represented  at  present  on  this
    application.  The Respondent appears  by  her  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer Mr Nath.

 5. I am considerably assisted by the approach of Mr Nath  in  this  matter
    who acknowledges that following the decision of  the  Court  of  Appeal
    that there is jurisdiction for an appeal to be heard  in  this  matter.
    He thus accepts that there has to be inevitably a material error of law
    in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   That  is  not  a
    criticism of the judge he was merely following the law as it  stood  at
    that time.

 6. In such circumstances bearing in mind that no  actual  hearing  of  the
    issues in this matter have taken place no application is made for me to
    proceed on finding a material error of law to re-hear the matter  I  am
    asked to remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal.  This  I  do
    along with giving appropriate directions.

Decision and Directions

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains a material error
    of law and is set aside.  Directions are given hereinafter for the  re-
    hearing of this matter.

      1) On the finding that there was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal in that the Tribunal is  seized
         with jurisdiction to hear the appeal the decision of the First-tier
         Tribunal is set aside and the matter is remitted back to the First-
         tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

      2) That the appeal be heard at Taylor House  on  the  first  available
         date 28 days hence with an ELH of two hours.  The appeal is  to  be
         before any judge of the First-tier Tribunal other  than  Designated
         Judge Manuell.

      3) That there be leave to either party to file and/or serve an  up-to-
         date bundle of both subjective and/or objective evidence upon which
         they seek to rely  at  least  seven  days  prior  to  the  restored
         hearing.

      4)  Whilst  the  Appellant  has  indicated  he  does  not  require  an
         interpreter in the event that an interpreter is required  then  the
         Appellant's legal  representatives/the  Appellant  in  person  must
         notify the Tribunal Service within seven days of receipt  of  these
         directions.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 09 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application has been made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 09 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



