
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/25714/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 10 June 2015                      |On 12 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                              ISLAMKHANOV ANVAR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr J Markus, instructed by Turpin & Miller
solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant,  a  national  of  Russia,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of State dated  25  July
    2013 to remove him  from  the  UK.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Thorne
    dismissed the appeal on the basis that there was no valid  appeal.  The
    appellant now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 2. In summary the background to this appeal is that the appellant  claimed
    asylum in the UK on 13 March 2013 having arrived in the UK from  Cyprus
    where he had previously claimed asylum. The Secretary of State  made  a
    formal request to the Cypriot authorities to accept responsibility  for
    the consideration of the appellant's asylum claim under the  Dublin  II
    Regulations and a formal letter of acceptance  was  received  from  the
    Cypriot authorities on 20 May 2013.

 3. The Secretary of State issued a decision dated 25 July 2013  to  refuse
    the appellant's application for leave to enter the UK and to remove him
    to Cyprus. The Secretary of State also issued  a  reasons  for  refusal
    letter dated 26 September 2013 informing the appellant that  his  claim
    had been certified under schedule 3, Part 2  paragraph  5  (4)  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004  and  that
    he could appeal against that decision after he had  left  the  UK.  The
    appellant challenged that decision by seeking permission to  apply  for
    Judicial Review and in advance of a hearing the  respondent  agreed  to
    withdraw her decision of 26 September 2013 and to make a  new  decision
    on the appellant's human rights claim. The appellant  appealed  against
    the decision to refuse leave to enter dated 25 July  2013.  His  appeal
    was received by the Tribunal on 17 June 2014 and on 15 July 2014 First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Freestone  found   that   there   were   special
    circumstances and extended the time limit so as to admit the appeal  in
    view of the procedural history of the case.

 4. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Thorne  on  2  October
    2014. Whilst the parties initially  agreed  that  there  was  no  valid
    appeal  as  the  decision  had  been  withdrawn  later  that  day   the
    appellant's representative returned to submit that there was in fact  a
    valid appeal as the respondent had not withdrawn the decision to refuse
    leave to enter. Although he accepted that there had been some confusion
    as to when the removal decision  had  been  withdrawn,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge decided that at all material times it  was  the  settled
    and clear intention of the Secretary of State to withdraw  the  removal
    decision. The Judge therefore found that there was no decision  and  no
    valid appeal.

 5. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on
    the grounds that the Judge erred in concluding that there was no  valid
    decision because the decision to refuse leave to enter had not in  fact
    been withdrawn. Permission was refused by the First-tier  Tribunal  but
    was granted by the Upper Tribunal on renewal on the basis that  it  was
    arguable that the Secretary of State had not withdrawn  the  appealable
    decision. In her Rule 24 response the Secretary of State  accepted  the
    appellant's submissions and accepted that the disposal of the  Judicial
    Review proceedings did not state that the immigration decision was also
    being withdrawn.

 6. The respondent therefore concedes that there is an error of law in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal. I am satisfied on the basis of the
    evidence before me, taking into account this concession, that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge erred in finding that there was no decision and  no
    valid right of appeal. I therefore set aside the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.

 7. At the hearing before me Ms Everett accepted that there were no grounds
    to challenge the decision of Judge Freestone to admit the  late  appeal
    as indicated on the rule 24 response.

 8. Both representatives requested that, as there is an extant appeal which
    has not yet been determined by the First-tier Tribunal, the  appeal  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. They drew my attention to a  fresh
    decision issued by the respondent dated 17 November 2014.

 9. I am satisfied that  the  appellant  has  not  had  his  case  properly
    considered by the First-tier Tribunal. The nature  and  extent  of  the
    judicial fact finding which is necessary in order for the  decision  to
    be remade is such that (having regard to the  overriding  objective  in
    Rule 2 of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008) it is appropriate to
    remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

The Judge made an error on a point of  law  and  the  determination  of  the
First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.



Signed      Date:  10 June 2015

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

