

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal No:
IA/25151/2013

                                               IA/25159/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
       Determination Promulgated
On 12 August 2014                                             On 26 August
2014


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL DIGNEY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               IRENE SOMUAH +1

                                                                 Respondents
Representation:

For the appellant: Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondents: Mr Collins

                               DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The first respondent, whom I shall call the respondent, a  citizen  of
      Ghana applied for a derivative residence card as the primary carer  of
      a British citizen (Juanita).  That  application  was  refused  and  an
      appeal  aginst  the  decision  allowed.  The  respondent  has  another
      daughter (not the British citizen) and her appeal was allowed in  line
      with that of her mother. It has not been disputed that  that  decision
      stands or falls with that of her mother.

   2. Permission to appeal was granted and I  have  to  decide  whether  the
      original decision contained an error of law. The relevant law is to be
      found in section 15A  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
      Regulations 2006.  Regulation 4A, which is  the  relevant  regulation,
      reads:


             [The appellant is entitled to a derivative residence card if]:


             (a) [the appellant] is the primary carer of a British  Citizen
             ("the relevant British citizen")


             (b)The relevant British citizen  is  residing  in  the  United
             Kingdom; and


             (c)The relevant British citizen would be unable to  reside  in
             the UK  or    another  EEA  state  if  [the  respondent]  were
             required to leave.


   3. The original judge concluded that the respondent was the primary carer
      of a British citizen who would be unable to reside in this country  if
      her mother left. The grounds of appeal argue that the child  would  be
      able to reside in this country with her father who has had involvement
      with the child and there is no evidence that the father is  unable  to
      look after the child. It was said in paragraph 4 of the  determination
      that the father  said  that  he  could  not  bring  Juanita  into  his
      household as this would cause a rupture in  his  marriage  which  came
      under stress on account of his having a child outside  the  home.  The
      grounds argue that this amounts to an unwillingness to look after  the
      child as opposed to an inability to care for the child  and  in  those
      circumstances it was wrong to conclude that that the child was  unable
      to remain in this country.


   4. No doubt the father would be capable of looking after the  child.  The
      question at issue is not the father's ability to look after the  child
      but her ability to remain here and that turns on whether any  suitable
      person is prepared to look after her. It  is  not  disputed  that  the
      father is the  only  suitable  person.  The  judge  concluded  on  the
      evidence before him that the father was not prepared to look after his
      daughter.  The father reached that conclusion because he thought  that
      bringing Juanita into his family might destroy his marriage. The judge
      was entitled to conclude, on the evidence before him that  the  father
      meant what he said and was not prepared to look  after  Juanita.  That
      was a factual conclusion that was open to the judge  on  the  evidence
      and his reasoning is not vitiated by any error of law. It follows,  as
      a factual matter that Juanita  would  be  unable  to  remain  in  this
      country if her mother was required to leave.


   5.  It follows that the original judge made no error of law. The original
      decision stands.

The appeal is dismissed


Designated Judge Digney
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                           15 August 2014
