

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Numbers: IA/25183/2013
                                                               Ia/25206/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                               |Determination           |
|                                                   |Promulgated             |
|On 25th June 2014                                  |On 27th June 2014       |
|                                                   |                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                  Between:

                              NATIA GELASHVILI
                              MARIAM GELASHVILI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           No appearance
For the Respondent:          Mr G Jack, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellants

1.    The Appellants are citizens of Georgia born on 10th July 1984 and  8th
      August 2011 respectively. They appeal against the determination of the
      First-tier Tribunal dated 14th December 2013 dismissing their  appeals
      against the Respondent's decision of 8th June 2013 refusing to issue a
      residence  card  as  confirmation  of  a  right  of  residence   under
      Regulation 6 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.




2.    The Second Appellant's appeal is  dependent  on  the  First  Appellant
      showing that her husband, the Sponsor, was a qualified person. I shall
      therefore refer to the  First  Appellant  as  the  Appellant  in  this
      appeal.

3.    Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul  on
      15th May 2014 on the grounds that it was arguable First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge N Manual took into account irrelevant matters, raising an  issue
      which had not been in dispute between the parties, and from which  she
      drew inferences which were adverse to the Appellant and which she took
      into account in determining that the Sponsor was not exercising Treaty
      rights.

4.    On 30th May 2014, the Appellant's solicitors requested an  adjournment
      on the basis that counsel was on annual leave on 25th June  2014.  The
      application was refused. At  the  hearing  before  me,  there  was  no
      appearance by the Appellant, the Sponsor  or  her  solicitors.  I  was
      satisfied that the notice of hearing was properly served and heard the
      appeal in the Appellant's absence.

5.    Mr Jack submitted that the burden was on the Appellant  to  show  that
      the Sponsor was a qualified person. At the time  of  the  application,
      the Sponsor claimed to be self-employed, but failed to authorise  HMRC
      checks so that the  Respondent  could  authenticate  this  claim.  The
      application was refused. At  the  time  of  the  appeal,  the  Sponsor
      claimed to be employed.

6.    Mr Jack submitted that the appeal was decided on  the  papers  at  the
      Appellant's request. The burden was on the Appellant to show that  the
      Sponsor was employed at the date of hearing as he claimed. The Sponsor
      had produced four payslips in support of this claim. This evidence was
      not before the Secretary of State. There were no  bank  statements  to
      support the Sponsor's claim that he was now employed. The Judge  found
      that the evidence  before  her  was  contradictory.  The  accountant's
      letter and the skeleton argument stated that  the  Sponsor  was  self-
      employed. This was contrary to the evidence of  the  Sponsor  and  his
      employer.  The Judge was entitled to conclude that the  Appellant  had
      failed to show that the Sponsor  was  employed  and  was  therefore  a
      qualified person. There was no error of law in the Judge's decision.

7.    The Judge's findings on the Appellant's relationship with the  Sponsor
      immediately succeeded the Judge's findings under the EEA  Regulations.
      These findings were relevant to her assessment of Article 8,  not  her
      findings under the EEA Regulations. Article 8 was not relevant to this
      appeal since there was no removal decision  and  the  Appellant  could
      submit a further application  supplying  sufficient  documentation  to
      satisfy the EEA Regulations.





Discussion and conclusions

8.    The grounds submit that  the  Judge  applied  the  wrong  standard  of
      proof. There was evidence before the Judge to show  that  the  Sponsor
      was a self-employed contractor from February 2011 to June 2013 and was
      now employed by the  same  company.  The  payslips  corroborated  this
      claim. The letter from the accountants confirmed that the Sponsor  was
      self-employed and referred to the tax return for 2013/2014 because  he
      was still self-employed from April  to  June  2013.  In  addition  the
      relationship between the Appellant and Sponsor was not in question and
      the Judge's concern as to whether the Appellant  was  married  or  the
      paternity of the child were immaterial.

9.    The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was decided  on  the  papers
      at the      Appellant's request. The documentary evidence  before  the
      Judge was contradictory. The Appellant claimed to have  been  employed
      since June 2013. The letter from the employer and  the  four  payslips
      supported this claim. However, the letter dated 22nd October 2013 from
      the Sponsor's accountants stated that he was self-employed, as did the
      skeleton argument submitted for the appeal. The Judge's  finding  that
      it was unclear whether the Sponsor was employed or  self-employed  and
      the documentary evidence was insufficient to show that the Sponsor was
      a qualified person under the EEA Regulations was open to  her  on  the
      evidence.  There  was  no  material  error  of  law  in  the   Judge's
      determination.

10.   The Judge's subsequent findings on the  Appellant's  relationship  and
      the paternity of the child were relevant to her findings under Article
      8. The Judge having already found that the  Appellant  had  failed  to
      show that the Sponsor was a 'worker' as claimed.

11.   I find that there was no error of law  in  the  Judge's  determination
      under the EEA Regulations. There would  be  no  breach  of  Article  8
      because the Appellant could  make  further  application.  The  Judge's
      findings at paragraph 19 onwards were immaterial to the decision under
      the EEA Regulations.

12.   Accordingly, the Judge made no error on any point of law  which  might
      require the determination to be set aside. The  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal is dismissed.  The determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      dated 14th December 2013 shall stand.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
26th June 2014
