
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25768/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 8 June 2017                     |On 23 June 2017                         |
|                                   |                                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Sandeep Kaur
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Aslam, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge M  R  Oliver)  allowing  an  appeal  by  the
    applicant against the respondent's decision of 7 July 2015 refusing her
    application for leave to remain based  on  her  family  life  with  her
    sponsor.  In this decision I will refer to the  parties  as  they  were
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Secretary  of  State  as   the
    respondent and the applicant as the appellant.


Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of India born on 12 July  1990.   She  first
    came to the UK on 20 September 2009 with entry clearance as  a  Tier  4
    Student until 30 January 2012 and her leave was  subsequently  extended
    in the same capacity until 31 May 2014.

3.   Shortly after her arrival in the UK she met and fell in love  with  the
    sponsor, a citizen of Pakistan born on 8 December 1986, and  she  moved
    in with him a year later.  He had arrived in the UK as a child aged  13
    and has remained ever since.  He  made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain on long residence grounds which was refused  by  the  respondent
    and a subsequent appeal  was  dismissed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    However, that decision was set aside by the Upper  Tribunal  and  in  a
    decision issued on 5 January 2014 the  appeal  was  allowed  under  the
    provisions of para 276ADE and the sponsor was then granted  30  months'
    discretionary leave in the ten-year settlement path.

4.   On 26 January 2015 the appellant converted from her Sikh faith  to  the
    Islamic faith and married the sponsor  in  an  Islamic  ceremony.   She
    applied for further leave  to  remain  on  11  February  2015  and  her
    application was supported by a letter  from  her  solicitor  explaining
    that as she had converted to Islam, her family had completely  disowned
    her and her partner was  now  her  new  family.   The  application  was
    refused for the reasons set out in Annex A of the decision letter of  7
    July 2015.  The respondent was not satisfied that the  appellant  could
    meet the requirements of the Rules for leave to remain as a partner  or
    on private life grounds or that there were any particular circumstances
    constituting exceptional circumstances warranting a grant of  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

5.   Having set out the background to the application and the fact that  the
    appellant and the sponsor had both confirmed the truth of their witness
    statements, the judge summarised his findings as follows:

         "9.  I am satisfied, because of the evidence of  long  cohabitation
             and the joint running of the important matters in their lives,
             that the appellant  meets  the  definition  of  partner  under
             Appendix FM and, for the reasons which were  accepted  in  her
             partner's appeal hearing and affirmed by them both in evidence
             before me, that it is impractical for them to be  returned  to
             Pakistan and that there would be very significant difficulties
             in their returning together to India.  Of the respondent's two
             decisions, to refuse rather than to adjourn a decision on  her
             application and to resist her application, I am left to wonder
             which was the more unreasonable."


     The appeal was allowed under the Rules.



The Grounds and Submissions

6.   The respondent's grounds of appeal can be summarised  as  follows.   It
    is argued that the fact that the sponsor had been  granted  30  months'
    leave did not mean  that  the  relationship  requirements  set  out  at
    Appendix FM, E-LTRP.1.2 were met.  Assuming that the judge allowed  the
    appeal under Section EX.1, that provision could only be  considered  if
    the eligibility requirements were met.  Even  if  the  judge  had  been
    correct to proceed under para EX.1,  it  is  argued  that  he  had  not
    applied the correct test as impracticability was not the  test  and  no
    reasons had been given why the couple could not relocate anywhere  else
    in India, which had the second highest population in the world and  was
    one of the largest countries in terms of areas.

7.   It is further argued that the Court of Appeal has set a high  threshold
    in Agyarko v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ
    440 as to what the test of insurmountable obstacles means.  Finally, it
    is argued that the judge had not considered or applied the guidance set
    out in R (Chen) v  Secretary  of  State  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -
    temporary separation  -  proportionality)  (IJR)  [2015]  UKUT  189  or
    considered what the Court of Appeal had  said  about  Chikwamba  [2008]
    UKHL 40 in Agyarko.

8.   At the hearing before me Mr Avery adopted his grounds  submitting  that
    the judge had clearly erred by allowing the appeal under the Rules when
    it was clear that those requirements could not be met by the appellant.
     Further, the judge had not given any adequate consideration to article
    8.  His reference to it being impractical for the parties to return  to
    Pakistan  and  there  being  very  significant  difficulties  in  their
    returning  to  India  did  not  without  more  provide   any   adequate
    explanation to show that there  had  been  a  proper  consideration  of
    article 8.

9.   Mr Aslam did not seek to  argue  that  the  appeal  could  properly  be
    allowed under the Rules but submitted that in the light of the  judge's
    findings about the problems of returning to Pakistan or India, it would
    have been open to him to find that the  refusal  of  further  leave  to
    remain would be in breach of article 8.

The Error of Law

10.  I am satisfied  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  as  set  out  in  the
    respondent's grounds.  As the  reasons  for  refusal  make  clear,  the
    provisions of E-LTRP.1.2 were not met as the  appellant's  partner  was
    not a British citizen in the UK nor present and settled in the  UK  nor
    in the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or  as  a  person  with  humanitarian
    protection.  In these circumstances the appellant could  not  meet  the
    requirements in section R-LTRP.1.1 and there was no  route  through  to
    the provisions of para EX.1 but in any event para EX.1(b) relating to a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner, makes it clear that
    this provision only applies where the partner is in the  UK  and  is  a
    British citizen, settled or in the  UK  with  refugee  or  humanitarian
    protection leave. The  appellant  was  therefore  unable  to  meet  the
    requirements in Appendix FM for  a  grant  of  leave  to  remain  as  a
    partner.

11.  The judge did not  go  on  to  consider  expressly  the  provisions  of
    article 8.  There is no indication of whether  or  to  what  extent  he
    sought   to   carry   out   a   balancing   exercise   when   assessing
    proportionality.  The assessment under article 8 must be carried out in
    a structured way in accordance with the guidelines set out not only  in
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 but also in MM (Lebanon)  [2017]  UKSC  10.   The
    judge has referred to it being impractical for the parties to return to
    Pakistan and there being very significant difficulties in returning  to
    India  but  there  has  been  no  further  analysis  of  whether  these
    difficulties amount to insurmountable obstacles in accordance with  the
    guidance now given by the Supreme Court in Agyarko [2017]  UKSC  11  or
    assessment of the public interest considerations set out in statute  in
    paras 117A and B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as
    amended.

12.  In these circumstances the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must  be
    set aside.  Both representatives accepted that the  proper  course  was
    for this appeal to be remitted for a  full  rehearing  by  a  different
    judge in the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

13.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the  decision  is  set  aside.
    The appeal is remitted for reconsideration by way of a  full  rehearing
    before a different judge.  No anonymity direction was made by the First-
    tier Tribunal.


Signed   H J E Latter                            Date: 22 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter








