
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25093/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 March 2016                              |On 5 April 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr Ishtiaq Khan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms D Revill, Counsel, instructed by Rahman & Company
Solicitors


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant, the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department,  has
    been granted permission to appeal the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Howard, who, in  a  decision  promulgated  on  8  September  2015
    allowed the appeal of the respondent against a decision made on 4  June
    2014 to refuse to issue an EEA residence card under Regulations  2  and
    17 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

2.   At the hearing  before  the  judge  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not
    represented.  The judge heard evidence  from  the  respondent  and  Ali
    Hamoudi, who informed the judge that it was he who had  introduced  the
    respondent to his wife.  The respondent explained that his wife was not
    at the hearing as she had  travelled  to  Poland  due  to  a  recurrent
    illness (depression) suffered by her mother.

3.   The  judge's  decision  was  very  brief.   He  said  as  follows  from
    paragraphs 13 to 18:

         "13. In her Reasons for Refusal Letter the respondent sets out  the
             reasons why it was concluded the appellant's marriage  is  one
             of convenience.  Both appellant  and  sponsor  were  asked  to
             attend an interview on the  21st  May  2014.   Both  attended.
             They were interviewed separately, but asked the same questions
             for comparison purposes.  Both were asked  in  excess  of  380
             questions.  Each answered all the questions they were asked.


         14.  When  it  came  to  an  analysis  of  the  answers  given  the
             respondent  identified  three  questions  where  significantly
             different answers were given.  In turn  those  questions  were
             first, their second date, the appellant saying it was one week
             after the first and that they went clothes shopping and  to  a
             restaurant, while the sponsor stated it was  two  weeks  later
             and that they went to the appellant's home.


         15.  The second, whether their  respective  parents  were  told  in
             advance about the wedding.  The appellant told his parents and
             this is the answer  he  gave.   His  wife  was  asked  if  her
             husband's parents know they are married and she  replied  they
             did.  The appellant was asked if his wife's parents knew about
             the wedding in advance.  He stated his wife  and  her  parents
             don't get on too well.  He stated her mother found  out  after
             her sisters and that she knows now.  The sponsor said she  did
             not tell her parents as she doesn't keep in touch  with  them.
             She added they know about it now.


         16.  The third, who paid for the wedding dress.  In his answer  the
             appellant stated that it was bought from the shop of a  friend
             and that his uncle paid.  She said it was hired from a  friend
             of her husband.


         17.  The respondent concluded that these answers are  so  different
             as to lead to the conclusion the marriage is a sham.


         18.  The question I must answer is whether those answers, they  are
             the only ones  relied  on  by  the  respondent,  are  evidence
             justifying reasonable suspicion  such  as  to  impose  on  the
             appellant an evidential burden.  Having considered the complex
             answers given by both appellant and  sponsor  to  those  three
             subjects and considering the answers given to the  very  large
             number of other subjects about which they were questioned I am
             not satisfied the answers given to those  three  subjects  are
             such as to justify a reasonable suspicion that the marriage is
             not genuine."


4.    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-Hutchinson  granted  permission  as
    follows:

         "It is arguable that the judge has failed to give adequate  reasons
         why the respondent has not discharged the burden with reference  to
         the case of MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan  [2013]  UKUT  00641
         (IAC) by simply stating


             'having considered the  complex  answers  given  by  both  the
             appellant and the sponsor to those three subjects about  which
             they were questioned I am not satisfied that the answers given
             to those three subjects are such as to  justify  a  reasonable
             suspicion that the marriage is not genuine'."

5.   Ms Revill submitted that the judge did not make  a  material  error  of
    law and that although his reasons were brief, they were  sufficient  in
    the context of the issues raised  by  the  respondent  in  the  refusal
    letter.

6.    I  disagree  with  Ms  Revill's  submission.   I  accept  Mr  Clarke's
    submission that it is not  about  the  number  of  questions  that  the
    sponsor and the respondent were asked at the interview and the  answers
    they each gave.  The judge should have engaged with  the  three  issues
    raised by the Secretary of State and considered to what extent, if any,
    they undermined the respondent's relationship with his EEA  wife.   The
    judge failed to do this.

7.   Consequently I find that the judge erred in law.  His  decision  cannot
    stand.

8.   As remaking this decision will require  evidence  from  the  respondent
    and his sponsor, I am unable to remake it.

9.   The appeal is therefore remitted to Hatton Cross  for  rehearing  by  a
    judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard.








Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

