
                                                  [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/25592/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                  |Decision & Reasons promulgated  |
|on 9 January 2017               | on 10 January 2017             |




                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               GURCHARAN SINGH
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: Mr R O'Ryan instructed by Gills Immigration Law.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


      1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler promulgated on the 16  June  2016
         in which the Judge  allowed  the  appellants  appeal  against  the
         refusal to issue a Residence Card as confirmation of  a  right  to
         reside in  the  UK  as  the  family  member  of  an  EEA  national
         exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.
      2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  by  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Pedro in the following terms:


            1.The appellant is a citizen of India born on 7 July 1997.
            2.The respondent seeks permission to appeal, in time, against  a
            decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler promulgated  in  16
            June 2016 to allow  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
            respondent dated  30  June  2015   to  refuse  to  issue  him  a
            permanent residence card under  Immigration  (European  Economic
            Area) Regulations 2006.
            3. The grounds assert that the judge (1) made a mistake as to  a
            material  fact  and  (2)  failed  to  give  weight  to  material
            matters.
            4.  Having  correctly  referred  to  the   test   explained   in
            Papajorgji, it is arguable that the judge misdirected himself as
            to whether or not the evidential burden had shifted on the facts
            of this case, which in  turn  may  have  been  affected  by  the
            matters raised in the grounds.
            5. The grounds do disclose arguable errors  of  law  capable  of
            affecting the outcome.


      3. The Judge noted in [2] disagreement in relation  to  the  date  Mr
         Singh entered the United Kingdom but found there was  no  need  to
         determine this for the purposes of the issues under consideration.
         It is also noted that it is not disputed that on 4  June  2009  Mr
         Singh married Marcela Lazukova, a national of Slovakia,  and  that
         he was issued a residence card  as  a  family  member  of  an  EEA
         national. On 28 August 2014  Mr  Singh  applied  for  a  permanent
         residence card which was refused by reference to regulation 20B of
         the Regulations as Mr Singh had failed on two  separate  occasions
         to attend a marriage  interview.  The  appellant  was  refused  by
         reference to regulation 2 as the SSHD considered that the marriage
         was a marriage of convenience.


Background

      4. In Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece [2012]
         UKUT 00038(IAC) (Blake J) the Tribunal held that "Although neither
         the Directive nor the  Regulations  define  it,  as  a  matter  of
         ordinary parlance and the past experience of the UK's  Immigration
         Rules and case law, a marriage of convenience in this context is a
         marriage contracted for the sole or decisive  purpose  of  gaining
         admission to the host state. A durable marriage with children  and
         co-habitation is quite inconsistent with such a definition".
      5. In Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ 14 it was held that the focus in  relation
         to a marriage of convenience ought to be on the intention  of  the
         parties at the time the marriage was  entered  into,  whereas  the
         question of whether a marriage was subsisting  looked  to  whether
         the marital relationship was a continuing  one.  Nonetheless,  the
         FtT  was  correct  to  look  at  the   evidence   concerning   the
         relationship between  the  Claimant  and  the  Sponsor  after  the
         marriage itself, since that was capable of casting light on  their
         intention at the time of marriage.
      6. The European Commission has produced a Handbook which can be found
         at (http://ec.europa.eu/justice/citizen/files/swd_2014_284_en.pdf)
         which defines a marriage of convenience as a  marriage  contracted
         for the predominant purpose of conferring a right of free movement
         and residence under EU law to a person  who  would  otherwise  not
         have such a right and  explains  that  as  'sole  purpose'  is  an
         autonomous EU law concept it is not to be interpreted literally as
         being the unique or exclusive purpose. There is no definition  of'
         predominant' but the handbook indicates that the  phrase  is  used
         because someone may have more than one abusive purpose (such as  a
         tax advantage). The key is whether there is abuse.
      7. Although not specific to EU law section 55 of the Immigration  Act
         2014 states that there is a sham marriage if either, or  both,  of
         the parties is not a  British  citizen,  a  Swiss  national  or  a
         national of an EU state; there is no genuine relationship  between
         the parties to the marriage; and either or both of them  enter  in
         to the marriage for one or more  of  the  following  purposes  (a)
         avoiding  the  effect  of  one  or  more  provisions  of  the   UK
         immigration law or rules (b) enabling a party to the  marriage  to
         obtain a right conferred by that law or rules to reside in the  UK
         .
      8.  In Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ 14 it was held that the legal burden  was
         on the SSHD to prove  that  an  otherwise  valid  marriage  was  a
         marriage of  convenience  so  as  to  justify  the  refusal  of  a
         residence card under the EEA  Regulations.  The  legal  burden  of
         proof in relation to marriage lay on the Secretary of  State,  but
         if she adduced evidence capable of pointing to the conclusion that
         the marriage was one of convenience, the evidential burden shifted
         to the applicant (paras 24 - 27).


Error of law

      9. The Judge noted a number of concerns with the SSHD's case such as
         those recorded at [11-14] in the following terms:


            11. In the refusal letter the respondent relied on  "information
            detailed in the interview summary" and on the strength  of  that
            information  concluded  that  she  had  sufficient  evidence  to
            believe  that  the  marriage  on  4  June  2009   was   one   of
            convenience.
            12.  The  respondent  however  failed  to  adduce  any  relevant
            supporting evidence.  Notably  she  failed  to  provide  to  the
            Tribunal or the appellant any  evidence  of  what  was  said  in
            interview. It may be inferred that the respondent was  referring
            to an interview with the appellant's wife which took place on 28
            May 2015. The refusal letter purports to set out what  was  said
            in interview by the wife; but the contents of the letter are  no
            more than an assertion and do not amount to evidence which is to
            be taken into account by the Tribunal.
            13. Even if those assertions had  been  supported  by  evidence,
            they do not assist the respondent.  The first point taken by the
            respondent concerned photograph taken and in particular an image
            of a young child.  The wife said that this was  the  neighbour's
            child and that the occasion was the celebration of  the  child's
            first birthday.  The respondent continued:


                  "There are clearly no cards, presents, banners or balloons
                  which would be standard to  any  child's  birthday  party.
                  The image clearly shows evidence of substantial amounts of
                  alcohol and cigarettes, all within close proximity to  the
                  child.  The answers given at interview cast serious  doubt
                  on the validity of the evidence presented."


            14. I find the points taken by the respondent to have been of no
            relevance to the assessment of whether the marriage was  one  of
            convenience.  The respondent's opinion as to  the  necessity  of
            cards,  presents  banners  or  balloons  is  wholly  irrelevant.
            Indeed, whether or not the photograph was  of  a  child  on  the
            occasion of his or her first birthday is of no relevance to  the
            issue which the Tribunal has to decide.


     10. The Judge directed himself to the fact the issue was whether the
         marriage was one of convenience at its inception and so matters
         recorded as giving rise to concern were rejected as not being
         relevant in [15 and 16].
     11. In relation to regulation 20B, which is set out at [18]of the
         decision under challenge; regulation 20B(4) states  "If, without
         good reason, A or B fails to provide the additional information
         requested or, on at least two occasions, fail to attend an
         interview if so invited, the Secretary of State may draw any
         factual inferences about A's entitlement to a right to reside as
         appear appropriate in the circumstances".  The Judge noted the
         appellants explanation for his failure to attend the interviews in
         his statement and at [23] finds:


            23. It appears, at its lowest, that the appellant was given
            conflicting information by the respondent and I am satisfied on
            the evidence that he had good reason for his non attendance on
            the 17 February 2015.


     12. The interview on the 17 February was a second interview as on  the
         first occasion the appellants wife attended  and  submitted  a  GP
         letter which stated that the appellant had injured his back which
         it was found the SSHD appeared to have accepted as a  good  reason
         by the issuing of two subsequent invitations. In relation to third
         interview, arranged for the 28 May 2015, the Judge found that  the
         evidence did not allow him to find that the  appellant had  good
         reason for not attending [25]. The Judge therefore concluded:


            26 Thus the appellant failed to prove he had good reason for his
            non attendance on 28 May 2015 but his failure to attend  on  the
            two earlier occasions was not without good  reason.  Accordingly
            regulation 20B(4) did not  apply  and  the  respondent  was  not
            entitled to draw factual inferences.


     13. The Judge also noted that regulation 20B(6) makes it  clear that
         the decision must not be taken on the sole basis that an applicant
         failed to comply with regulation 20B  and  that  given  that  the
         respondent had failed to prove  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
         convenience, regulation 20B provides the sole basis on which  the
         respondent could rely which cannot be the sole basis on which an
         adverse decision can be made.
     14. Mr Bates sought to argue before the Upper Tribunal that the Judge
         misunderstood the SSHD's position in the refusal  letter.  It  is
         accepted that the appellant was given two further opportunities to
         attend an interview and in relation to the failure to  attend  the
         first interview it is stated at paragraph 4 of  the  refusal  "You
         failed to attend this interview and did not give the  Home  Office
         sufficient evidence of justification for this failure  to  attend.
         Your spouse attended the interview alone and submitted a GP letter
         which stated that you had injured your back on 12th January 2015".
         It was also submitted that following the rejection of the medical
         evidence in relation to  the  third  interview  as  not  providing
         sufficient reason for the failure to attend on that occasion,  the
         Judge should have re-visited  the  medical  evidence  provided  in
         respect of the first failure to attend  and  reconsidered  whether
         that did make out a sufficient reason for not attending.
     15. Two issues arise in relation to this submission. The  first is  a
         procedural point raised by Mr O'Ryan that this submission is not a
         ground raised by the SSHD  in  challenging  the  appeal  on  which
         permission to appeal has been granted. The reference in  Ground  1
         is to a letter concerning the second interview  scheduled  for  17
         February 2015.
     16. No application for permission to amend the grounds to  enable  the
         SSHD to argue  this  additional  point  was  made,  it  is not  a
         'Robinson obvious' point, and so this is not  a  matter  that  the
         Upper Tribunal is able to consider  at  this  late  stage,  taking
         into consideration the overriding objectives and the interests of
         fairness to both parties.
     17. The second issue is that noted by the Judge at [27], which is that
         failure to attend cannot be the sole basis for refusal as the SSHD
         was  still  required  to  prove  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
         convenience which it was found she failed to do. Any  error,  even
         if made out, is therefore not material.
     18. It is accepted that the fact the motive for the marriage  was  not
         challenged when the residence card was granted  earlier  does  not
         prevent a challenge being raised at  a  later  date,  if further
         evidence becomes available. The difficulty in this appeal, as the
         Judge noted, is that the material which it was  claimed  warranted
         such a decision was not before the First-tier Tribunal.
     19. Mr O'Ryan submits  that  the  rational  behind  ground  1  is  the
         submission that it is irrelevant why Mr Singh did not attend on 17
         February 2015 and that the issue the Judge should have  determined
         was whether the SSHD was  entitled  under  regulation  20B(4)  and
         (5) to make adverse inference regarding Mr Singhs entitlement to a
         right to reside as it was said that Mr Singh had not confirmed  in
         advance his future attendance at the proposed  appointment  of  17
         February 2015, leading to its cancellation.  At  paragraph  17  of
         his skeleton argument it is further submitted that the  difficulty
         with this stance is that the SSHD has failed to provide copies  of
         any letters to Mr  Singh  in  relation to  any  of  the  proposed
         interviews,  setting  out  (i)  who  was  actually   invited   for
         interview, (ii) whether there was any process  or  time  limit  to
         confirm attendance, (iii) what the consequences of  not  following
         the process for confirming the appointment may be,  or  (iv)  what
         the consequences of not attending the appointment may be.  It  was
         accepted by Mr Bates that this is factually correct  and  in  such
         circumstances the alleged legal error is not made out.
     20. Ground 2 assert a weight challenge and claims that  the  SSHD  was
         denied the right to a fair hearing. This  ground  was  not,  quite
         properly, argued by Mr Bates. Had it been it would have failed as
         the weight to be given to  the  evidence  was  a  matter  for  the
         Judge.  Ground 1, on which this ground is based has been found to
         have no arguable merit. The assertion in Ground 2, that  the  fact
         Mr Singh was in  detention  did  not  prevent  him  attending  the
         hearing is arguably bizzare, especially as he was  in  immigration
         detention and the SSHD refused to bring him to  the  hearing.  The
         claim Mr Singh's wife did not attend is factually incorrect as she
         was at the hearing but was not called to give oral evidence. It is
         also hard to see how the SSHD seeks to maintain this argument,  on
         the facts of this case, when  she  failed to  send  a  Presenting
         Officer to the hearing.
     21. No arguable legal error material to  the  decision to  allow  the
         appeal is made out. The Judge properly directed himself as to the
         relevant issues and the time at which they were to be considered.
         In light of the failure of the SSHD to make out  her  case,  the
         findings made are clearly within the range of permissible findings
         the Judge was entitled  to  make  on  the  evidence.  As  such  no
         material legal error is made out.



Decision

     22. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
         Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


    Anonymity.


     23. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule
         45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules
         2005. I make no such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 9 January 2017

