
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25284/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th February 2016                         |On 16th March 2016            |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                          CHINYERE MERCEDES OFOBIKE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Ogunnubi, Counsel, instructed by TM Legal
Services


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  with  permission  by  the
    Secretary of State.  The Appellant before the First-tier Tribunal is  a
    Nigerian national and she had  appealed  against  the  refusal  of  the
    Secretary of State to issue her with a residence  card  under  the  EEA
    Regulations as confirmation of her right of residence as a spouse.

 2. The judge was probably not helped in the First-tier by the absence of a
    Presenting Officer.  However it is clear from  the  judgment  that  the
    Appellant was represented by Mr Ogonnubi who appears  before  me.   The
    judge heard evidence from the Appellant and from her "husband"  dealing
    particularly with discrepancies that the Secretary of State pointed  to
    in the refusal letter as a result of which due in no small part to  the
    absence of the transcript of the interview the judge found the evidence
    pointed to a genuine relationship.

 3. The judge in his findings noted  the  evidence  and  referred  himself,
    because this was a proxy marriage carried out in Nigeria, to  the  case
    of CB (Validity of marriage - proxy marriage) Brazil [2008]  UKAIT  80.
    That governed the validity  of  proxy  marriages  and  informs  that  a
    marriage that is recognised in the  country in which it  is  celebrated
    is a valid marriage.  However, when one is dealing with  a  case  under
    the EEA Regulations that is not the end of the matter  and  it  is  not
    just the validity of the marriage that is the only criteria. The  cases
    relevant to the issue, that the Judge failed to take into  account  are
    Kareem (Proxy marriage - EU law) [2014] UKUT 24, subsequently  affirmed
    in the case of TA [2014] UKUT 316.  Those cases make  clear  that  when
    dealing with a proxy marriage in relation to a marriage between an  EEA
    national and a foreign  national  what  is  important  is  whether  the
    marriage is recognised in the EEA state from  which  the  EEA  national
    comes, in this case Portugal.

 4. The judge did not consider at  all  that  case,  he  simply  considered
    whether the marriage was valid under Nigerian law and concluded that it
    was.  He concluded it was not a marriage of convenience as asserted  by
    the Secretary of State and he also found that the  parties  were  in  a
    durable relationship, and he then without more allowed the appeal.

 5. On the face of it in failing to take into account Kareem  and  consider
    whether the marriage is recognised in Portugal the judge has erred.  On
    the face of it, in finding  there  to  be  a  durable  relationship  by
    allowing the appeal outright the judge had erred.

 6. Mr Ogunnubi argued that the judge had not  erred  because  the  refusal
    letter did not refer to the lack of  recognition  of  the  marriage  in
    Portugal or that the couple were validly married.   I disagree with him
    on that point because it is quite clear from the refusal  letter  which
    is dated 4th June 2014 in the fourth paragraph where the  Secretary  of
    State says "On 19th June 2012 you applied for a residence card  on  the
    basis of your claim to be the spouse of a Portuguese national"  and  in
    the next paragraph the application was refused "due to  the  fact  that
    this department did  not  accept  that  you  were  legally  married  as
    claimed".    In the next paragraph "It is noted that the Appellant  did
    not  appeal  against  that  decision  instead   submitting   a   second
    application in relation to the same Portuguese national".

 7. It follows in my view that the Secretary of  State  having  refused  to
    recognise that the couple were legally married and  that  decision  not
    having been appealed, it must  therefore  have  been  an  issue  to  be
    decided by the judge.  The judge clearly recognised it was an issue for
    him to decide because he has decided it; unfortunately on the basis  of
    CB rather than Kareem.

 8. Therefore I conclude that  the  judge  has  erred  in  considering  the
    question of the recognition of the marriage by failing to apply Kareem.
     The judge therefore erred in allowing the appeal without consideration
    of that fact and it is accepted there was no evidence in front  of  him
    about the marriage being recognised under Portuguese law.

 9. There is no challenge, however, to the judge's finding that this couple
    are in a durable relationship, so that is a finding which  will  stand.
    However, in then allowing the appeal outright on that basis  the  judge
    erred again because parties to a durable relationship  are  not  family
    members but extended family members and as extended family  members  it
    is a matter of discretion  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  consider
    whether or not it is appropriate to issue a residence card.

Notice of Decision

10. Therefore, I set aside the decision of Judge  Kanagaratnam  and  I  re-
    decide it and for the reasons I have indicated above I allow it to  the
    limited extent that the case is remitted to the Secretary of  State  to
    consider issuing a residence card  to  the  Appellant  as  an  extended
    family member.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date 4th March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin








