
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25860/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|Oral decision given following hearing     |                                  |
|On 20 July 2017                           |On 17 August 2017                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr MD Shohel Rana
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Karim, Counsel, instructed by E1 Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge R Scott.  For ease of reference I shall  throughout
    this decision refer to the Secretary of State,  who  was  the  original
    respondent, as "the Secretary of State" and to Mr  Rana,  who  was  the
    original appellant, as "the claimant".

 2. The claimant is a national of Bangladesh who was born in 1989.  He  was
    married in 2013 to a British citizen and in 2014 he applied  for  leave
    to remain as the spouse of his wife.  In support of his application  he
    was required to  establish  that  his  English  was  of  the  requisite
    standard and for this purpose he submitted  a  TOEIC  test  certificate
    provided by ETS which was said to be valid from 22 August 2012 until 21
    August 2014.  This certificate would, if a valid certificate, have been
    sufficient evidence of his ability to speak English for the purpose  of
    this application.

 3. The application was refused on the basis that the test certificate  had
    been obtained via the use of a proxy and the claimant appealed  against
    this decision, the basis of his appeal being that he had taken the test
    himself on 22 August 2012 at a college known as  Sanjari  International
    College in Mile End Road, London E1 and he had passed that  test.   The
    issue before the judge hearing that appeal, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Wilsher, was whether or not the certificate  was  a  valid  certificate
    properly obtained or whether as the Secretary of State  maintained  the
    certificate had been acquired through use of a proxy.

 4. Although the history of this litigation is  not  strictly  relevant  to
    this appeal it is a fact that the claimant's appeal was successful  but
    thereafter it was set aside by the Upper Tribunal and remitted back for
    rehearing; it came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Scott,  sitting  at
    Taylor House on 29 November 2016.  In the course  of  that  appeal  she
    heard submissions put before her on behalf of  both  the  Secretary  of
    State and the claimant and also had the benefit of hearing the claimant
    give evidence when he was cross-examined.  Following that hearing Judge
    Scott in a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 15 December 2016 allowed
    the claimant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.  The  basis  of  her
    decision was that she was satisfied on the  balance  of  probabilities,
    having considered all the evidence, that this claimant  was  an  honest
    individual and  that  he  had  taken  the  test  himself  and  on  this
    particular occasion the respondent's belief that he had  used  a  proxy
    was incorrect.

 5. The Secretary of State now appeals (again) with leave having been given
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge I Murray.

 6. Before me, in her admirably concise but persuasive submissions, Ms  Pal
    has essentially argued that the judge failed to accord adequate  weight
    to what were very strong reasons why  the  Secretary  of  State  should
    believe that a proxy had been  used.   She  referred  to  the  evidence
    provided by the Secretary of State linking the test taken at  Elizabeth
    College with the certificate provided which,  she  claims,  established
    that  it  was  extremely  likely  indeed  that  this  particular   test
    certificate had been given following the use of a  proxy  who  was  not
    this individual.  The alternative way in which the Secretary of State's
    case is advanced is that in any event the reasons given  by  the  judge
    for rejecting this evidence were inadequately reasoned.   Although  the
    Secretary of State's case had been set  out  at  paragraph  27  of  her
    Decision, there was no  reference  to  this  case  within  the  Judge's
    findings later in the Decision.

 7. In my judgment, attractively though the Secretary of State's  case  was
    advanced before this Tribunal, it must fail.  It is right to  say  that
    in this as in many other ETS cases the generic evidence is in fact  far
    stronger than had  first  been  considered  to  be  the  case  by  this
    Tribunal.  In SM and Qadir a Presidential Tribunal had  concluded  that
    although there were very substantial weaknesses  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's evidence,  which  relied  very  heavily  on  generic  evidence,
    nonetheless it was sufficient to satisfy the primary evidential  burden
    of showing that there was  a  case  against  people  accused  in  these
    circumstances of having used a proxy such as to require explanation  on
    their  part.   Subsequently,  in  a  judicial  review  claim  before  a
    differently constituted Presidential Tribunal, R (on the application of
    Saha and  Another)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    (Secretary of State's duty of candour) [2017] UKUT 00017, the  Tribunal
    made it clear that the evidence produced on behalf of the Secretary  of
    State in that case (in particular relating to  Elizabeth  College)  was
    much stronger than had initially been thought.   However,  it  remained
    the position that where an appeal was brought (either in country or out
    of country) against a decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  an
    English language certificate had been obtained fraudulently that was  a
    matter to be determined by a First-tier Tribunal Judge having regard to
    all the evidence which was before the Tribunal on that occasion.

 8.  Accordingly,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  is  obliged  to   take
    consideration not only  of  the  evidence  adduced  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State (however strong that is now felt to be  generically)
    but also of such evidence as  is  given  on  behalf  of  an  individual
    applicant.  It is only where the  finding  that  is  subsequently  made
    either fails to take account of material evidence before  it  or  where
    the decision  is  effectively  perverse  that  such  a  decision  could
    properly be said to contain an error of law.

 9. In this case the judge did identify the factors which had  been  argued
    on behalf of the Secretary of State.  At paragraph 27 she sets out  why
    it is that the test is  shown  to  be  invalid.   She  notes  that  the
    Secretary of State has linked the number with a test said to have  been
    taken at Elizabeth College.  She then refers to  some  arguments  which
    have been advanced on behalf of the claimant such as  that  he  had  no
    reason to cheat by submitting a false test as he was fluent in  English
    but correctly notes that whatever his ability  of  English  might  have
    been at the time of the hearing before her does not establish that  his
    English was as proficient at an  earlier  stage.   Also,  even  if  his
    English was  fluent,  she  acknowledges  that  there  "could  be  other
    possible reasons why he might engage in a scam anyway; [such  as]  fear
    of failure, and lack of time to study ...".  She also discounted  as  a
    reason why she should not accept the Secretary of State's evidence that
    he had not required an interpreter at the hearing (see paragraph 31  of
    the decision).

10. The judge then refers to the evidence given on behalf of the  claimant,
    having previously set out the Secretary of State's case, and refers  to
    some of the difficulties there are inherent in the Secretary of State's
    case such as  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  not  considered  it
    appropriate even to give the address of Elizabeth  College,  which  was
    not the college where this claimant claims to have sat his test.   Even
    though the decision of the First-tier Tribunal first hearing the appeal
    was not strictly relevant, it is relevant  that  the  first  judge  had
    recorded that the claimant could  not  provide  evidence  from  Sanjari
    College where he said he had taken the test because by this  time  that
    college had been closed.  It is also of note that  as  long  ago  as  8
    September  2014  the  claimant  had  written  to  ETS  requiring   that
    organisation to provide a verification report regarding the test  which
    he claimed even then to have taken at  Sanjari  International  College.
    At no stage in these proceedings has the Secretary of State  considered
    it appropriate to provide the voice  recordings  which  were  taken  to
    enable the Tribunal itself to consider further whether or  not  it  was
    indeed a proxy who had  taken  the  test  as  the  Secretary  of  State
    claimed.

11. I do not understand the generic and  expert  evidence  which  has  been
    provided on behalf of the Secretary of State in ETS cases generally  to
    be so strong as to exclude the possibility of  a  mistake  being  made.
    The highest it comes is to suggest that mistakes  would  be  relatively
    rare and the likelihood of there being a mistake  very  low.   It  must
    follow that there may be at least some cases where a mistake was  made.
    In these circumstances a judge will always, in an individual case, have
    to assess the strength of what is essentially generic evidence  against
    the specific evidence provided  by  and  on  behalf  of  an  individual
    applicant.  In these cases all a judge  can  do  is  consider  all  the
    evidence carefully and decide whether on the balance  of  probabilities
    in the particular case he or she is considering it is more likely  than
    not that a proxy was used.  In this case the judge considered  all  the
    evidence and in particular the evidence  of  this  claimant,  whom  she
    considered to be entirely credible,  and  in  these  circumstances  her
    decision that the respondent had not established that he  had  sat  his
    test at Elizabeth College and had used a  proxy  test  taker  for  this
    purpose was open to her.  It may not have been the decision that  every
    judge would have taken and indeed it may be a decision which relatively
    few judges would have taken,  but  I  cannot,  having  considered  this
    decision as a whole, find that there was any arguable error of  law  in
    the manner in which this  judge  considered  the  evidence.   In  these
    circumstances it follows  that  there  is  no  basis  for  setting  her
    decision aside and I do not do so.

Decision

There being no material error of law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal,  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  against  that  decision   is
dismissed, and Judge Scott's decision, allowing the  claimant's  appeal,  is
affirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 25 July 2017
