
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25341/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 5th October 2017                   |On  27th October 2017                 |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     NK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION  made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Saleem,  instructed on behalf of  Malik and Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal who, in a determination promulgated on the  20th  January
    2017 dismissed his appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse his application for leave to remain in the  UK  as  the
    spouse of a British Citizen.


 2. Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014


 3. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity as at the hearing before the  FTT,  reference  was
    made to the Appellant's circumstances  as  a  vulnerable  witness.   No
    report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  him
    or any member of his  family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the
    Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction
    could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 4. The factual background of the Appellant is set out in the papers.   The
    appellant claims to have entered the United Kingdom  in  February  2002
    and made a claim for asylum. It was refused on 6 August 2002 and it was
    not accepted that at the time he made the application he was  a  minor.
    He was subsequently removed to Germany where a  claim  for  asylum  was
    made by the appellant. It is recorded that they accepted his age within
    that application. On 15 February 2008 he re-entered  the  UK  illegally
    and made a further asylum claim on 8 October 2008. On 24  January  2009
    the second asylum claim was refused. The papers make reference  to  the
    appeal being successful before the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  that  on
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal the  decision  was  set  aside  and  on  a
    rehearing of the appeal on 18 January 2010 the appellant's  appeal  was
    dismissed.

 5. On 29 October 2013 the appellant married  and  on  9  January  2015  an
    application was made for leave to remain on the basis of marriage.

 6.  In a decision letter dated 5 June 2015 that application  was  refused.
    The appellant's immigration history as set out above was summarised and
    his application was considered under the partner route.  The  Secretary
    of State considered whether EX1 applied and noted  that  he  could  not
    meet the requirements of EX 1(a) as  there  were  no  children  of  the
    relationship. As to the requirements of  EX1(b),  it  was  acknowledged
    that he had a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a  settled
    partner who was in employment in the United Kingdom but that it did not
    mean that they  were  unable  to  live  together  in  Afghanistan.  The
    Secretary of State considered that whilst relocation there may cause  a
    degree of hardship for the appellant's British partner,  there  was  no
    evidence that there were insurmountable obstacles  in  accordance  with
    EX2 preventing  the  appellant  from  continuing  his  relationship  in
    Afghanistan. Thus he failed to fulfil EX1(b)  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules and thus did not meet the requirements of  R-LTRP1.1.
    and the application was refused under D-LTRP 1.3.

 7. The decision under private life was considered under paragraph 276  ADE
    (1) taking into account his claim  that  he  last  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in February 2008 and thus had lived in the UK for six years. He
    therefore could not satisfy paragraph 276 ADE (1)  (iii).   As  he  was
    over the age of 18 years and has not spent at least half  of  his  life
    living continuously in the UK he could not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iv) or (v).

 8. As to paragraph 276 ADE (1)(vi) and the requirement  for  there  to  be
    very significant obstacles to his integration into Afghanistan, it  was
    not accepted that there would be such significant obstacles because  he
    had spent the majority of  his  life  there,  including  his  formative
    years. It was noted that he spoke Pashto, the language  of  Afghanistan
    and thus it was not accepted that he had lost all cultural, social  and
    family ties to Afghanistan.

 9.  The  Secretary  of  State  also  considered  whether  there  were  any
    circumstances that would give rise to a grant of leave outside  of  the
    rules and took into account his claim  that  he  had  immediate  family
    members present and settled in the UK including his brother, sister and
    other relatives who provided financial assistance. The respondent  also
    took into account his claim that he had  integrated  closely  with  the
    local community and established friendships whilst in the  UK.  However
    the Secretary of State considered the relations with adult siblings did
    not fall within the definition of "family  life"  and  that  there  was
    nothing to  prevent  the  relatives  or  friends  from  continuing  the
    relationship outside of the UK by visits  or  through  forms  of  long-
    distance communication that was  available.  Any  financial  assistance
    provided by relatives could be sent abroad.

10. As to his relationship with his partner, the secretary  of  state  took
    into account his claim that it would be  unreasonable  to  ask  her  to
    leave the United Kingdom as she was progressing well in her  employment
    and that she would not be  able  to  enter  employment  in  Afghanistan
    without hardship. It was further claimed  that  his  partner  would  be
    unable to support him in Afghanistan and that they would have to "start
    from scratch". However it was noted by the respondent that his  partner
    was a national of Afghanistan and had spent her formative  years  there
    and thus had some experience of the culture. Furthermore, as she was in
    employment in the UK it was not accepted that she would  be  unable  to
    transfer those skills to finding  suitable  employment  in  Afghanistan
    should she choose to accompany the appellant back to his home  country.
    It was noted that his partner was in the UK with  indefinite  leave  to
    remain and that she was under no obligation to leave the UK  and  could
    remain in employment should she choose to do so. Thus  it  was  decided
    that there were no "exceptional circumstances" in his case and did  not
    therefore fall for a grant of leave outside of the rules.

11. The appellant appealed that decision and it came before the  First-tier
    Tribunal in January 2017. In a determination promulgated on 20  January
    2017, the appellant's appeal against that decision was  dismissed.  The
    judge's conclusions are set out at  paragraphs  62  -  79.  As  to  the
    provisions of EX1 (b) and the  issue  of  insurmountable  obstacles  as
    defined  in  EX2,  he  concluded  that  there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to the appellant and his spouse maintaining  family  life  in
    Afghanistan. He further concluded at [71] that  there  were  not  "very
    significant  obstacles"  to  the   reintegration   of   the   appellant
    Afghanistan. Furthermore at paragraphs 74 onwards the judge  considered
    the claim outside of the immigration rules and reached  the  conclusion
    that the balance of proportionality was in  favour  of  dismissing  the
    appeal.

12. The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and on 3 August
    2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup granted permission. There was  no
    response in the form of a Rule 24 notice from the respondent.

13. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal. Mr Saleem  appeared  on
    behalf of the  appellant.  He  relied  upon  the  written  grounds  for
    permission and the grant of permission by Judge  Pickup.  He  submitted
    that in terms of the facts found at paragraphs 56 - 61, there  were  no
    serious concerns with those save that at [56] the judge made  reference
    to there being no difficulties in her returning to Afghanistan. In this
    context he submitted that the factual  background  of  the  appellant's
    spouse was that she had entered the United Kingdom as a dependent of  a
    father who had been recognised as a refugee seven  years  ago  and  the
    issue of safety of return had not been considered by the Tribunal.

14. He  submitted  that  the  conclusions  drawn  from  the  evidence  were
    challenged and in particular paragraphs [62]-[65]. In this  context  he
    submitted that whilst it was accepted that the appellant's spouse was a
    Muslim who had previously lived in Afghanistan, the  judges  assessment
    at [64] that both the appellant and his spouse are "almost  wholly  un-
    assimilated into the UK, to the extent that their lack of  assimilation
    into the UK means that they are both more  familiar  with  Afghanistan"
    was an immaterial consideration. He submitted that  it  was  not  known
    what the judge had meant or what the appellant's spouse was required to
    demonstrate to show that she was assimilated  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Furthermore,  he  submitted  that  at  [65]  the  judge  repeated  this
    consideration stating that the appellant's spouse "is not able to speak
    English, and is of the religion followed  in  Afghanistan,  speaks  the
    language of that country, and chooses in the UK to wear a full  burkha.
    She moves in almost exclusively Afghan expatriates circles. She is  not
    assimilated into the UK in any meaningful sense." He submitted that the
    judge's notion of a British citizen is one who does not wear  a  burkha
    and suggests that if such a  person  speaks  the  language  of  another
    country that is wrong. He further submitted that the practice of  faith
    is fundamental and that in any event she was a British citizen  and  to
    obtain citizenship she had been required to pass the "life  in  the  UK
    test".

15. By reference  to  paragraph  [65]  he  submitted  that  the  judge  was
    inconsistent as to the issue of language because earlier at [62] he had
    found that she had an understanding of English, although  he  described
    it as "very limited. At [69] he submitted that the judges analysis  was
    wrong and that as the appellant's spouse was a British citizen she  was
    entitled to receive treatment via the NHS.

16. He directed the Tribunal to the assessment made by the  judge  "outside
    of the rules" and the "balance sheet" containing the factors taken into
    account in the proportionality balance. In this  context  he  submitted
    that whilst the judge was entitled to take into account the appellant's
    precarious  immigration  history,  the  judge  fell   into   error   by
    considering the appellant spouse as being "culturally  Afghan  and  not
    assimilated in the  UK"  and  the  reference  again  to  the  fertility
    treatment "as not a matter of human rights " when the appellant  spouse
    was a British citizen and thus  entitled  to  NHS  treatment.  Thus  he
    submitted that when looking at the considerations, both under  EX  1(b)
    and outside of the rules in the proportionality balance, the judge  had
    taken into account irrelevant considerations which was wrong in law.

17. Mr Saleem also confirmed in his submissions that he was  not  advancing
    the issue of bias as a freestanding ground of  appeal  as  the  written
    grounds appeared to state, but that the judge had  taken  into  account
    irrelevant considerations which were an error of law.

18. As to other issues, he submitted there was an argument  as  to  whether
    the appellant could be returned to Afghanistan in order  to  apply  for
    entry clearance. He relied upon a decision of the Upper Tribunal SM and
    others (entry clearance - proportionality) Afghanistan CG [2007]  UKAIT
    00010. He did not have a copy of  that  decision  but  I  was  able  to
    furnish the parties with a copy myself. By reference to  that  decision
    he submitted that the case was still good law and that  there  were  no
    entry clearance facilities in Afghanistan and that an  appellant  would
    have to travel to Pakistan to make such an  application.  He  submitted
    that by reference to paragraph 57 that the dangers were  faced  by  all
    and not just by those with British nationality.

19. He further submitted that at [66] where the judge had  found  that  the
    appellant and his spouse depended entirely on the financial  and  other
    support of the appellant's brother and other family  members,  that  in
    the light of the decision in MM (Lebanon) that third-party support  can
    now be taken into account and thus the analysis was wrong. Consequently
    he submitted that the decision  should  be  set  aside  and  should  be
    remitted for a further hearing.

20. Mr Kotas on behalf of the respondent confirmed that there had  been  no
    Rule 24 response filed with the Tribunal. He reminded the  Tribunal  of
    the grounds of permission as set out in  the  written  application  and
    that there  was  no  suggestion  that  the  Article  8  assessment  was
    deficient and that the issue relating to MM (Lebanon) was a  new  issue
    raised but  in  any  event  was  misconceived  as  there  had  been  no
    application  under  Appendix  FM  in  this  regard.  Furthermore,   the
    reference to the decision in SM and others was misconceived because the
    judge had not reached a conclusion that the appellant could  return  to
    Afghanistan and then seek entry clearance. He had found that the couple
    could return together as a family unit.

21. As to any issue of bias, he submitted that the grounds did not make any
    allegation in the way that the case was conducted. Indeed  at  [39]  he
    submitted that he invited the appellant's spouse to resume wearing  her
    burkha and was alive to any matters of cultural sensitivity.

22.  In  response  to  the  submissions  relating  to  the  conclusions  at
    paragraphs [62] onwards, he submitted that the judge had considered how
    the appellant had integrated in the UK, what  were  her  ties  and  the
    nature  of  her   private   life.   The   judge   was   undertaking   a
    "contextualisation" of the issues.

23. He further submitted that the issue of the basis of her father's  grant
    of refugee status was not argued at the appeal therefore could not give
    rise to an error of law.

24. In terms of the Article 8 analysis, the  judge  conducted  a  balancing
    exercise and took into account the  relevant  factors.  The  submission
    made on behalf of the appellant as to the tension between [62] and (65]
    and the issue of language was essentially  "splitting  hairs"  and  the
    judge was entitled to reach that conclusion overall.

25. By way of reply, Mr Saleem submitted that the written grounds were  not
    intended to set out the whole of the submissions and  that  the  issues
    raised at this hearing could not have taken the presenting  officer  by
    surprise when the decision in SM and  others  was  a  country  guidance
    decision. He submitted that the issues had been raised in  the  grounds
    including  that  the  judge  did  not  assess  the  cultural  norms  in
    Afghanistan  relating  to  the  ability  of  women  to  work  and   the
    patriarchal system in Afghanistan and had not taken  into  account  the
    appellant's learning difficulties  in  obtaining  any  employment  thus
    paragraph 4 of the written grounds did raise  issues  relating  to  the
    objective material and return to Afghanistan.

26. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my  decision  which  I  now
    give.

27. I have given careful consideration to the submissions of  each  of  the
    advocates as summarised above. I have to consider whether it  has  been
    demonstrated that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law  when  reaching
    its overall decision. Whilst Mr Saleem submits that the judge erred  by
    not considering the country guidance case of SM and others (as  cited),
    I do not find that this had any relevance to  the  issues  before  this
    particular First-tier Tribunal. As Mr Kotas submitted the judge made no
    finding adverse to the appellant on the basis that he could be expected
    to return to Afghanistan  alone  and  make  an  application  for  entry
    clearance out of country. The decision letter does not  raise  such  an
    issue and the judge did not consider the  appeal  on  this  basis.  The
    issue that the Tribunal had to decide related to whether the  appellant
    could return to Afghanistan accompanied by his wife and  whether  there
    were "insurmountable obstacles"  to  family  life  being  exercised  in
    Afghanistan under EX1(b) or when considering the issue of  family  life
    outside of the rules (see the decision in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11).

28. I also do not  consider  that  there  was  any  error  of  law  in  the
    conclusion reached at [66]. The judge was not undertaking an assessment
    of the family's finances under Appendix FM as  to  whether  they  could
    meet the maintenance requirements but  was  considering  the  issue  of
    family support being maintained in order to support the  appellant  and
    his spouse if they returned to Afghanistan. That, in my judgement was a
    completely different issue.

29. That said, I am satisfied that the decision does demonstrate the making
    of an error on a point of law in the assessment of whether  there  were
    "insurmountable obstacles" to family life in Afghanistan  either  under
    EX1 (b) or when considering the parties return to  Afghanistan  outside
    of the rules. In this context the error relates to the  proportionality
    balancing exercise conducted by the judge.

30. In this context I have considered the written grounds and in particular
    paragraph 3 in which the error of law is articulated in  the  following
    way: -

         "3. The appellant submits that  the  First-tier  judge  erred  when
         stating that since the appellant's wife wears a burkha, she has not
         assimilated in the UK. This is a serious error as  the  appellant's
         wife would have to pass a life in the UK test  to  become  British.
         The First-tier Tribunal judge was biased as what an assimilation is
         the circumstances of the appellant's wife."

31.  The grounds were not accompanied by any other evidence in the form  of
    witness statements from the parties present or from the advocates  (see
    decisions of the Tribunal  in  BW  (witness  statements  by  advocates)
    Afghanistan [2014] UKUT  568  and  Wagner  (advocates  conduct  -  fair
    hearing) [2015] UKUT 655 and the Court of Appeal decision  in  Singh  v
    SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ  492).  Nor  was  there  any  further  elucidation
    provided prior to the hearing as to the  basis  of  any  allegation  of
    bias.

32. The grant of permission by Judge Pickup interpreted the written grounds
    in the following way:-

         "2. In essence, the primary ground of application is that the judge
         was biased in assessing the appellant British citizen wife was  not
         assimilated in the UK, because she wears a burkha. That is  a  very
         serious allegation.

         3.   In assessing the proportionality of returning the appellant to
         Afghanistan, at [62] of the decision the judge noted that she is of
         Afghani origin birth, is a Muslim who wears a burkha, with  limited
         understanding of English in the six years that she has been in  the
         UK, and speaking the language of Afghanistan.  At  [65]  the  judge
         again referred to the Burka, stating she "chooses in the UK to wear
         a full burkha. She moves in almost exclusively  Afghan  expatriates
         circles. She is not assimilated  into  the  UK  in  any  meaningful
         sense."

         4.   That the appellant's British citizen wife wears a full back is
         irrelevant to the consideration of assimilation or integration.  It
         is thus arguable that the judge allowed  irrelevant  considerations
         to affect the proper determination of the appeal."

33. Mr Saleem in his submissions did not seek to rely on the issue of  bias
    in advancing his submissions as set out above. He based his submissions
    on those particular paragraphs identified asserting that the judge  had
    taken  into  account  irrelevant  considerations  and   therefore   the
    assessment of insurmountable obstacles,  whether  under  the  rules  or
    outside the rules, was flawed.

34. The issue of whether there were insurmountable obstacles or in the
    alternative, whether there were there were any "sufficiently
    compelling" circumstances to outweigh the public interest because the
    refusal of leave would result in "unjustifiably harsh consequences"
    (see decision in Agyarko at [48]) both involve a consideration of
    whether family life could continue in all its essential respects in
    Afghanistan, the appellant's country of nationality. As Mr Saleem
    conceded, it could not be an error of law to take into account that the
    appellant's spouse had formerly lived in that country and was thus
    familiar with the customs, social norms and language. However in taking
    as his standpoint some point of significance drawn from the appellant's
    spouse wearing a Burka, the judge had taken into account a
    consideration that was immaterial. I agree with Judge Pickup when
    granting permission. The the fact that she wears a Burka is not
    relevant to the consideration of assimilation and/or integration and in
    any event, the issue of assimilation was not the issue under
    consideration but that of "insurmountable obstacles" or whether there
    are any "sufficiently compelling" circumstances to outweigh the public
    interest because the refusal of leave would result in "unjustifiably
    harsh consequences" (see Agyarko at [48]).

35.  I am therefore satisfied that the balancing exercise in which this
    factor was considered (as set out at paragraph 77) was therefore flawed
    and cannot stand.

36. It also seems to me that the position of  the  appellant's  spouse  and
    basis  of  her  status  derived  from  her  father   was   a   relevant
    consideration when considering joint return to Afghanistan  and/or  the
    issue of insurmountable obstacles. There does  not  appear  to  be  any
    factual assessment of this issue  and  the  safety  of  any  return  to
    Afghanistan although there is reference at [50] where  the  appellant's
    counsel submissions are summarised. It is unclear to me  why  this  was
    not evidenced at the hearing.

37. Furthermore, the judge recorded at [75] that "much was made  on  behalf
    the appellant on how bad life is in Afghanistan but  this  was  not  an
    asylum appeal." Mr Saleem made reference  to  the  written  grounds  at
    paragraph  4  where  it  was  asserted  that  the  cultural  norms   in
    Afghanistan were not assessed and in particular in the context  of  the
    finding made  that  the  appellant's  wife  would  be  able  to  obtain
    employment. The country conditions in Afghanistan seem to me  to  be  a
    relevant consideration and provide the backdrop against  which  return,
    even though this is not an asylum claim, should be assessed.  Again  it
    is unclear to me why no objective evidence was put before the judge  in
    this regard. The Tribunal cannot be at fault in not taking into account
    material if it is not provided.  However  in  view  of  the  conclusion
    reached that the balancing exercise was flawed for the reasons  I  have
    given, the decision reached shall be set aside.

38. As to the remaking of the decision, Mr Saleem invited me to  remit  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  fresh  hearing  which  would
    consider the issues further. I am satisfied that that  is  the  correct
    course to adopt for  a  number  of  reasons.  Whilst  the  decision  on
    proportionality will require further consideration, it is  likely  that
    this will entail further oral evidence from the parties and documentary
    evidence as to the circumstances in Afghanistan. As set out earlier  in
    the  determination,  the   issue   relates   to   whether   there   are
    insurmountable obstacles to family life in Afghanistan  and  this  will
    require consideration of the objective material relating to  conditions
    in that country. I observe that neither  party  produced  any  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal in this regard and  whilst  it  was  not
    asserted that this was an error of  law  made  by  the  judge,  on  the
    remaking of the decision, it is likely to be of relevance when reaching
    an overall decision. At the present time, the Upper Tribunal is hearing
    a country guidance case concerning the most recent  objective  material
    relating to Afghanistan and therefore when it is promulgated it will be
    relevant to the decision under appeal. Thus the appeal should be listed
    before the  First-tier  Tribunal  after  promulgation  of  the  country
    guidance decision.

39. At this hearing the parties should  ensure  that  all  the  documentary
    evidence that is relied upon is filed and served on the other party and
    the Tribunal.

40. The original decision  made  reference  to  the  vulnerability  of  the
    appellant (see paragraph 29). Mr Saleem was not  able  to  provide  any
    further details or any evidence concerning the appellant circumstances.
    It will be for those who are instructed by the  appellant  to  consider
    this issue further and in light of the decision of the Senior President
    of Tribunals in AM (Afghanistan) and Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department and Lord Chancellor [2017] EWCA Civ 1123. In  the  light  of
    those circumstances I have made in anonymity direction,  however,  when
    the matter returns to the First-tier Tribunal for further hearing  that
    issue may be revisited upon  receiving  further  submissions  from  the
    parties and in the light of any available evidence.

DECISION:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside; the  decision  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a further hearing in accordance
    with the Practice Direction.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

