
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA253022014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 June 2016                                |On 10 June 2016               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD TURNBULL
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                            JOSELYN SANCHEZ PUNO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Khosla, Solicitor with DJ Webb & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. We see no need for, and do not make, an order  restricting  publication
    of any of the facts on this case.

 2. This is an appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appeal of the Appellant  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State on 6 June 2014 refusing to vary her leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom as a domestic worker.

 3. It is clear to us that  the  sole  matter  of  concern  raised  by  the
    Secretary of State that caused her to doubt that the appellant  was  in
    fact employed as a domestic worker in the household of her employer  is
    the method of paying her wages. The evidence  clearly  shows  that  her
    wages are not paid by the person for whom she works but  by  a  company
    not self-evidently connected in any way with her employer.

 4.  This  is  a  perfectly  proper  reason  for  concern  but  it  is  not
    determinative.  Whether or not the appellant works for  the  people  in
    whose house she lives, as she must if she is to satisfy the Rules, is a
    matter of fact and the evidence about how she is paid can  be  no  more
    than a contrary indication.

 5. In many circumstances it would be a very compelling contrary indication
    but the Secretary of State's own guidance recognises expressly that  it
    is not conclusive.  The guidance  postulates,  for  example,  a  person
    being paid from a company controlled by the employer.

 6. We find that the First-tier Tribunal  has  clearly  erred  because  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge directed herself specifically to the guidance
    given on the Rules, asked herself if the  facts  fitted  the  guidance,
    decided that they did not and dismissed the  appeal.   What  the  judge
    should have done, but did not do,  was  to  have  reflected  and  asked
    herself if the evidence persuaded her that this Appellant  is  employed
    in the household where she actually works.

 7. There is a great deal of evidence to support that conclusion.  There is
    the testimony of the people in whose house she works and there  is  her
    own testimony,  none  of  which  was  challenged  in  any  material  or
    significant way; there is the evidence of a written job description and
    a contract of employment which, although  satisfactory  documents,  are
    clearly home-made and add to the picture of her working  in  a  private
    household for  the  people  who  live  there.  In  contrast  there  are
    absolutely no contractual documents suggesting that she is the employee
    of the people who pay her wages.

 8. How then are the wages paid? The Appellant offered an explanation.  She
    said that the wages came through a company because the householder  has
    a strong interest in that company.  We do not find it necessary to know
    the precise details of that interest.  He has sufficient  authority  to
    organise the affairs of the company so that it is an agent  for  paying
    the Appellant's wages.  There may be many good reasons  for  that.   We
    are certainly in no position to  say  there  is  anything  sinister  or
    improper about it.  The wages  are  clearly  and  openly  paid.  It  is
    inherently likely that proper accounting arrangements have been made.

 9. It is clear to us that the contrary indication of the source  of  wages
    is not sufficient to disperse the other unchallenged  evidence  showing
    this Appellant to be the employee of the people for whom she works.

10. The Appellant has satisfied us that it is at least probable that she is
    employed by the householder at the place where she lives and works.

11. The identity of her employer is the only  matter  of  contention.   The
    Rules require her to be employed by the householder  at  her  place  of
    work. The evidence clearly shows that the householder is her  employer.
    That is the decision the judge should have reached and would have  done
    if she had applied her mind to the evidence.

12. We set aside the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.   We  substitute  a
    decision allowing the appeal against the Secretary of State's decision.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed under the rules.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated  9 June 2016                   |




