
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25732/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18th September 2017                    |On 29th September 2017            |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                                 Mahmud Reza
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M B Hussain, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Clarke dismissing his appeal under the Immigration  Rules  and  on  the
    basis of his human rights.  The Appellant  was  granted  permission  to
    appeal  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin.   The  grounds  upon  which
    permission was granted may be summarised as follows:

         "...the well drafted and clear grounds that assert that  the  judge
         erred in considering only the applicability  of  R-LTRP.1.1(d)  and
         not the alternative of R-LTRP.1.1(c),  which  it  is  asserted  the
         Appellant's evidence he met are arguable."

 2. I was not provided with a Rule 24 response from the Respondent  however
    I was told that there was one but it was not available at the time that
    the hearing commenced.

Error of Law

 3. At the outset of the appeal  Ms  Ahmad  conceded  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  had  made  a  material  error  of  law  in  respect  of
    considering issues above and beyond  the  two  rules  outlined  in  the
    refusal letter, namely E-LTRP.1.7 and S-LTR.2.2. This  amounted  to  an
    error in law as that consideration was unnecessary and  superfluous  to
    the central issue of whether the Appellant could meet  the  immigration
    rules and the consideration that  followed,  including  the  assessment
    under Article 8 ECHR outside the rules  was  entirely  unnecessary.  In
    light of that fact the parties were in agreement that the determination
    contained a material error of law such that it  should  be  set  aside,
    albeit only in part; both parties were agreed  that  the  determination
    was not infected by that material error up until paragraph 52  of  that
    document.

 4. In my view, the concession was rightly made and the  agreement  between
    the parties was a sensible one.  The  determination  does  to  my  mind
    contain an error of  law  which  infects  the  latter  portion  of  the
    judgment, in that, given the requirements of R-LTRP of Appendix FM, the
    Respondent's criticism of the application under  the  rules  began  and
    ended with E-LTRP.1.7 and S-LTD.2.2. Thus,  by  going  on  to  consider
    EX.1, the judge imitated  the  Respondent's  omission  in  the  Refusal
    Letter by failing to consider R-LTRP.1.1.(c) and instead considered  R-
    LTRP.1.1.(d) alone. This omission was fatal to the judge's reasoning as
    on the findings already made, it was clear that the appeal was one that
    could succeed, as shall become clear.

Remaking the Decision

 5. In light of the parties agreed position I was  invited  to  go  on  and
    decide the appeal on the basis of the findings reached  by  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  up  to  paragraph  53  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
    determination.

 6. As already set out above, the findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    respect of E-LTRP.1.7 in relation to  the  applicant  and  his  partner
    being in a genuine and subsisting relationship remain uninfected and  I
    note that the Respondent has not sought to  cross-appeal  or  challenge
    that finding that the Appellant and his partner  enjoy  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship.

    In respect of S-LTR.2.2 and the requirement that the  applicant  should
    not have submitted false information, representations or  documents  in
    relation to an application, again that finding that the  Appellant  did
    not do so has not been challenged by the Respondent by way of a  cross-
    appeal and consequently the finding of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  upon
    this issue also stands.  It is not in dispute that  the  Appellant  was
    not an overstayer but in fact applied whilst he  had  extant  leave  to
    remain.

 7. As a result, according to the provisions of R-LTRP.1.1, I find that the
    Appellant has met the requirements for limited leave  to  remain  as  a
    partner as:

    (a)  he is in the UK;

    (b)  he has made a valid application for limited leave to remain  as  a
        partner; and

    (c)  (i) he has not fallen for refusal under Section S-LTR, and

         (ii)     the applicant meets all the requirements  of  Section  E-
             LTRP.

 8. Consequently, I find that the Appellant satisfies the Immigration Rules
    for a grant of limited leave to remain under the 5-year route and given
    that finding, I allow his appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  on  the
    above bases having established  his  family  life  in  accordance  with
    Appendix FM.

 9. In summary, I find that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in its
    consideration of the Appellant's appeal in respect of EX.1 and  Article
    8 outside the Rules but did not err in respect of its findings in terms
    of E-LTRP.1.7 and S-LTR.2.2. I thus remake the appeal allowing  it,  as
    the Appellant has now demonstrated that he meets R-LTRP.1.1.(c).

Notice of Decision

10. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

11. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  in  part  as
    indicated above, and the appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

12. No anonymity direction was requested and none is considered necessary.

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I was not asked to make a fee award by  the  Appellant  and  given  that  it
required the Appellant's evidence on appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
satisfy the substantive issues raised in the  Refusal  Letter  in  order  to
succeed in this appeal, I do not see fit to do so.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

