
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal number: IA/25127/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London            |Determination Promulgated |
|On 3 December 2014                      |On 8 December 2014        |
|                                        |                          |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                JAVID AHMADI


                                                          Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                        Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: no appearance and no representation
For the Respondent: Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of Afghanistan, appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of State to  refuse  his
    application for a Residence Card as confirmation of his right to reside
    in the UK with his EEA national partner under the Immigration (European
    Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  (the  EEA  Regulations).  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mathews dismissed  the  appeal  and  the  appellant  now
    appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 2. At the hearing of this matter  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  there  was  no
    appearance by or on behalf of the appellant.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had determined the appeal on the  papers,  the  appellant  having
    elected  for  him  to  do  so.  The  appellant  had  not  nominated   a
    representative and was notified of the hearing on 12 November  2014  at
    the address given in the application for permission  to  appeal.  There
    was no reason before me as to why the  appellant  did  not  attend  the
    hearing. I was satisfied that the appellant had been  notified  of  the
    hearing and I considered that it was in the  interests  of  justice  to
    proceed with the hearing and I did so in accordance with Rule 38 of the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as amended).

 3. The respondent refused to issue the residence card because she was  not
    satisfied that the appellant had demonstrated that his  partner  was  a
    qualified person under regulation 6, in particular that she was  not  a
    jobseeker within regulation 6 (2) (b) of the EEA Regulations.

 4. It appears to be the appellant's case, although it is  not  very  clear
    from the documents, that the appellant's partner was in receipt of  Job
    Seekers Allowance (JSA) for at least part of the time during which  she
    claims to have been employed.  This  may  account  for  the  respondent
    having considered the application on the  basis  that  the  appellant's
    partner was a 'jobseeker' rather than a 'worker'.

 5. The appellant had submitted  further  evidence  for  the  appeal.  This
    included a letter dated 16 June 2014 from  Choice  Travel  and  Fashion
    stating that the appellant's partner had been employed there since June
    2013, initially for 10 hours a week and more recently for  16  hours  a
    week. There were also payslips from Choice Travel and Fashion from  May
    and June 2014. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered  this  evidence
    along with the evidence  submitted  with  the  application.  The  Judge
    considered the absence of a witness statement from  the  employer;  the
    lack of evidence from HMRC; the lack of bank statements reflecting  the
    partner's claimed income; the fact that the earlier  payslips  identify
    the appellant's partner as male; the lack of evidence as to the  income
    referred to in the JSA documentation; the poor quality of the documents
    submitted; and the lack of evidence from the appellant's  EEA  national
    partner. The Judge considered the employer's letter and payslips in the
    context of these factors and did not  accept  that  this  evidence  was
    sufficient to demonstrate that the appellant's partner is  employed  as
    claimed.

 6. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal contend that the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge erred in failing to take into  account  the  documentary
    evidence from the appellant's partner's employer and by failing to take
    into account the fact that the Home  Office  previously  made  a  wrong
    decision in the appellant's case.

 7. However the Judge did take the new evidence into account as well as the
    evidence already submitted. There was no evidence before the  Judge  as
    to any previous application so I do not see how that  could  have  been
    considered. In any event the Judge  was  bound  to  consider  only  the
    appeal before him.

 8. Mr Shilliday submitted that it was open to the Judge to decide that the
    documents submitted were not reliable in the circumstances and that his
    decision was not Wednesbury unreasonable. He also submitted that  there
    is little prejudice to the appellant in making a fresh application with
    all of the appropriate documentation.

 9. I am satisfied that the decision made by the Judge was open to  him  on
    the basis of the evidence before him. The situation in relation to  JSA
    was unclear. The appellant had submitted some evidence of his partner's
    employment but the Judge was entitled to look at all  the  evidence  in
    the round and to conclude that the evidence submitted was not  reliable
    or sufficient to discharge the burden of proof upon the appellant.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

Signed
                            Date: 3 December 2014


A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



















