
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25639/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th June 2015                             |On 26th June 2015             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              Duangjan Marples
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwncyz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hussain, Counsel instructed by Fusco Browne


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Williams made following a hearing at Stoke on 16th September 2014.

 2. The judge allowed the claimant's appeal against the decision to  refuse
    her application on the grounds that she had not provided the  necessary
    English language qualification.

 3. The Secretary  of  State  challenged  his  decision  stating  that  the
    certificate produced had a validity of two years and therefore that the
    judge had erred in finding that there was no evidence that the  English
    language qualification was time-limited.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Chamberlain for  the  reasons
    stated in the grounds.

 5. At the  hearing  Mr  Diwncyz  accepted  that  the  Immigration  Judge's
    decision should stand.

 6. In the UKBA guidance published after a freedom of  information  request
    dated  28th  April  2014  UKBA  states  that  if  a  qualification  has
    previously been accepted by them in connection with another immigration
    application e.g. for entry clearance, it will be accepted.

 7. It is not disputed that the claimant submitted an application  to  join
    her husband in the UK as a spouse  and  as  part  of  that  application
    provided evidence of having passed the English language test  at  level
    A1 of the Common European Framework of Reference.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the original judge shall stand.  The  claimant's  appeal  is
allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


