
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25324/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9th May 2013                                 |On 17th June 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                              ANSER HAYAT KHAN
                      (ANONONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - bangkok
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs M Ahammed of RMS Immigration Limited
For the Respondent:    Ms S Ong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan born on  2nd  August  1986.
    No earlier than 28th August 2012 the Appellant  applied  for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant.   That  application  was
    refused on 29th October 2012 for the  reasons  given  in  a  Notice  of
    Decision of that date.  The Appellant  appealed,  and  his  appeal  was
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal James (the Judge) sitting  at
    Hatton Cross on 4th  January  2013.   For  the  reasons  given  in  his
    Determination dated 13th January 2013, the Judge found that  there  was
    no valid appeal before him under the Immigration Rules but nevertheless
    went on to consider the Appellant's Article  8  ECHR  rights.  In  that
    respect,  he  came  to  the  conclusion  that   there   would   be   no
    disproportionate breach of such rights by  the  Respondent's  decision.
    The Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and on  11th  March
    2013 such permission was granted.

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.  In that  connection,  I
    heard brief submissions on behalf of both parties which are recorded in
    the Record of Proceedings.

 3. It is not in dispute that the Appellant did not  make  his  application
    for leave to remain until 28th August 2012 at the earliest, whereas his
    leave to remain had expired on the previous day being 27th August 2012.
     That being the case, the Appellant does not have the right  to  appeal
    as he has not appealed an immigration decision as  defined  by  Section
    82(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   The  Judge
    did not err in law in coming to that conclusion.  Where the  Judge  did
    err in law was to go on to on to consider human rights grounds.  As the
    Appellant had not appealed an immigration decision, he did not have the
    right of appeal on any grounds.  However this  does  not  amount  to  a
    material error of law requiring the decision of the  Judge  to  be  set
    aside because the Judge dismissed the appeal on Article 8 human  rights
    grounds.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision that there is no valid appeal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  also  do
not make one.






Signed                              Dated 17th June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

