
[pic]
IAC-HW-MP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25211/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th November 2015                |On 23rd November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                             MR JUSTICE PHILLIPS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                            MS MST TARANEA JUNNAT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik, instructed by Malik Law Chambers
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, with permission, seeks to appeal  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Stokes) which in a determination promulgated
    on 1st April 2015 dismissed her appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant under the points-based system.

 2. No application has been made for any anonymity direction on  behalf  of
    the Appellant.

 3. The Appellant's immigration history can be summarised as follows.   The
    Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 16th November  1982.   She
    first arrived in the United Kingdom to study for a Diploma in  Business
    Management (Level 7) at the London School of Business Studies which was
    completed after eighteen months in July  2011.   She  had  subsequently
    been granted leave to remain as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant
    expiring on 20th April 2014 to study on a Health and Social Care course
    (Level 5) at Helios College which she had completed in  or  about  July
    2013.  According to the  Appellant's  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal the licence of that college was subsequently suspended.

 4. From the material before the First-tier Tribunal, it was noted that she
    had applied in January 2014 for further leave to remain to  enable  her
    to study at the London School of Technology (LST) on a course in Health
    and Social Care.

 5. The Secretary of State refused that application in a decision  made  on
    27th February 2014.

 6. The Appellant made a further application for leave to remain as a  Tier
    4 (General) Student Migrant on 17th April 2014.  In a decision made  on
    4th June 2014, the Secretary of State refused her  application  on  the
    grounds that she had not met the requirements  of  paragraph  245ZX(c),
    (d).  Those paragraphs state as follows:

         "(c)     The applicant must have  a  minimum  of  30  points  under
             paragraphs 113 to 120 of Appendix A.

         (d)   The  applicant  must  have  a  minimum  of  10  points  under
             paragraphs 10 to 14 of Appendix C."

 7. The relevant paragraphs of Appendix A of the Immigration  Rules  headed
    "Attributes for Tier 4 (General) Students" states as follows:-

         "113.    An applicant applying for  entry  clearance  or  leave  to
                remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student must  score  30  points
                for attributes.

         114. Available points are shown in Table 16 below.

         115. Notes to accompany Table 16 appear below that table.

         Table 16

         Criterion     Points Awarded

         Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies (CAS) 30

         Notes:

         115A In order to obtain  points  for  a  CAS,  the  applicant  must
                provide a valid CAS reference number.

         116. A CAS will only be considered to be valid if:

                (a) - (d)   ...

                (ea)   the migrant must  not  previously  have  applied  for
                      entry clearance, leave to enter or  leave  to  remain
                      using  the  same  CAS  reference  number  where  that
                      application  was  either  approved  or  refused  (not
                      rejected as an invalid application, declared void  or
                      withdrawn)."

 8. In the decision letter the Secretary of State noted that the  Appellant
    had claimed 30 points for her CAS number which had been submitted  with
    her application but that it had been used in a previous application and
    therefore this was not a valid CAS and thus she was not awarded the  30
    points necessary.   The  Appellant  had  also  claimed  10  points  for
    maintenance (funds) under Appendix C but as she had failed to submit  a
    valid CAS, the Respondent was unable to assess the level of  funds  she
    was required to show in support of her application.   Consequently  the
    application was  refused  under  paragraph  245ZX(c)  and  (d)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 9. The Appellant appealed that decision and the  appeal  came  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Stokes) on 13th February 2015.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal at paragraphs 12 to 21 set out the evidence  advanced  on
    behalf of the Appellant.  At paragraphs 12-21 of the determination  the
    First-tier Tribunal set out the evidence of the Appellant.  It is plain
    from the conclusions reached at [23] there has been no challenge to the
    Appellant's credibility and her claim was accepted that  she  had  been
    told by the college that a CAS was valid for six months  and  that  the
    college submitted the CAS directly to the Home Office, the  first  that
    she knew of the difficulties with her application was from the  refusal
    decision and that the Home Office had not contacted either her  or  the
    college concerning the validity of the CAS (See [23]).

10. It was argued on behalf of the Appellant that there was  a  public  law
    duty of fairness upon the Secretary of State to  have  made  a  further
    enquiry of either the college or the Appellant or to have notified  the
    Appellant of the problems with the CAS.  Reliance  was  placed  on  the
    decision of Pokhriyal v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1568 and its reference  to
    the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  Naved  v  SSHD  [2012]  UKUT  14
    (IAC).  The judge  found  that  whilst  neither  the  college  nor  the
    Appellant had been notified that the CAS had been used  in  a  previous
    application, there was no procedural unfairness in the manner in  which
    the Respondent considered her application and had reached the decision.
     The judge found that the CAS was not valid and therefore she  did  not
    qualify for the requisite 30 points under Appendix A of the Immigration
    Rules thus she dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.   (The
    judge also dealt with Article 8 at paragraphs 31 to 40).

11. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and  permission
    was granted on 17th June 2015.

12. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.  Mr Malik  appeared  on
    behalf of the Appellant and Mr Whitwell on behalf of the  Secretary  of
    State.

13. The Grounds of Appeal upon which permission was granted related to what
    was described as the "conspicuous conflict of  authority"  between  the
    Court of Appeal decisions in Pokhriyal v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1568  and
    that of EK (Ivory Coast) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1517.  It was therefore
    submitted that EK (Ivory Coast) was decided per incuriam and should not
    be followed (see paragraph 11 of the grounds).   However  as  Mr  Malik
    conceded before us, after the grounds  were  settled  (but  before  the
    grant of permission) the Court of Appeal considered this issue  in  the
    decision of Kaur v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 13.  The decision in  Kaur  (as
    cited) concerned an Appellant who had been refused leave to  remain  in
    the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student who was required to have a minimum
    of 30 points under paragraphs 113-120 of Appendix A to the Rules.   The
    Secretary of State declined to take  into  account  a  Confirmation  of
    Acceptance for Studies ("CAS") assigned to the Appellant by the Sponsor
    because the CAS had not been provided in the  application.  Before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal, the CAS and the documentary
    evidence was taken  into  account,  but  it  was  considered  that  the
    evidence did not provide the confirmation required by  the  Rules.   As
    the decision sets out, two principal submissions were made on behalf of
    the Appellant (at [2]).  For the purposes of this appeal, the second of
    those submissions is of relevance where it was argued that even if  the
    Secretary of State did  not  have  to  accept  the  CAS  as  confirming
    academic progress, she was obliged to make  further  enquiries  of  the
    academic institution before  refusing  the  application  (applying  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in Naved v SSHD  [2012]  UKUT  14  (IAC)
    which had been applied by analogy in the decision of Pokhriyal.

14. On the second question, the Court of Appeal observed that the  decision
    of Naved had been considered twice  since  the  decision  of  Pokhriyal
    concerning Tier 4 Students and deficiencies in the CAS (Rahman  v  SSHD
    and EK (Ivory  Coast)).  In  both  cases  the  decision  of  Naved  was
    distinguished and thus concluded that where a Tier 4 Sponsor  fails  to
    provide evidence via a CAS which is required to enable the  student  to
    secure the necessary points, there is no obligation founded in fairness
    which obliges the Secretary of State to further  investigate  with  the
    Sponsor or to inform the student (see the decision at [58]).  The Court
    of Appeal went on to consider the  decision  of  Naved  and  Rahman  at
    paragraphs [39] and [40] of that decision and reached the conclusion at
    [42]:-

         "It follows, in my judgment, that both Rahman and EK (Ivory  Coast)
         are binding authority on the  question  whether  the  Secretary  of
         State should, as a matter of fairness, give notice to an  applicant
         for leave to remain or the Tier 4 Sponsor that she considers  there
         to be a deficiency in the CAS before making an adverse decision  on
         that basis.  There is no such obligation."

15. Thus Mr Malik conceded that the  basis  upon  which  the  grounds  were
    advanced when seeking permission were no longer arguable.

16. However in his oral submissions he raised an alternative argument; that
    whilst the there is no general obligation on the Secretary of State  to
    either contact  the  Appellant  or  the  Sponsor  before  deciding  the
    application, each case was "fact sensitive" and that on the  particular
    facts of this appeal the Appellant could demonstrate there was  a  duty
    of fairness upon the Secretary of State to contact either  her  or  the
    Tier 4 Sponsor before refusing the application for leave to remain  and
    therefore  her  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  have
    succeeded.

17. In this respect he advanced the following argument.  The Appellant  had
    set out in her application form at page 5 the  circumstances  in  which
    she had been refused leave to remain following a  previous  application
    made in January 2014.  The form recorded the following:-

         "I applied for leave to remain on 20th January 2014 and got refused
         despite being awarded the 40 points, on the grounds that I was  not
         allowed to change Sponsor without notifying UKVI. I mentioned in  a
         cover letter with my previous application that I did not change  my
         Sponsor but  studied  a  programme  alongside  my  main  study.   I
         finished the supplementary programme but  could  not  complete  the
         main  programme  as  London  College  of   Care   Education   faced
         difficulties with UKBA and subsequently lost sponsorship.  When the
         college informed me that they were revoked I applied to study under
         sponsorship  of  a  different  institute  recently.   Therefore  my
         previous study of HND in Business was a supplementary study with my
         main programme of Diploma in Health and Social Care at  College  of
         Care Education.  I could not complete the  certificate  because  my
         Sponsor, College of Care  Education  lost  their  licence  and  was
         terminated.   Therefore  the  grounds  of  refusal  were  incorrect
         according to my understanding."

18. Mr Malik submitted that in the circumstances where  the  Appellant  had
    said that she had made an earlier  application  and  the  decision  was
    unjustified and thus unlawful and the CAS on its face was  valid  until
    21st July 2014, the Secretary of State was obliged to  give  notice  to
    her on the basis that the Appellant could not  have  been  expected  to
    understand that the CAS could not  be  used  again.   Consequently  the
    submission he made was that this particular case could be distinguished
    on its facts.

19. As we have set out above whilst Mr Malik  realistically  accepted  what
    was set out in the decision of Kaur at [42], he sought  to  distinguish
    this particular case on its own facts.  We accept  as  a  statement  of
    general principle that the Immigration Rules do not exclude the general
    public law duty to act fairly which rests on the Secretary of State  in
    exercising her functions and that the context of the duty to act fairly
    varies according to the particular decision making context in which  it
    falls to be applied (see EK (Ivory Coast) at  [27])  and  as  Mr  Malik
    submits, each case is "facts sensitive".  However,  on  the  particular
    facts of this case and the context in which the decision  was  reached,
    we do not find that they demonstrate that there was any breach  of  the
    Secretary of State's duty to act fairly in considering the  application
    for leave to remain.  We have reached that conclusion for the following
    reasons.

20. The context and background in which the public  law  duty  of  fairness
    operates in the points-based system is conveniently summarised  in  the
    decision of EK (Ivory Coast) at [28-31] as follows:-

         "28. The PBS is intended to simplify the procedure for applying for
             leave to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  in  certain
             classes of case, such as economic migrants and students.  This
             is to enable the Secretary of State to process high volumes of
             applications in a  fair  and  reasonably  expeditious  manner,
             according  to  clear  objective  criteria.  This  is  in   the
             interests of all applicants. It  also  assists  applicants  to
             know what evidence they  have  to  submit  in  support  of  an
             application.

         29.  As Sullivan LJ observed in Alam, it is an inherent feature  of
             the  PBS  that  it  'puts  a  premium  on  predictability  and
             certainty at the expense of discretion' (para.  [35]).  Later,
             at para. [45], he said:

                  '... I endorse the view expressed by the Upper Tribunal in
                  Shahzad [Shahzad (s  85A:  commencement)  [2012]  UKUT  81
                  (IAC)] (paragraph 49) that there is no unfairness  in  the
                  requirement in the PBS that an applicant must submit  with
                  his  application  all  of  the   evidence   necessary   to
                  demonstrate compliance with the rule under which he  seeks
                  leave. The Immigration Rules, the Policy Guidance and  the
                  prescribed application form all make  it  clear  that  the
                  prescribed  documents   must   be   submitted   with   the
                  application, and if they are not the application  will  be
                  rejected.  The   price   of   securing   consistency   and
                  predictability is a lack  of  flexibility  that  may  well
                  result in "hard" decisions in individual cases,  but  that
                  is not a justification for imposing an obligation  on  the
                  Secretary of State to conduct a preliminary check  of  all
                  applications to see whether they are accompanied by all of
                  the specified documents, to contact applicants where  this
                  is not the case, and to give them an opportunity to supply
                  the missing documents. Imposing such an  obligation  would
                  not only have significant resource implications, it  would
                  also extend the time taken by the decision making process,
                  contrary to the policy underlying the introduction of  the
                  PBS.'

         30.  These comments were echoed by Davis  LJ  in  giving  the  lead
             judgment in Rodriguez, at para. [100].

         31.  This context informs the way in which the general  public  law
             duty of fairness operates in relation to  the  PBS.  The  duty
             supplements the PBS regime, but ought not  to  be  applied  in
             such a manner as to undermine its intended mode  of  operation
             in a substantial way. Application  of  the  duty  of  fairness
             should not result  in  the  public  benefits  associated  with
             having such a clear and predictable scheme operating according
             to objective criteria being placed in serious jeopardy."

21. On the facts of this case it could not be said that  the  grounds  upon
    which the application was refused could not  have  been  known  to  the
    applicant or the Tier 4 Sponsor.  We  have  set  out  earlier  in  this
    determination  the  Rules  which  governed  the  application   and   in
    particular the notes to accompany Table 16 in which it was stated at:-

         116. A CAS will only be considered to be valid if:

                (a) - (d)   ...

                (ea)   the migrant must  not  previously  have  applied  for
                      entry clearance, leave to enter or  leave  to  remain
                      using  the  same  CAS  reference  number  where  that
                      application  was  either  approved  or  refused  (not
                      rejected as an invalid application, declared void  or
                      withdrawn)."

22. Notwithstanding that, on its face, the CAS was valid  until  21st  July
    2014, it is plain from 116 (ea) that, where an applicant has previously
    applied for entry clearance and that application had been  refused  (as
    it was in this Appellant's case) the applicant must not  use  the  same
    CAS in a subsequent application.  It could not arguably  be  said  that
    the Secretary of State bore any  responsibility  for  any  error  which
    resulted in leave being refused (as on the particular facts of the case
    of Naved).  Nor could it arguably be said that the CAS was deficient in
    its contents.  It was a document that the Rules  stated  would  not  be
    valid for the purposes of the application if it had  been  used  in  an
    earlier application which had been refused.

23.  Whilst Mr Malik sought to distinguish the facts on the basis that  the
    earlier decision had not been a lawful or a  justified  decision,  that
    has not been demonstrated to be the case.  Whilst  the  applicant  made
    reference to her previous application and that "the grounds of  refusal
    were incorrect" we observe that no challenge was subsequently  made  at
    the time to that decision on the grounds that it was unlawful either by
    way  of  any  application  for  judicial  review,  or  by  way  of  any
    application of reconsideration to the Secretary of  State.   Similarly,
    it had not  even  been  argued  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (see
    paragraph  24  of  the  decision).   Thus  on  the  particular  factual
    circumstances of this case, we do not consider that it  could  properly
    be said that there was  any  public  law  duty  of  fairness  upon  the
    Secretary of State to require her to contact either  the  Appellant  or
    the Tier 4 Sponsor before making a  decision  on  the  application  for
    further leave to remain as it was plain that this was not a valid  CAS.



24. Whilst the First-tier Tribunal did not have the benefit  of  EK  (Ivory
    Coast) or the decision in Kaur, we are satisfied it  was  open  to  the
    judge to reach the conclusion on the facts of this case that there  was
    no procedural or any unfairness on the part of the Secretary  of  State
    and that the appeal was properly dismissed.   The  Appellant  therefore
    has not demonstrated any error of law in the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal and the decision shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law in its decision and the decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   Date 19/11/2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds



We have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed   Date 19/11/2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
