
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25464/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On May 3, 2017                        |On May 15, 2017                      |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                             mrs kulwinder kaur
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V Makol,(Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I do not make an anonymity direction under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 2. The appellant is an Indian national.  On February 7, 2011  she  entered
    the United Kingdom as a student.  On November 3, 2014 she applied for a
    residence card as confirmation of her right to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom as the spouse of an EEA national, Mr Przemyslaw Bogus  who  was
    exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  The respondent refused
    this application on July 2, 2015 because  she  was  not  satisfied  the
    marriage was genuine or that the EEA national was  a  qualified  person
    under Regulation 6 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal against that  decision  and  her
    appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the   First-tier   Tribunal   Bradshaw
    (hereinafter called the Judge) on February 26, 2016 and in  a  decision
    promulgated on March 15, 2016 the Judge allowed the  appeal  under  the
    2006 Regulations.  The respondent appealed that decision on  March  21,
    2016 and permission to appeal was given on  January  6,  2017  and  the
    matter then came before me on March 9, 2017 when I took submissions  on
    whether there had been an error in law.

 4. Having heard submissions I  concluded  that  the  Judge  had  erred  by
    placing too much weight on unsubstantiated claims of  employment.   The
    appellant had borne the burden of proving the EEA national's employment
    was genuine and by failing  to  produce  any  documentary  evidence  to
    support the claimed employment, at the date of hearing,  there  was  an
    error in law.

 5. Both Mr Avery and Mr Makol invited me to adjourn the matter for further
    evidence to be submitted and I acceded to that request.

 6. On April 20, 2017 the appellant's solicitors submitted further evidence
    in line with my directions and that evidence  included  a  contract  of
    employment between JD Wetherspoon PLC and the EEA national dated  March
    13, 2017.  The contract confirmed he was to be employed in the  kitchen
    with a guaranteed minimum number of hours of 25 hours a week.  Payslips
    confirming his employment were submitted  along  with  bank  statements
    corroborating the payments made by the employer.

 7. The EEA national gave oral evidence  at  the  hearing  and  was  cross-
    examined by Mr Avery.  He confirmed that he worked in a  restaurant  in
    Windsor and generally worked five days a week on  approximately  twelve
    hour shifts.  At the conclusion of his evidence Mr Avery indicated that
    he was satisfied that  the  EEA  national  was  working  and  therefore
    exercising treaty rights.  The previous issue of whether  the  marriage
    was genuine had been addressed by the Judge at the  First-tier  hearing
    and this was no longer an issue for myself.

 8. I indicated to Mr Makol  that  based  on  the  oral  evidence  and  the
    documentary evidence that had now been submitted  I  accepted  the  EEA
    national was exercising treaty rights and consequently this appeal must
    succeed.

 9. I invited representations on whether a fee award  should  be  made  but
    indicated that I was allowing this appeal based on  the  new  evidence.
    Mr Makol confirmed that no application for a fee award was being made.

10. I therefore indicated to the appellant who was present at  the  hearing
    that I would be allowing her  appeal  and  this  decision  confirms  my
    reasons for doing so.

    NOTICE OF DECISION

11. The original decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making
    of an error of law and I set that decision aside.  I  have  remade  the
    decision allowed the appeal.

12. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date May 12, 2017




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made because the appeal was allowed on fresh evidence.





Signed                              Date May 12, 2017







Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

