
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/25757/2015
                                                               IA/25761/2015
                                                               IA/25766/2015
                                                               IA/25769/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 May 2018                                 |On 16 May 2018                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                            DGP (First Appellant)
                           LBM (Second Appellant)
                            LTM (Third Appellant)
                           LKM (Fourth Appellant)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms U Miszkiel, Counsel instructed by Chipatiso
Associates LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Background

 1. The appellants in this  case  are  citizens  of  Tanzania.   The  first
    appellant, Ms DGP, was born on 18 July 1974, her son LBM, was  born  on
    13 August 2002 and her daughters LTM, born on 21 January 2005 and  LKM,
    born on 21 August 2007.  The first and fourth appellants entered the UK
    on 2 October 2007.  The second and third appellants entered the UK on 1
    December  2007  as  dependants  of  the  first  appellant.   The  first
    appellant originally had leave to remain as a student and  subsequently
    submitted human rights applications.  On 27 September  2013  the  first
    appellant  lodged  a  judicial  review  against  the  refusal  of   the
    respondent to grant her a right of appeal following a  refusal  of  the
    human rights claim on 17 April 2013.  The  Home  Office  conceded  that
    judicial review and on 18 November  2014  the  appellants  submitted  a
    further human rights application.  It is these applications, which were
    refused on 2  July  2015,  which  were  considered  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In a decision promulgated on 27 April  2017,  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Turquet dismissed the appellants' appeals.

 2. The appellants appeal with permission from the Upper  Tribunal  on  the
    following grounds:

         Ground 1 - that the First-tier Tribunal applied an improperly  high
         standard of proof in using the word "satisfied";

         Ground 2 - at [53] the judge erred in incorrectly finding that  not
         all three children were qualifying children (under  section  117D),
         where the judge mistakenly said that at the  date  of  the  hearing
         only two of the three children had lived in the UK continuously for
         at least seven years;

         Ground 3 - it  was  submitted  that  the  judge  has  confused  the
         reasonableness test with the best interests test and  as  such  the
         assessment of the EX.1.(a) and 276ADE(1)(iv) under  Article  8  was
         fatally flawed;

         Grounds 4 and 5 - it was argued  that  the  judge  failed  to  give
         adequate weight to the correct length of residence of the  children
         when assessing both their best interests and the reasonableness  of
         return under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) and Section 117B(6).   It  was
         argued that the judge failed to  assess  all  relevant  factors  in
         relation to all three qualifying children;

         Grounds 6 and 7 - it was argued that the judge's assessment of  the
         best interests was  inadequate  or  unreasonable  when  considering
         Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules.  Equally the assessment
         that it would be reasonable for the children to return to  Tanzania
         was unreasonable.

Error of Law

 3. Before me, Mr Walker conceded that the judge had made  material  errors
    of fact when looking at the age of the children and how long  they  had
    been in the UK and he considered that this caused errors in the judge's
    decision due to confusion as to how long they  were  here.   Mr  Walker
    submitted that such confusion led to a material error of  law  in  both
    the judge's consideration of the best interests assessment for  all  of
    the children and whether it  was  reasonable  for  them  to  return  to
    Tanzania, which he conceded were infected by these errors.

 4. I agree with Mr Walker's sensible concession.  Ms  Miszkiel  sought  to
    amend the grounds of appeal, with consent to include ground 8 that  the
    appellants rely on the arguments made by the appellants in the  Supreme
    Court in the cases  of  Pereira  and  NS  (Sri  Lanka)  &  Others  UKSC
    2016/0187  in  relation  to  the  best  interests  and   reasonableness
    assessment (which are appeals from MA (Pakistan) and others [2016] EWCA
    Civ 705 and currently awaiting judgment from the  Supreme  Court).   Ms
    Miszkiel relied on the arguments  made  specifically  in  relations  to
    whether there is a wider public interest consideration  when  assessing
    reasonableness under Section 117B(6) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002..

 5. Ms Miszkiel maintained that the judge had erred in applying an elevated
    standard of proof in that she had stated that she was not  "satisfied".
    I do not accept that this is the case.  There is nothing disclosed from
    a fair reading of the judge's decision that might indicate that she had
    got the burden of  proof  wrong  and  in  finding  that  she  was  'not
    satisfied' is not inconsistent with something being  more  likely  than
    not.

 6. However, I am satisfied that the judge erred  in  her  best  interests'
    assessment.  The fact that the decision is  ill-structured  is  not  in
    itself a material error, and the judge reminded herself that it did not
    matter how the balancing exercise was  conducted,  providing  the  best
    interests of the children were a primary  consideration.   Nonetheless,
    there is force in the argument that  the  judge's  assessment  of  best
    interests at [53], which was essentially  outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, and was preceded by findings that it would be reasonable for the
    first appellant and her children to relocate, was insufficient.  It  is
    trite law that in considering the best interests of the child there can
    be no consideration of the conduct of the parents.  The judge, at  [38]
    and [39] looked at the position of the fourth appellant LKM, born on 21
    August 2007, the fourth appellant and the only child  who  appeared  to
    meet the requirements under paragraph 276ADE.  However, the  judge  was
    not applying the correct test when assessing the fourth appellant under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  It was unclear that the best interests of the
    fourth appellant had been considered.  Instead  the  findings  at  [41]
    focused primarily on whether it would be reasonable for her  mother  to
    return, and at [39] and [42] that it would be reasonable for the fourth
    appellant to leave.

 7. MA (Pakistan) & Ors [2016] EWCA Civ 705 confirms  that  the  assessment
    has to be from the position of the child.  At [46] of MA (Pakistan):

         "46. Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the fact  that
             a  child  has  been  here  for  seven  years  must  be   given
             significant  weight  when  carrying  out  the  proportionality
             exercise. Indeed, the Secretary of State published guidance in
             August  2015  in   the   form   of   Immigration   Directorate
             Instructions entitled 'Family Life (as a  partner  or  parent)
             and Private Life: 10 Year Routes' in  which  it  is  expressly
             stated that once the seven  years'  residence  requirement  is
             satisfied, there need to  be  'strong  reasons'  for  refusing
             leave (para. 11.2.4). These instructions  were  not  in  force
             when the cases now subject to appeal were determined,  but  in
             my view they merely confirm what is  implicit  in  adopting  a
             policy of this nature. After such a period of time  the  child
             will have put down roots and developed  social,  cultural  and
             educational links in the UK such  that  it  is  likely  to  be
             highly disruptive if the child is required to  leave  the  UK.
             That may be less so when the children are very  young  because
             the focus of their lives will be on their  families,  but  the
             disruption becomes more serious as they get  older.  Moreover,
             in these cases there must be a very  strong  expectation  that
             the child's best interests will be to remain in  the  UK  with
             his parents as part of a family unit, and that must rank as  a
             primary consideration in the proportionality assessment."

 8. Paragraph [53] of MA (Pakistan) provides:

         "53. Paragraph (7) justifies the observation of Christopher  Clarke
             LJ in EV (Philippines) para. 33 that 'the  best  interests  of
             the child are to be determined by reference to the child alone
             without reference to the  immigration  history  or  status  of
             either parent.' Accordingly, when making that  assessment,  it
             would  be  inappropriate  to  treat  the  child  as  having  a
             precarious  status  merely  because  that  was  true  of   the
             parents."

 9. Although the Tribunal Judge cited MA (Pakistan), the Tribunal failed to
    properly apply those principles.  The Upper  Tribunal  in  Presidential
    Panel (MT and ET (child's best interests;  ex  tempore  pilot)  Nigeria
    [2018] UKUT 00088(IAC)) found as follows:

         "33. On the present state of the law, as set out in MA, we need  to
             look for 'powerful reasons' why a child who has  been  in  the
             United  Kingdom  for  over  ten  years  should   be   removed,
             notwithstanding that her best interests lie in remaining."

10. The Upper Tribunal in MT and ET  highlighted  the  relevant  points  in
    relation to the best interests of assessment as follows:

         "31. Conversely, ET has no direct experience of  Nigeria.   Whether
             or not  there  is  a  functioning  education  system  in  that
             country, her best interests, in terms of  section  55  of  the
             2009 Act, manifestly lie in remaining in  the  United  Kingdom
             with her mother rather  than,  as  the  respondent  contended,
             returning to Nigeria with her mother.  A much  younger  child,
             who has not started school or who has only  recently  done  so
             will have  difficulty  in  establishing  that  her  Article  8
             private and family life has a  material  element,  which  lies
             outside her need to live with her parent or parents,  wherever
             that may be.  This position, however, changes over time,  with
             the result that an assessment of best interests must  adopt  a
             correspondingly wider focus, examining the child's position in
             the wider world, of which school will usually be an  important
             part.

         32.  This is why both the age of the child and the amount  of  time
             spent by the child in the United Kingdom will be  relevant  in
             determining, for the purposes of section 55/Article  8,  where
             the best interests of the child lie."

11. The Tribunal in this appeal failed to adequately address  the  position
    of each of the children and conduct a  best  interests  assessment;  as
    highlighted by MT and ET (and paragraph 10(7) of Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74
    and paragraph 24 of ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4) and  in  MA,  such  an
    assessment must not take into consideration the behaviour of the parent
    and must look at the age of the child, how long they have been  in  the
    UK and examine their position in the  wider  world,  including  school.
    Whilst at [44] the judge looked at the position of the second appellant
    who had been in the UK since the age of 4 and was aged 14 at  the  date
    of hearing the judge in considering 117B(6) only considered this in the
    context of the second appellant and did  not  adequately  consider  the
    position of the third and fourth appellants who had been in the UK  for
    over seven years at the date of the hearing.

12. I take into consideration that there was a body of evidence before  the
    Tribunal in  relation  to  all  three  children,  including  up-to-date
    reports and educational assessments and that the second appellant  gave
    oral evidence in relation to not only himself but the position  of  his
    siblings.  The Tribunal failed to give any adequate reasons as  to  why
    that evidence  was  rejected,  if  it  was,  in  respect  of  the  best
    interests' assessment that was carried out at [53].  There is merit  in
    Ms Miszkiel's submission that  the  judge  approached  the  Immigration
    Rules and Article 8  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  from  the  wrong
    perspective in assuming that the children  could  go  back  with  their
    mother,  which  led  to  the  reasonableness  assessment  she  reached.
    Whereas, MA (Pakistan) at [45], [46] and  [47]  sets  out  the  correct
    approach including in cases where  a  child  has  put  down  roots  and
    developed social, cultural and educational links in the UK, such as are
    likely to be highly disruptive if the child is required  to  leave  the
    UK, this disruption becomes more serious as they get older, and in such
    cases there  is  a  very  strong  expectation  that  the  child's  best
    interests will be to remain in the UK with their parents as part  of  a
    family unit and that must  rank  as  a  primary  consideration  in  the
    proportionality assessment.   The  Tribunal  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons as to why, in this case where all of the children had  been  in
    the UK for over seven years, and the second and third appellants' seven
    year period does not run from  birth  or  shortly  thereafter,  it  was
    decided that their best interests did not lie in remaining in the UK.

13. I agree with Mr Walker that the judge's confusion, which is highlighted
    at [17], [38], [53] and [56] where  the  Tribunal  is  inconsistent  in
    relation to which children have been in the UK for seven years  at  the
    date of the hearing or not, has infected her assessment  and  therefore
    her findings of best  interests  of  the  children  (and  at  [56]  the
    Tribunal refers only to 'his' best interests, suggesting that only  the
    best interests of the second appellant  have  been  considered).   This
    necessarily has infected  the  assessment  of  whether  or  not  it  is
    reasonable for the children to return and  what  the  "strong  reasons"
    would be that might require the children to return.

14. I do not agree with Ms Miszkiel's submission in relation to the judge's
    finding, at [50] and [51] (that the first appellant would have made  an
    asylum claim if there was a belief that the children were going  to  be
    subjected to FGM).  Ms Miszkiel submitted that nevertheless  the  judge
    ought to have considered the issue of FGM  when  considering  the  best
    interests.  It is difficult to see  what  that  assessment  would  have
    involved given that it cannot properly be said that the children  would
    be at risk as it is manifestly clear that their mother would have  made
    the appropriate asylum claim if that were the case.  However,  such  is
    academic as I am satisfied  that  the  judge's  approach  to  the  best
    interests assessment and the reasonableness question are fatally flawed
    and the judge failed to have proper regard to the best interests of all
    three children as a primary consideration.  The  consideration  of  the
    best interests was infected by her prior finding that it was reasonable
    for the first appellant and therefore in her findings, the children  to
    return.

15. The appellant's' solicitors are in the process of obtaining an  updated
    expert report and had submitted  information  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    prior to the hearing, in relation to the delay  in  that  report.   The
    Supreme Court's decision in NS (Sri Lanka) may be of assistance in  the
    remaking of this appeal (and it is anticipated  the  decision  will  be
    available in the autumn of 2018).

Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error of  law  and
    is set aside.  Due  to  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  fact-finding
    required I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  de
    novo other than by Judge Turquet.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  14 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
