
IAC-AH-KRL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25227/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th March 2015                             |On 25th March 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                              Ali Hussnain Raza
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmad Al Arayn (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr Tony Melvin (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Evan Ruth, promulgated on 12th November 2014, following a hearing
    at Taylor House on 4th November 2014.  In the determination, the judge
    allowed the appeal of Ali Hussnain Raza.  The  Respondent  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was  born  on  17th
    November 1990.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  to
    refuse his application for a residence card,  as  confirmation  of  his
    right of residence as the husband of a  Lithuanian,  namely,  Ms  Diana
    Jarmolovskaja.  The appeal was  set  down  to  be  heard  as  a  "paper
    hearing" with no oral evidence given.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge held that, given that the issue of a marriage of  convenience
    had been raised in this case, the failure of the Appellant  to  provide
    reliable evidence was telling.  He held that, "in this case neither the
    Appellant nor his Sponsor had chosen to attend  their  hearing  and  no
    explanation for  their  absence  has  been  provided"  (paragraph  19).
    Although there was a witness statement provided about how the Appellant
    met the Sponsor, the judge held that,

         "The unexplained failure of the Appellant or his representatives to
         attend the hearing following the refusal of the adjournment request
         and the fact that his evidence was not able to be tested by  cross-
         examination significantly reduces the weight which I can attach  to
         it" (paragraph 21).

    Furthermore, the witness statement itself had no date on it and it  was
    not signed by the Sponsor (paragraph 23).   The  judge  concluded  that
    there was no genuine  relationship  (paragraph  30).   The  appeal  was
    dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 4. The grounds of application state that two letters were sent  dated  3rd
    November 2014 to the Tribunal by the Appellant's  representative.   The
    first of these  letters  was  on  3rd November  2014  to  adjourn  the
    application  and  was  received  at  15:50pm.   The   application   was
    considered and refused.  The medical evidence relied on did  not  state
    that the Appellant was unable to attend the  hearing.   The  second  of
    these letters repeated the adjournment application, but  also  included
    submissions made on behalf of the Appellant.  This  second  letter  was
    submitted to the Tribunal on the morning of the hearing.  At page 11 of
    the application, there is a copy of the second letter with a  fax  note
    indicating it went to the Tribunal at 11:39am.  Judge Ruth recorded  in
    the decision that  the  Tribunal  had  been  informed  in  a  telephone
    conversation on the morning of the hearing that a  further  application
    for an adjournment was to be made.  However, by 12  o'clock  midday  on
    4th November, it had not been received.  In these circumstances,  Judge
    Ruth heard the appeal in the Appellant's absence.  However, it is clear
    that a further copy of the second  letter  was  then  received  by  the
    Tribunal on the date of the hearing at 1:25pm.  This copy (with the fax
    time on it) was subsequently sent to the judge, along with the copy  of
    the first letter, at some point after the hearing.  Judge Ruth did  not
    receive the second letter until four days later on 8th  November  2014.
    By then Judge Ruth had signed off his decision.  Indeed,  Judge  Ruth's
    file indicates a note that by the time of the  receipt  of  the  second
    letter the decision had been promulgated (although the Tribunal  office
    did not promulgate the decision until 12th November 2014 but  this  was
    not known to Judge Ruth).

 5. On 23rd January 2015, permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis
    that  Judge  Ruth  does   not   appear   to   have   had   the   second
    letter/application to adjourn before him when  he  made  the  decision.
    More  importantly,  he  does  not  appear  to  have  had  the   written
    submissions contained in the second letter before him when he made  the
    decision  on  the  appeal.   Accordingly,   there   was   arguably   an
    administrative unfairness because  the  evidence  at  page  11  of  the
    application indicates that this second letter to adjourn  was  sent  to
    the Tribunal before the hearing started at midday.

 6. A Rule 24 response was subsequently entered by the Respondent Secretary
    of State.

Submissions

 7. At the hearing before me on 9th March 2015,  Mr  Melvin,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, submitted  that,  although
    this was the Appellant's appeal, he had  spoken  with  the  Appellant's
    representative, Mr Ahmad Al Arayn, and he had decided that the Rule  24
    response  would  be   withdrawn,   because   plainly   there   was   an
    administrative unfairness to the Appellant,  in  that  his  Grounds  of
    Appeal had not been received by the  Tribunal  judge  until  four  days
    after they had been sent.  In the meantime, the Tribunal  judge,  Judge
    Ruth, had made his decision without having regard  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal.  Second, he  submitted  that,  given  that  it  was  still  the
    position of the Appellant's representatives, that neither the Appellant
    nor his Sponsor, had  any  intention  of  attending  the  hearing,  the
    appropriate course of action was for this matter to be remitted back to
    the First-tier Tribunal, to be heard by a judge other than  Judge  Evan
    Ruth, so that the Grounds of Appeal can be  considered  in  what  is  a
    "paper hearing" to enable  the  judge  to  reach  properly  sustainable
    findings of fact.

 8. For his part, Mr Arayn accepted that this was a  "paper  hearing".   He
    also accepted that the Appellant and the Sponsor had  no  intention  of
    attending the hearing.  He undertook to resend the  Grounds  of  Appeal
    again to the First-tier Tribunal so that the matter can be reconsidered
    again in the light of the grounds.

Error of Law

 9. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  There is  clearly  an
    unfairness to the Appellant in a procedural sense in that, in what is a
    paper hearing, the Grounds of Appeal which he submitted on the  day  of
    the hearing, such that they arrived during the morning of the  hearing,
    were not considered  when  the  judge  considered  the  papers  in  the
    afternoon.  In fact, the Grounds of Appeal were  only  looked  at  four
    days after the date of the hearing, by which time the  judge  had  made
    his decision.  There has been a failure of a proper  hearing  and  this
    matter should  be  returned  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under
    practice statement 7.2 to be heard by a judge  other  than  Judge  Ruth
    with the matter to be considered on a de novo  basis,  with  directions
    given by this Tribunal, as I  now  do,  that  the  Appellant  send  the
    Grounds of Appeal relied upon to the Tribunal (with a copy sent to  the
    Respondent Home Office) by the time of  the  next  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard by a judge other
    than Judge Ruth on a de novo basis under practice statement 7.2 with no
    previous findings preserved.  The Appellant is to resend his Grounds of
    Appeal relied upon.

11. No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        23rd March 2015

