
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25309/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 9th December, 2016                    |On 04th January 2017                |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MAHMOUD YAHIA AHMED ABDO
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr F Khan, Counsel, instructed by NWL Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this appeal the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  is  the
    appellant and I shall refer to her as being, "the claimant".

2.   The respondent is a national of Egypt born on 21st May, 1980.  He  made
    application to the claimant for a residence card confirming  his  right
    of residence under European Community law following  his  divorce  from
    his former spouse, an EEA national.  The claimant made her decision  on
    30th June, 2015.

3.   The respondent's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page  at
    Newport on 8th April 2016.  At the hearing before him, it was  accepted
    that there was only one issue, namely  the  respondent  being  able  to
    prove his divorce.

4.   The Home Office Presenting Officer accepted  that  this  had  now  been
    resolved in the respondent's favour by  the  production  of  a  divorce
    certificate. However, the judge should have gone on to consider if  the
    respondent's former wife was still exercising treaty rights at the date
    of the divorce, and whether the respondent was still qualified.

5.   The Secretary of State sought and was  granted  permission  to  appeal,
    but at the hearing before me today,  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State, Mr Wildling and on behalf  of  the  respondent,  Mr  Khan,  both
    accepted that the error was not material and was incapable of affecting
    the outcome of this appeal.

6.   In the circumstances the respondent's appeal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

The respondent's appeal is allowed.
No anonymity direction is made.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal I have considered making a fee award  and  have
decided to make a fee award of any  fee  which  has  been  paid  or  may  be
payable (adjusted where full award not justified) for the following reason.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
