

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/25139/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 1 November 2017                         |On 17 November  2017           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

                          MR OLUWASEUN MICHAEL oke
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  12  November  1980.   He
    appealed against a decision  of  the  respondent  dated  19  June  2016
    refusing  the  appellant's  application  for  a   residence   card   as
    confirmation of a right to reside in the United Kingdom as  the  spouse
    of an EEA national, Jesica Amador Garcia, who is  a  Spanish  national.
    His appeal was heard by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Swinnerton  on
    the papers.  The appeal was dismissed in a decision promulgated  on  23
    December 2016.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged with the  First-Tier
    Tribunal but permission was not granted.   A  further  application  for
    permission to appeal was lodged with the Upper Tribunal and  permission
    to appeal was granted on 8  September  2017  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Bruce.  The permission states that the grounds assert that  the  First-
    Tier Tribunal misunderstood Nigerian law as  it  relates  to  customary
    marriage as well as the nature of the documentary evidence  before  it.
    It is asserted that had clarification been sought  the  decision  might
    have  been  different.   The  permission  was  granted  so  that  these
    arguments could be considered by the Upper  Tribunal  and  there  is  a
    direction in the permission  which  states  that  both  parties  should
    attend the first hearing of this appeal prepared to make submissions on
    the effect of the relevant Nigerian  statutes,  including  the  Births,
    Deaths Etc (Compulsory Registration) Act  1992  (as  amended)  and  the
    Marriage Act 1990.

 3. There is a lengthy Rule 24 response from the  respondent  which  states
    that the Judge considered all the evidence and  gave  adequate  reasons
    for the findings he reached.  The response states  that  the  appellant
    chose for his appeal to be heard on the papers which is a pity  as  had
    he and his wife appeared at the hearing, questions  pertaining  to  the
    marriage could have been asked and the  appellant  could  have  offered
    clarification on the Nigerian law which his grounds rely  upon.   There
    is a request in the Rule 24 response that the London South Law Chambers
    who drafted the grounds for the  appellant  and  are  representing  the
    appellant, let all parties have their submissions prior to the hearing,
    however not only has that not happened, there was  also  no  appearance
    either by the appellant or by a representative.

The Hearing

 4. The Presenting Officer submitted that what has to be decided is whether
    the marriage has been  registered.   He  submitted  that  the  relevant
    registration documents  have  not  been  provided  but  had  they  been
    provided  and  had  it  been  shown  that  the  marriage  was  properly
    registered the appeal could have been be allowed.

 5. I  was  referred  to  the  respondent's  bundle  and  the  Lagos  State
    Government of Nigeria Grade A  Customary  Court  Agege  Certificate  of
    Registration of Customary Marriage.  I was also referred  to  paragraph
    17 of the decision in which  it  is  noted  that  this  certificate  is
    undated  and  that  the  registration  document   provided   with   the
    application and the registration document now provided for the  purpose
    of the appeal are from the same source - the Grade  A  Customary  Court
    but are in a completely different format and no  explanation  has  been
    provided by the appellant as to why the document now provided  was  not
    provided previously, at the time of the application in  November  2013,
    as the document is dated one and half years before that.  At  paragraph
    18 the Judge refers to  the  Nigerian  Births,  Deaths  Etc  Compulsory
    Registration Act 1992 (as amended) and notes the details  required  for
    registration.   The  Judge  finds  that   the   Marriage   Registration
    Certificate dated 10 April 2012 contains minimal details and  does  not
    contain the required details pertaining to Nigerian law and because  of
    this he does not accept  that  the  Marriage  Registration  Certificate
    provided, complies with the necessary  requirements  of  Nigerian  law.
    The Judge finds that because of this  the  appellant's  proxy  marriage
    will not be regarded as a valid marriage in Nigeria.

 6. Having  considered  the  decision  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Swinnerton I can find no error therein.  Had the appellant attended the
    hearing questions might have been asked which he could  have  answered,
    which might well have clarified the situation  further,  but  based  on
    what was before the Immigration Judge at the First-Tier Hearing I  find
    that there is no error of law in the decision.

 7. The grounds  indicate  that  the  Judge  misunderstood  the  difference
    between the document in the respondent's bundle and  the  documents  in
    the appellant's bundle, but I do not find that that is the case.   What
    the Judge has found is that the Certificate of  Registration  does  not
    fulfil the required terms.

Notice of Decision

 8. I find that there is no material error of  law  in  Judge  Swinnerton's
    decision promulgated on 23 December 2016 and  that  his  decision  must
    stand.

 9. Anonymity has not been directed.





Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray



