
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25264/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 July 2013                               |On 1 August 2013             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE



                                   Between

                                SHOFIQ RAHMAN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Hosein, of Diamond Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh born on 25  May  1980,  received
    from the decisions dated 24 October 2012, refusing his application  for
    variation of leave to remain as a student and purporting to decide that
    he should be removed from the  United  Kingdom  by  way  of  directions
    pursuant to section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act
    2006.  The appellant appealed against  those  decisions  and  following
    hearings at Taylor House on 11 January and 18  March  2013,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Scott-Baker dismissed his appeal.

2.     Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  granted  on  16  May
    2013 on two bases. The first was that, contrary to what is required  by
    paragraph 118(b)(ii)(iv)ii of Appendix A to the Immigration Rules,  the
    appellant had not "achieved or exceeded level  B2  of  the  Council  of
    Europe's Common European Framework for Language Learning  in  all  four
    component (reading, writing, speaking and  listening)  unless  exempted
    from sitting a component on the basis of the applicant's ability".  The
    second basis for refusal was that  the  appellant  had  not  shown,  as
    required by paragraph 13 of Appendix C to the Immigration  Rules,  that
    relevant funds for his maintenance were held by him or by  his  parents
    or legal guardians, who had provided written consent that the funds may
    be used by the appellant for study in the United Kingdom.

3.   The granting judge considered that, as regards  the  first  matter,  it
    was  unclear  whether  the  requirement  to  pass  all  components  was
    contained in the Immigration Rules or  in  guidance.   If  it  was  the
    latter, then pursuant to the judgments in Alvi v SSHD [2012]  UKSC  33,
    the requirement would be unlawful.  As regards the second  matter,  the
    granting judge  considered  it  arguable  that  a  "legal  guardianship
    declaration" provided by  the  appellant  and  signed  by  his  brother
    satisfied the requirements of paragraph 13 of Appendix C.

4.   The First-tier Tribunal judge  found  against  the  appellant  on  both
    matters. So far as the first is concerned, at  the  reconvened  hearing
    the judge had before her  an  email  from  the  administrators  of  the
    examining body  in  question,  the  City  and  Guilds,  concerning  the
    appellant's specific position.  This email said:

         "I can confirm that the candidate has been issued the  certificates
         you are enquiring  about.   Our  international  ESOL  qualification
         (qualification code 8984) is  set-up  in  a  way  that  allows  the
         candidates to receive a  full  certificate  with  an  overall  Pass
         Award, even if they received a Narrow Fail for  one  of  the  three
         components, provided they achieve at least Pass result in the other
         two  components.  Mr  Rahman  received  a  Narrow  Fail   for   his
         performance on the written part of the test, but received  a  First
         Class Pass in the  other  two,  so  he  was  eligible  for  a  full
         certificate with Pass result.


         However,  UKBA  will  only   accept   international   ESOL   (8984)
         certificates if the applicant received at least  Pass  50%  on  all
         three components of the examination" (original emphasis).

5.   The document to which the email apparently makes reference is  not,  in
    fact, a certificate but a "notification of candidate  results",  issued
    in the name of City and Guilds in respect of the centre known as Helios
    International  College.  The  "assessment  description"  is  stated  as
    "International English  for  Speakers  of  Other  Languages  (IESOL)  -
    communicator - B2)".  The "performance codes" are "GA  GF  GK  HI  HJ".
    The overall result is "pass". The relevant  performance  codes  are  as
    follows: GA - First class pass; GF - section grade for  reading:  pass;
    GK - section grade for writing: narrow fail;  HI - writing - grammar  -
    standard not met; HJ - writing - task fulfilment - standard not met.

6.   Mr Hosein sought to  contend  that  the  "assessment  description"  was
    itself no more than a 'component' and that, as a result, the  appellant
    did  in  fact  meet  the  requirements   of   Appendix   A,   paragraph
    118(b)(ii)(iv)ii.  With respect,  I  consider  that  submission  to  be
    misconceived. It is plain that the notification  of  candidate  results
    describes passes or fails for reading,  writing  and  listening,  which
    clearly correspond to three of the four named components in Appendix A.
     Furthermore, if this were not the case, then it is inconceivable  that
    the email from City and Guilds would not have stated  as  much,  rather
    than explaining how the awarding body decided to grant an overall  pass
    even though certain "components" (the word used in the email)  had  not
    been passed by the appellant.

7.   Accordingly, there can be no question but that the requirements of  the
    relevant provisions of Appendix A have not been met.   The  issue  that
    troubled the granting judge; namely, whether the  requirement  to  pass
    each of the components at B2 level was in the  Rules  or  in  guidance,
    manifestly cannot assist the appellant.   The  requirement  is  in  the
    Rules themselves; Alvi has no application.

8.   In any event, the appellant fails by reference to  the  second  matter;
    namely, the maintenance requirements.  The case for the  appellant  was
    that the "legal guardianship  declaration"  of  23  December  2012  was
    before Judge Scott-Baker and that she erred in law in finding at [8] of
    her determination that there was "no evidence that his brother had been
     appointed a legal guardian".

9.   I am prepared to accept that the  legal  guardianship  declaration  was
    before the judge and, to that extent, what she said at [8]  was  wrong.
    However, her finding in that paragraph continued by stating that  there
    was  no  evidence  that  there  had  been  "any  necessity  for  [legal
    guardianship] given his age at the time of the death of  his  parents".
    That finding  was  undoubtedly  open  to  the  judge.  The  declaration
    purports to be an assumption of legal guardianship by  the  appellant's
    44 year old brother in respect  of  the  appellant,  described  in  the
    declaration as "aged about 33 years".  How a 44 year old sibling  could
    claim to be the legal guardian of a 33 year old man not suffering  from
    any mental  impairment  was  a  question  that  Mr  Hosein  was  unable
    satisfactorily to  answer.   He  attempted  to  say  that  because  the
    declaration had been  notarised, the notary  could  be  taken  to  have
    confirmed that, whatever the position might be in the  United  Kingdom,
    under the law of Bangladesh it was legally possible for a 44  year  old
    to be the effective legal guardian of a 33 year old.

10.  The existence and effect of foreign law must be proved  in  proceedings
    in the United Kingdom, as a matter of fact.  This has not  happened  in
    the present case.  I reject  the  unsubstantiated  assertion  that  the
    notarising the guardianship  declaration  necessarily  means  that  the
    appellant became  in  law  the  ward  of  his  brother,  in  the  sense
    understood in the United Kingdom.

11.   But  all  this  is  immaterial.   As  Mr  Wilding  pointed  out,   the
    guardianship declaration is dated 23 December 2012, almost  two  months
    after the decision in the present case.  Since this is a "points based"
    case, Exception 2 in section 85A of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum  Act  2002  has  the  effect  that  the  declaration  could  not
    constitute evidence in the present proceedings.  It was not  "submitted
    in support of, and at the time of making, the application to which  the
    immigration decision related" (section 85A(4)(a).  There  has  been  no
    suggestion that the matters set out in paragraphs (b) to (d) of section
    85A(4) are relevant in the present case.

12.  For these reasons, the appellant's challenge to  the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge fails  on  both  matters.  The  challenge
    would, of course, have had to succeeded on both before her decision  to
    dismiss the appeal against the variation of leave decision could be set
    aside.

13.  As I explained at the hearing, the judge did, however, err  in  law  in
    failing to deal with the appeal brought against the decision purporting
    to be made under section 47 of the 2006 Act.  In the light  of  SSHD  v
    Ahmadi [2013] EWCA Civ 512, the section 47 decision  was  unlawful  and
    the judge should have allowed the appeal against it, to the  extent  of
    finding that the appellant awaits a lawful removal decision.   To  that
    extent, I set aside  and  re-make  her  determination;  otherwise  that
    determination stands.

Decision

14.  The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error
    in respect of the dismissal  of  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision to refuse to vary his leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom.
    I set aside the determination, so  far  as  the   judge  dismissed  the
    appeal against the section 47 removal decision. I re-make that part  of
    the decision by allowing it, to the extent indicated above.





                               Signed                                  Date




                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane



