
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/25296/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 12th April 2013                       |On 13th June 2013         |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              MRS SHAVET DHAVAN
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Z Malik, Counsel, instructed by Malik Law Chambers
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

     1.  This  is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  but  in  this
        determination we shall refer to the parties as they were before the
        First-tier Tribunal.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 1st November  1982.  She
       arrived in the UK on 30th September 2010 with leave to  enter  as  a
       Tier 4 (general) student migrant until 30th January 2012.  She  made
       an application to extend her leave on 26th January 2012,  which  was
       never determined by the respondent as on the 3rd July 2012 she  made
       a further application on form FLR(M) to remain as the  wife  of   Mr
       Musa Barrow, a British Citizen.  The  application  to  remain  as  a
       spouse was refused on 25th  October  2012  on  the  basis  that  the
       appellant did not fulfil the relevant Immigration Rules to remain as
       a spouse or under Article 8 ECHR. Her  appeal  against  the  refusal
       decision was allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lingam  in  a
       determination promulgated on the 8th February 2013.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martins  on
       26th February 2013 on the basis that it was arguable that the First-
       tier judge had erred in law in not dealing with the English language
       requirement of the Immigration Rules at paragraph 284(ix) of HC  395
       as amended, and also in her treatment of Article 8 ECHR.

    4. The matter came before us to determine if there was an error of  law
       in the determination of the First-tier Tribunal. Ms  Kenny  did  not
       have full papers so she was provided with a copy of the  appellant's
       bundle which was before the First-tier Tribunal and directed to page
       78 which was the appellant's IELTS certificate which showed she  had
       an overall band score of 6.0.

Submissions

    5. Ms Kenny said that she accepted that the appellant's IELTS score was
       sufficient to satisfy paragraph 284(ix) HC 395 as  amended:  it  did
       prove that the appellant  had  supplied  an  English  language  test
       certificate at level A1 of the Common European  Framework  Reference
       or above.  She submitted that Judge Lingam ought to have referred to
       it in her determination however. She referred to the  submission  at
       paragraph one of  the  respondent's  grounds  of  appeal,  that  the
       respondent had not  conceded  that  the  requirements  of  paragraph
       284(i) of HC 395 as amended was fulfilled, but then did  not  pursue
       the submission when it was not pointed  out  that  the  respondent's
       letter of 25th October  2012  explicitly  states  that  "the  FLR(M)
       application has been treated as being in time which attracts a right
       of appeal."

Conclusions

    6. We find that Judge Lingam had erred in law in not referring  to  the
       fact the appellant had submitted evidence that showed  she  complied
       with the requirements of paragraph 284(ix) of HC 395  and  that  she
       was satisfied that this aspect of the  Immigration  Rules  was  met.
       However this error was  not  material  as  it  was  clear  that  the
       appellant had in fact submitted this evidence to the respondent with
       her application (see pages 9 (at question 5.4) and 17 of her  FLR(M)
       application form) and provided it to the First-tier Tribunal in  her
       bundle of evidence and there was no dispute that it  was  more  than
       satisfactory  to  show  that  she  met  this  requirement   of   the
       Immigration Rules.

    7. As all other aspects of the Immigration Rules at paragraph 284  were
       found to be met by Judge Lingam, and no errors were pursued  by  the
       respondent in her analysis of these, we uphold her decision to allow
       the appeal on this basis. In the circumstances it is  not  necessary
       to examine Judge Lingam treatment of  the  appeal  under  Article  8
       ECHR, but we note no errors in her analysis.

Decision

    8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
       of a material error on a point of law.

    9.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  appeal  under
       the Immigration Rules and under Article 8 ECHR is upheld.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

12th April 2013
