
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25097/2014
                                                               IA/25102/2014
                                                               IA/25108/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th October 2015                 |On 23rd November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MR PRAVEEN KUMAR MANUKONDA
                            MISS JEENA MANUKONDA
                        MISS PRAISE MARVEL MANUKONDA
                                                                   Claimants


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Claimant: Ms R Qureshi, Counsel; instructed by Legend Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Gandhi  allowing  the  Claimants'  appeal  on
    human rights grounds outwith the Immigration Rules pursuant to  Article
    8 ECHR.

 2. In Refusal Letters dated 27 May 2014, the Secretary  of  State  refused
    the Claimant's applications for leave to remain as the dependent family
    of a Tier 4 (General) student including consideration under section  55
    of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and  incorporating
    removal directions under section 47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006 set for the Claimants' country of  origin,  India.
    The  Claimants  appealed  against  that  decision  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  promulgated  its  decision  allowing  the  Claimant's  appeal
    against that decision on 2 July 2015.

 3. The Appellant appealed  against  that  decision.  The  grounds  may  be
    summarised as follows:

      i) The judge erred in failing to have regard to  the  public  interest
         and the starting point being the appellants do not meet  the  rules
         pursuant to SSHD v SS (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ  387;  and  the
         appellants have not shown how they would meet the immigration rules
         for entry clearance pursuant to Chikwamba v SSHD [2009] UKHL 41.

 4. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Colyer.

 5. I was not provided with a Rule 24 response from the Claimants  but  was
    addressed in oral submissions by their counsel.

    No Error of Law

 6. At the close of submissions,  I  indicated  that  I  would  reserve  my
    decision, which I shall now give. I do not find that there was an error
    of law in the decision such that it should be set aside. My reasons for
    so finding are as follows.

 7. In relation to the first issue, that the judge failed to have regard to
    the public  interest,  that  statement  is  simply  incorrect.  In  the
    judgment of Underhill, LJ at [44] of SSHD v SS  (Congo)  &  Ors  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387 it is  stated  that  the  proper  approach  should  be  to
    identify the substantive content of the relevant rules first and  then,
    if the applicant does not satisfy them, go on  to  consider  Article  8
    rights if there is a reasonably arguable case not already  sufficiently
    dealt with under the Rules. It is this ratio that the  Appellant  seeks
    to rely on. However,  with  respect,  the  Appellant  is  reading  that
    paragraph far  too  literally  for  reasons  I  shall  explain.  It  is
    important to recall the context in which this appeal was heard.  I  was
    reminded by Ms Qureshi of counsel, whom also represented the  Claimants
    at the First-tier Tribunal, that the appeal arose because  the  refusal
    only took issue with the fact that the Claimants could not switch  from
    their previous status of dependents  of  a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
    migrant, to that of dependents of a Tier 4 (General)  student  migrant.
    Therefore, whilst the first Claimant's wife  was  permitted  to  switch
    from a Tier 1 category, to that of a Tier 4  category,  her  dependents
    could not. This is because they should go back to India  to  apply  for
    entry  clearance.  Aside  from  that  basis  of  refusal  pursuant   to
    paragraphs 319C(i) and 319H(i) (for the first  Claimant  and  remaining
    Claimants respectively), the Appellant did not seek to take issue  with
    other matters. This is further confirmed by paragraph 9 of the  judge's
    Determination where it is stated that the Claimants accepted that  they
    did not satisfy the Immigration  Rules  because  dependents  could  not
    switch categories I country, but needed to return to  apply  for  entry
    clearance in particular categories. This  is  again  fortified  by  the
    confirmation at paragraph 13 of the Determination,  that  both  parties
    agreed that the only basis for consideration of the appeal was  outwith
    the Immigration Rules under Article 8 ECHR.

 8. In that light, notwithstanding my other findings,  it  is  discourteous
    and contradictory for the Appellant to complain that the judge did  not
    engage in an Immigration  Rule-based  assessment  when  she  explicitly
    agreed that the judge should  only  consider  the  appeal  outwith  the
    Rules.

 9. With those facts in mind, given that the judge was aware to what extent
    the rules were met, in other words, the rules  were  substantively  met
    but for the non-switching provision, and given that the  Claimants  did
    not take contend they could succeed under the Rules, there  is  nothing
    in this analysis that the Appellant is entitled  to  take  issue  with.
    First, the judge was aware of the extent to which the  public  interest
    was met under the rules governing leave to remain.  Second,  the  judge
    was not obliged or required to perform an analysis of the  rules  given
    that the Claimants did not pursue their success under the  rules  as  a
    basis upon which the appeal should succeed. In that  light,  the  judge
    was entitled to commence her substantive assessment  of  the  remaining
    issue on appeal at paragraph 10, by starting with an assessment outwith
    the Immigration Rules, having carefully audited that the  appeal  could
    not succeed under the Rules.

10. In my opinion, it was not the intention of  Lord  Justice  Richards  to
    compel judges in all appeals to undertake an assessment under the Rules
    where it is not contended by an  appellant  that  that  the  assessment
    under the Rules was wrong. It may be that even in  such  circumstances,
    an assessment of an individual's failure to meet  the  rules  could  be
    performed for the purpose of determining the weight to be given to  the
    public interest in removal under the Rules and gauging  proportionality
    outwith the Rules, pursuant to SSHD v SS (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA  Civ
    387 at [56] and Patel & Ors v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72 at [55]. However,  to
    my mind, such an assessment would not  normally  take  place  unless  a
    party were to explicitly raise such  an  argument  in  submissions  and
    address the weight to be given to the public interest in  a  particular
    context. Nonetheless, this is not that case.

11. In the instant appeal, I do not find that the failure to  perform  such
    an assessment is of consequence given my findings  above,  and  in  any
    event, had such an assessment been performed, it would  not  alter  the
    result that the judge reached, and in fact, may  support  the  findings
    that she reached, given that the margin by which the Rules were not met
    was a matter of technicality and  form,  and  the  public  interest  in
    removing a person because switching in-country  is  not  permitted  for
    certain categories does not appear to have a rational basis pursuant to
    the decision in Shuai Zhang, R v SSHD [2013] EWHC 891 (Admin) which the
    judge rightly gave consideration to as  persuasive  authority  on  this
    specific issue. Such a matter could rightly feature  in  an  Article  8
    assessment outwith the Rules in gauging proportionality in a variety of
    contexts, but particularly in the present.

12. For the reasons given above, and given that Mr Kotas did not  highlight
    any material  difference  between  the  assessment  of  the  Claimant's
    application for further leave as a  dependent  in  an  entry  clearance
    context, as opposed to applying for further leave to remain, I  do  not
    find that there is any merit in the contention that the  assessment  of
    hypothetical entry clearance outwith the Rules was lacking in any way.

13. Furthermore, as submitted  by  Ms  Qureshi,  the  public  interest  was
    assessed appropriately as  the  Claimants  were  applying  for  further
    leave, not settlement, and it was noted  that  the  Claimants  did  not
    intend to settle and indicated they may return to India in  March  2016
    (although that is a matter for them, given that the Rules do not compel
    them to  leave  once  their  leave  expires).  The  judge  specifically
    considers the public interest throughout her assessment from paragraphs
    25 to 28 of her Determination.

14. Further still, in an assessment outwith the Rules,  the  weight  to  be
    given to the public interest is given statutory voice in  the  form  of
    section 117B(1) for all Article 8 matters arising before the  Tribunal.
    At paragraph 27 of the Determination, the judge  explicitly  considered
    the statutory form of public interest as she  as  mandated  to  do  and
    considered  the  relevant  factors  before  her  and  her  decision  is
    compliant with the observation in Dube (ss.117A-117D)  [2015]  UKUT  90
    (IAC) that not every  subsection  of  section  117B  need  be  examined
    explicitly in turn, as what matters is substance not form.

15. Consequently, given my findings above, the grounds  do  not  reveal  an
    error of law such that the decision should be set aside.

    Decision

16. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is affirmed.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

