
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/25222/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 11 August 2015                    |On 17 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Jacobs


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Donovan Mark Stewart
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the claimant: Mr R Solomon
For the respondent:    Mr J McGirr, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appealed  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Suffield-Thomson  promulgated  3.2.15,  allowing   the
    claimant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State,  date
    4.6.14, to  refuse  his  application  for  an  EEA  Residence  Card  as
    confirmation  of  a  right  to  reside  in  the  UK,  pursuant  to  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006, on the  basis  of  being  a  family
    member (spouse) of Dorota Machala, a Polish citizen, exercising  Treaty
    rights in the UK.  The Judge heard the appeal on 28.1.15.

 2. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kelly  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    26.3.15.

 3. Thus the matter came before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Pickup  on
    13.5.15 as an appeal in the Upper Tribunal. Judge Pickup found an error
    of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  set
    the decision aside, and adjourned the remaking of the decision  in  the
    appeal, reserving it to  himself  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  2.7.15.
    However, on that date it transpired that neither party had received all
    the necessary documents. A further adjournment was granted to  11.8.15,
    when the appeal was listed  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Jacobs  and
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup sitting as  a  panel  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 4. The relevant history can be briefly summarised as follows. The claimant
    came to the UK as a family visitor in 2002. He never left and thus  has
    been an illegal overstayer. In addition, he has been working  illegally
    in the UK. He married Emma Stewart in 2007. They had a  daughter,  born
    in December 2007, with whom the claimant continues to have contact.  By
    2010 the claimant separated from his wife and  they  were  divorced  in
    November 2011. It is claimed that  in  either  in  2009  or  2010,  the
    evidence on this and a number of other issues is unclear, the  claimant
    commenced a new relationship, with Dorota Machala, the  mother  of  two
    children, whom he has known since 2006 when they worked  for  the  same
    employer. Following his divorce from Ms Stewart, the  claimant  married
    Ms Machala on 27.4.12. The application the subject of this  appeal  was
    made on 20.11.13 and refused on 4.6.14.

 5. The  Secretary  of  State's  case  is  that  the  marriage  is  one  of
    convenience, relying on discrepancies and inconsistencies arising  from
    a  marriage  interview  on  8.5.14.  Under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) (Amendment) Regulations 2012 the  definition  of  spouse
    specifically excludes a marriage of convenience.

 6. The refusal decision of 4.6.14 sets out a number  of  discrepancies  in
    the interview, including: the circumstances of their  first  date;  the
    marriage proposal; the wedding; the  post-wedding  celebrations;  their
    home; their respective families; and their respective faith.

 7. It is not necessary to set out all of the discrepancies highlighted  in
    the refusal decision, but in his error of  law  decision  Judge  Pickup
    found that they were more than mere trivial details. For  example,  the
    spouse  had  difficulty  recalling  the  exact  time  or  date  of  the
    claimant's marriage proposal, but said it was in the summer of 2011. On
    the other hand, he said it was in the winter, around December 2011. She
    said he proposed to her on the sofa at home, whereas he said it was  by
    a fountain in Wembley.

 8. In relation to the wedding,  the  spouse  stated  that  they  had  both
    travelled to the ceremony together in a car with the claimant's cousin,
    whereas he said they travelled to the wedding in his work van  and  his
    cousin travelled in a separate car. According to the spouse,  following
    the  wedding  they  visited  the  Harvester  restaurant,  whereas   the
    appellant stated that they both went home and later visited his  aunt's
    house for celebratory drinks. More telling were the discrepancies about
    the home. She stated that there was a smoke alarm in  the  living  room
    above the door to the kitchen, whereas he said the house had  no  smoke
    alarm. They also both differed  as  to  how  many  flats  were  in  the
    building and on what day the bins are collected. She spoke of attending
    church at Christmas and Easter, whereas the claimant said she  did  not
    go to church.

 9. Although the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred by a material misdirection
    as to the standard and burden of proof, we note that  the  judge  found
    that there were a number of explanations for the discrepancies, none of
    which were due to dishonesty  on  the  part  of  the  claimant  or  the
    sponsoring wife. The judge took account of the stress of the interview,
    some confusion as to whether the sponsor should answer  in  English  or
    Polish. The judge did not accept that there were any questions  that  a
    married couple should automatically know, noting that some have  better
    memories than others and some place more significance on  things  other
    than dates of events. The  judge  did  not  accept  that  the  lack  of
    knowledge or apparent discrepancies demonstrated that that marriage was
    not genuine. As the judge misunderstood on which party  the  burden  of
    proof lay, the conclusions are not necessarily sustainable.

10. We heard extensive  oral  evidence  from  the  claimant,  sponsor,  the
    claimant's brother, the sponsor's sister, and the sponsor's  two  adult
    children,  relying  on  the  various  letters  and  statements  in  the
    claimant's bundle.

11. We have carefully taken into account the 99  pages  of  the  claimant's
    revised appeal bundle, served under cover of letter dated 22.6.15,  and
    including his witness statement of 20.6.15, as  well  as  that  of  his
    spouse, of the same date.

12. We note that in these witness statements, the claimant and  Ms  Machala
    have put forward explanations for at least some of  their  inconsistent
    interview answers. For example, he now states that he proposed  to  her
    on the sofa at home in the summer of 2011, having previously given  her
    an eternity ring in April 2011 at a fountain in Wembley. He claims that
    his answer in interview was as to when he gave her an eternity ring and
    claims that both their accounts were in fact accurate.  He  now  states
    that they had the wedding reception meal at the  Harvester  restaurant.
    She now states that they also went to  his  aunt's  after  the  wedding
    reception at the restaurant.

13. We note that despite the  discrepancies  from  the  marriage  interview
    highlighted in the refusal decision, the claimant's statement does  not
    address several of  the  inconsistencies.  For  example,  he  does  not
    address the circumstances of their first date, stating  that  it  is  a
    hard thing to remember. Neither did he refer to whether his cousin came
    with them in the van to the wedding. He states that their answers as to
    when the bins were collected varied because they place their rubbish in
    a depot by the car park, rather than bins being  collected  immediately
    outside the house. As far as the smoke alarm is concerned he said  they
    didn't have one because it is disconnected.

14. Both claim that they were really nervous at the marriage interview  and
    felt under pressure and complain that they were given  little  time  to
    answer the questions.

15. His explanation as to why he said that he proposed to her in the winter
    of 2011, around December, at a fountain  in  Wembley  is  not  entirely
    satisfactory. His present account of April 2011  is  inconsistent  with
    his interview account. The date of the proposal he gave in interview is
    several months after the date she gave. His present account means  that
    the presentation of the  ring  in  April  2011  preceded  the  marriage
    proposal in the summer of 2011. One view of these late explanations  is
    that they are after the fact rationalisations to try and  explain  away
    the discrepancies.

16. Given the extent of the discrepancies  between  the  claimant  and  the
    sponsor, we are satisfied that the Secretary of  State  has  discharged
    the initial burden of  proof  to  demonstrate  reasonable  grounds  for
    suspicion that the marriage is one of convenience. The burden therefore
    falls on the claimant to demonstrate on the  balance  of  probabilities
    that his is not a marriage of convenience.

17. We found both the claimant and the sponsor relatively poor witnesses in
    their own cause. They seemed to be unwilling or unable to answer simple
    questions without giving a long circumlocutory explanation;  both  were
    repeatedly advised to answer the questions asked. In  our  view,  their
    evidence was unnecessarily and perhaps deliberately  vague,  making  it
    very difficult to extract any hard facts about their  relationship  and
    history. The other witnesses were significantly worse  and  we  reached
    the view that no reliance could be placed on their evidence as  to  the
    chronology of the claimant's relationship with the sponsor.

18. Further, on their oral evidence before us, it is clear that there  were
    at least some deliberate lies told in the marriage interview and  both,
    in our view were being less than straightforward with the tribunal. For
    example, in relation to the discrepancy as to which vehicle was used to
    convey them to the marriage ceremony, the claimant now states that  the
    sponsor did not tell the truth, which was that they  had  travelled  in
    his van, because he was not permitted  to  drive;  in  effect  she  was
    covering for him. However, when she was asked questions about this same
    issue in evidence  she  did  not  give  the  same  explanation  as  the
    claimant. She agreed that they had travelled in the sponsor's van,  but
    went on at length in her answer about her husband going to pick up  the
    ring and leaving his mobile phone on the car  seat,  resulting  in  the
    window being broken to steal the phone. None of this was  mentioned  in
    interview, nor was it relevant to the question  asked.  She  then  said
    that because  of  the  interviewing  officer's  negative  attitude  she
    thought she would say that they travelled in the car.  Eventually,  she
    said she was so stressed that she was not thinking straight  and  could
    not explain why she said what she did. If the claimant  is  right  that
    the sponsor lied in interview, it  follows  that  she  is  still  being
    untruthful as to why she said they had travelled in his  cousin's  car.
    This conduct serves to undermine  the  credibility  of  the  claimant's
    case.

19. Much of the hearing was given over to extensive questioning about where
    the claimant and the sponsor lived at various times from 2009  onwards.
    Despite the attempts of both Judge Pickup and Judge Jacobs to  try  and
    clarify the issue, it was not possible to determine any  clear  history
    and matters seemed more confused than they were  before.  For  example,
    the claimant said that at the time of a previous  application  made  in
    July 2011 for leave to remain on the basis of family life with his then
    wife and child, he was living between 5 [ - ]  Court,  the  matrimonial
    home, and Ms Machala's address. Mr McGirr did not pursue the  issue  of
    an apparent inconsistency between  that  application  and  his  present
    account and thus we make no finding in respect of  the  same.  However,
    the claimant said that he had been in immigration detention  from  July
    to August 2011 and when he was released he went to live with Ms Machala
    at 29 [ - ], Northolt. He then produced from his personal file, not  in
    his appeal bundle, a tenancy agreement dated 9.11.11,  suggesting  that
    from that date he and Ms  Machala  began  to  reside  at  that  address
    together, which seems inconsistent with moving  in  with  her  at  that
    address in August 2011. The agreement shows no existing address for the
    claimant, but states that her address prior to this tenancy was at 14 [
    - ], Hanwell. The claimant insisted he did not live at 29 [ -  ]  prior
    to August 2011, but could not provide any satisfactory  explanation  as
    to why the tenancy is dated in  November  2011.  In  her  evidence,  Ms
    Machala varied between insisting that they had  moved  in  together  at
    that address from November 2010, and then,  in  light  of  the  tenancy
    agreement, stating that it must have been November 2011.  However,  she
    was quite sure that at the time the claimant was  detained,  which  was
    July 2011, they were both already living at 29 [  -  ].  She  was  also
    adamant that there was only ever one tenancy agreement and  that  there
    had not been, as was suggested as a possible explanation,  a  prior  12
    month agreement of which the 9.11.11 document was merely a continuation
    of the tenancy. Although she fluctuated between 2010 and 2011, she  was
    very sure it was November when they moved in together and that they had
    gone  into  this  tenancy  together.  Her  account   is   significantly
    inconsistent with the claimant's account.

20. A further complication on this issue arose in two  council  tax  bills,
    also produced at the hearing by the claimant and  dated  May  2011  and
    June 2011. It is clear from these documents that both the claimant  and
    Ms Machala were registered as living at 29 [ - ] in May 2011. The bills
    were chasing unpaid council tax for a flat at 15 [ - ],  Ealing,  which
    appears to have been occupied by one or other, or both, of them between
    April 2009 and the end of December 2010.

21. We reached the conclusion that the claimant  was  certainly  not  being
    transparent about when he was living with Ms  Machala  and  from  when.
    Their accounts were generally inconsistent as to dates,  but  generally
    supportive as to the extent of  their  relationship.  There  may  be  a
    number of reasons why the claimant and the sponsor have made the matter
    so confusing and unclear. For example, they may  have  been  trying  to
    avoid being caught out about the timing of his previous application for
    leave to remain. However, in  the  light  of  the  documents  from  the
    council, together with the general evidence from the  other  witnesses,
    we reach the conclusion that they must have moved into  29  [  -  ]  in
    November 2010 and have been living together at least since  that  time.
    The  other  witnesses,  including  the  sponsor's  two  children   were
    completely unable to provide any exact dates, but  confirmed  that  the
    sponsor and the claimant were living together at a number of addresses,
    including 29 [ - ], at least from 2010, which is substantially prior to
    the date of marriage. All the  other  evidence  demonstrates  continued
    cohabitation from that date. There are numerous letters of support  and
    other  documents  in  support,  including  bank,  utility   statements,
    photographs,  etc.  We  do  not  ignore  or  overlook   the   remaining
    discrepancies from their marriage interview, not all of which have been
    explained, even now, but in the context of the evidence as a  whole  we
    find  those  discrepancies  insufficient  in   quantity   and   overall
    significance to  outweigh  the  considerable  weight  of  the  evidence
    supporting the conclusion that on  the  balance  of  probabilities  the
    marriage is genuine.

22. We reach the conclusion that the claimant and the sponsor are currently
    living together, and have been together for some time  prior  to  their
    actual marriage. We also  note  that  there  was  a  significant  delay
    between marriage and the application for an EEA Residence Card, as well
    as a delay between cohabitation and marriage and  between  proposal  of
    marriage and marriage. Whilst cohabitation is relevant to the issue  as
    to whether the marriage is one of convenience, we bear in mind that  it
    is not necessarily determinative of that issue, as a couple can cohabit
    for the purpose of falsely establishing the appearance of a genuine and
    subsisting relationship. We also take into account  that  the  claimant
    and his spouse have now had a considerable amount of time  to  rehearse
    and try to get their stories straight, without successfully being  able
    to do so. It is also  arguable  that  the  fact  they  have  not  given
    identical accounts demonstrates that the marriage and  relationship  is
    genuine, and that a rehearsed account may  have  been  more  consistent
    even if not factually true.

23. However, taking the evidence as a whole, in the  round,  we  reach  the
    conclusion, despite the  various  concerns  set  out  above,  that  the
    claimant and the sponsor are in a genuine relationship and that he  has
    demonstrated on the balance of probabilities that the marriage  entered
    into is not one of convenience.

24. In reaching that conclusion we take into  account  the  evidence  as  a
    whole, including but not only the following matters. First, evidence as
    to how they communicate in partly English and Jamaican patois, and that
    the claimant and the sponsor have known each other since 2006 and  that
    they have worked together for some years. The claimant  explained  that
    he has some knowledge of Polish, not just because of  his  relationship
    with Ms Machala  but  because  he  has  worked  (albeit  illegally)  in
    premises with a number of Polish workers. There were details  of  their
    evidence that indicated a good  knowledge  and  involvement  with  each
    other. For example, the sponsor explained that she visited the claimant
    each day he was in detention in 2011, stating that on each occasion her
    photograph and fingerprints were taken, which she invited us to  check.
    We also heard evidence that the claimant had introduced his brother  to
    the sponsor long before they were living together.  Ms  Grabowska,  the
    sponsor's sister who came from Poland to give evidence, explained  that
    she had come to visit and work in the UK during two successive  summers
    three years ago, staying with the claimant and the appellant at 29 [  -
    ], Northolt. One of the  sponsor's  children  gave  evidence  that  the
    claimant had been living with them since she was about age 12. We found
    that all of this evidence, taken together, was  inconsistent  with  the
    marriage being one of convenience and supportive of the claim  that  it
    is not. Ultimately, we find that the claimant has discharged the burden
    of proof to demonstrate that the marriage is not one of convenience.

25. No issue has been taken as to the sponsor's exercise of  Treaty  rights
    and thus it follows that on the basis that  they  have  discharged  the
    burden of showing that the marriage  is  not  one  of  convenience  the
    claimant is entitled to the EEA Residence Card sought.

Notice of Decision

26. The appeal is allowed under the Regulations.
                  [pic]
                  Signed


                  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                  Dated    1 December 2015




Anonymity

We have considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chambers)  Rules
2014.

Given the circumstances, we make no anonymity order.




Fee Award     Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of our decision, we have  considered  whether  to  make  a  fee
award (rule 9 of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration
and Asylum Chambers) Rules 2014  and  section  12(4)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,
Courts and Enforcement Act 2007).

We have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

However, we make no fee award.

Reasons: For various reasons,  we  find  that  the  claimant  has  not  been
straightforward with the Secretary of State and with the Tribunal as to  the
true history of his relationship with  the  sponsor  and  has  not  assisted
himself.
                  [pic]
                  Signed


                  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                  Dated    1 December 2015

