


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26008/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Decision & reasons Promulgated On|
|On 9th November 2017 and                        |14th March 2018                  |
|8th March 2018                                  |                                 |
|                                                |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER
            (UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR ON 9TH NOVEMBER 2017)

                                   Between


                        ADEJOKE FOLAKEMIOLUWA ADAMSON
                                     Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Plowright instructed by Nasim & Co, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, a Nigerian national born on 15 March  1980,  married  a
      Polish National (Marik Turkowski) on 4 October 2006. She  entered  the
      UK in July 2008 and was subsequently issued with an EEA Residence card
      valid between 1 March 2010 and 19 February 2015.


   2. Mr Turkowski left the  UK  on  7  November  2014.  Their  divorce  was
      finalised on 3 June 2016.


   3. On 16 January 2015, she applied for  a  permanent  residence  card  as
      confirmation of her right  to  reside  permanently  in  the  UK.  That
      application was rejected by the respondent for reasons set  out  in  a
      decision dated 1 July 2015 on three grounds:

   i) The respondent did not accept the couple  had  been  lawfully  married
      according to Nigerian Law;
  ii) Even if there was a valid marriage it was a marriage of convenience;
 iii) It was not accepted that Mr Turkowski had been a qualified person  for
      five years during the course of the marriage.


   4. The appellant's appeal against that decision was dismissed for reasons
      set  out  in  a  decision  by   First-tier   TribunalJjudge   Greasley
      promulgated  on  5  December  2016.  The  First-tier  Tribunal   judge
      concluded the marriage was a marriage of convenience and in any event,
      had not demonstrated that Mr  Turkowski  had  been  exercising  Treaty
      Rights for the required period.


   5. Permission to appeal was granted by UTJ Plimmer on 14  September  2017
      on the grounds that it was arguable the judge had failed  to  consider
      the circumstances of the marriage as  at  the  date  of  the  marriage
      (2006), although there was a dearth  of  evidence  as  to  whether  Mr
      Turkowski had been exercising the relevant Treaty Rights.

   6. UTJ O'Connor heard submissions on 9th November 2017 and concluded:

   i) The First-tier Tribunal had failed to consider  the  circumstances  of
      the marriage when it was undertaken namely 4th October 2006;
  ii) The First-tier Tribunal had failed to consider what evidence there was
      of Mr  Turkowski's  employment  and  that  it  was  not  necessary  to
      demonstrate that he had  been  in  employment  in  2014  or  any  time
      thereafter; the First-tier Tribunal had proceeded on  the  basis  that
      the relevant time frame was five years from the date of issue  of  the
      appellant's residence card which was incorrect.


   7. UTJ O'Connor found an error of law by the First-tier Tribunal and  set
      aside the decision to be remade. He directed  that  the  SSHD  request
      copies from HMRC of any records that relate to Mr  Turkoswki  and  the
      exercise of Treaty Rights;  that  copies  of  any  attachments  to  an
      application for a residence card by a Ms Anderson in October  2011  be
      disclosed and a copy of the appellant's application  for  a  residence
      card be produced.


   8. A transfer order was made on 6th  March  2018,  Judge  O'Connor  being
      unable to hear the continuation of this  appeal  within  a  reasonable
      period of time. The hearing came before me.

   9. The respondent had disclosed correspondence received from  HMRC  which
      confirmed that Mr Turkowski had been exercising Treaty Rights until he
      left the UK. Mr Deller accepted that the only live issue that remained
      was whether the marriage was a marriage of  convenience.  If  not,  he
      accepted that the appellant was entitled to be issued with a residence
      card confirming her permanent residence.

  10. The respondent had not provided  a  copy  of  the  attachments  to  an
      application made, in 2011, by a Ms Anderson for a  residence  card  on
      the basis of her marriage to a Mr Marik Turkowski. I had a copy of the
      application form by Ms  Anderson.  The  date  of  birth  and  National
      Insurance number of the Marik Turkowski on that  application  form  is
      different to the Marik Turkowski to whom the appellant was married and
      for whom not  only  were  the  HMRC  records  disclosed  but  payslips
      provided. It cannot be said that the evidence shows that it is  likely
      that the Marik Turkowski that Ms Anderson married is  the  same  Marik
      Turkowski that the appellant married in 2006. Furthermore, as  pointed
      out by Mr Deller,  if  the  marriage  between  Mr  Turkowski  and  the
      appellant were a marriage of convenience it is difficult to understand
      why some two years would elapse before she came to the UK. As noted by
      Judge O'Connor, a marriage may be genuine and then fail in the  future
      or even fairly soon after it has been celebrated but  that  does  mean
      that the marriage was, at its instigation, a marriage of convenience.

  11. Mr Deller very fairly accepted  that  the  respondent  was  unable  to
      discharge the burden of proof  that  the  appellant  had  undergone  a
      marriage of convenience. The evidence  from  HMRC  confirmed  that  Mr
      Turkowski had been exercising Treaty Rights for the relevant period.

  12. In these circumstances,  I  find  the  appellant  did  not  undergo  a
      marriage of convenience.  It  follows  that  her  appeal  against  the
      refusal of an EEA Residence Card  confirming  permanent  residence  is
      allowed.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law and is set aside.

     I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.







[pic]

                                    Date 12th March 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
