
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26522/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 May 2017                                |On 24 May 2017                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                                     G N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss D Ofei-Kwatia of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. As this case  involves  young  children  I  have  decided  to  make  an
    anonymity direction. Unless and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
    otherwise, the appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of
    his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and  to  the
    respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 12 May 1966.   She  applied
    for a  derivative  right  of  residence  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.  The appellant asserts  that  she  has  a  derivative
    right of residence as the primary carer of two  EEA  citizen  children.
    The appellant's two children are her son I born on 14 October 2001  who
    is a Dutch national, and E, born  on  12  May  2004  who  is  a  German
    national.  The  respondent  refused  to  issue  the  appellant  with  a
    residence card on 8 July 2015.  Initially the appellant had applied  as
    a family member of an EEA  national  exercising  treaty  rights  for  a
    continuous period of five years.  The sponsor, her husband, Mr TAA is a
    Dutch national.  The respondent refused the application because it  was
    not accepted that the appellant's husband was exercising treaty  rights
    and/or that he had exercised them for a sufficient period of time.  The
    appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 3. In a decision promulgated on 5 October 2016 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Ruth dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The First-tier  Tribunal  found
    that the appellant had not proved that her first son I was the  son  of
    her husband.  On that basis the judge found that the appellant did  not
    meet Regulation 15(a) of the EEA Regulations.

 4. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    On  22  March  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Brunnen  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.

The Hearing Before the Upper Tribunal

 5. There are essentially two grounds of appeal.  Firstly it  is  contended
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in making the finding that the
    appellant has not proven that her husband is the father of  I.   It  is
    submitted that the respondent has never taken any issue on  this  point
    that the judge was duty bound to put the matter to the appellant during
    the hearing.  The second ground of appeal was that the judge failed  to
    make a clear finding as to whether the appellant is the  primary  carer
    of her two children.  The appellant's claim to  be  the  primary  carer
    remained unchallenged at the hearing and no issue has been  taken  with
    her supporting evidence on that issue.  It is therefore unclear why the
    judge failed to make a finding on what is a principle question.  It  is
    submitted  that  the  judge  has  failed  entirely  to   consider   the
    appellant's entitlement to a Ruiz Zambrano (C-34/09) right of residence
    because she has two EU national children who are both being educated in
    the United Kingdom.  The appellant has no right of residence  elsewhere
    in the EU so that if she was required to leave the UK both  EU  citizen
    children would be required to leave the EEA area.

 6. Ms Fijiwala accepted that the judge had  not  considered  the  Zambrano
    point at all.   She very helpfully  indicated  that  therefore  it  was
    accepted that the case would need  to  be  reconsidered  and  that  the
    matter should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   She  also
    helpfully indicated that a Section 120 notice had been  served  on  the
    appellant so that she would be able to raise Article 8 arguments  at  a
    rehearing.

 7. I find that the judge has materially erred in law in failing to put  to
    the appellant a point (that was determinative of the appeal)  that  had
    never been raised before, namely that the appellant's  husband  is  not
    the father of her  first  son  I.   Further,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    materially erred in law in failing to consider the arguments that  were
    put to the Tribunal that the appellant,  as  a  primary  carer  of  EEA
    children, is entitled to a derivative right of residence in  accordance
    with the principles set out  in  the  case  of  Zambrano,  as  recently
    considered in Chavez-Vilchez and  Others  v  Netherlands  C-133/15.  In
    light of the Secretary of State's concession I set aside the decision.

 8.  I considered whether or not I could re-make  the  decision  myself.  I
    considered the Practice Statement concerning transfer of proceedings. I
    am satisfied that the nature and extent of judicial fact  finding  that
    is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made  is
    such, having regard to the overriding objective, that it is appropriate
    to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

 9. The First-tier Tribunal's decision contained a material error of law. I
    set that decision aside pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').  The case is remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House for a  de  novo  hearing  before  a
    judge other than Judge Ruth, to be heard on the next available date.







Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 22 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw













