
[pic]
First-Tier Tribunal          Appeal Number
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        IA/26054/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at  Field  House                                              Decision
                                             promulgated
On 11 November 2014          On 12 November 2014

                                   Before

                Judge of the First-tier Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                               Tamara Badalyan
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                   Respondent




Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. P. Ward of James & Co.
For the Respondent:    Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                 DECISION TO REFUSE TO EXTEND TIME TO APPEAL

   1. This case was initially listed before me as an Upper Tribunal  hearing
      to consider the Appellant's appeal against the decision of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Colvin promulgated on 2 January  2014,  dismissing  the
      Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated 17  July
      2013 to refuse to vary leave to remain and  to  remove  the  Appellant
      from the UK. In the event - for the reasons set out below and pursuant
      to the guidance in Samir (FtT Permission to appeal: time) [2013]  UKUT
      3 (IAC) - I have disposed of this matter in my capacity  as  a  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge.

Background

   2. The Appellant is a national of Armenia born on 13 October 1944.  On 28
      February 2012 she entered the UK pursuant to a  multiple  entry  visit
      visa valid from 9 February 2012 until 9 August 2012. On 6 August  2012
      the Appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain as the  dependent
      parent of Ms Ruzanna Badalyan. The application was refused for reasons
      set out in a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 9 July  2013,
      and a Notice  of  Immigration  Decision  communicating  a  refusal  of
      variation of leave to remain and a removal decision dated 17 July 2013
      was served on 19 July 2013. The RFRL is a matter of record on file and
      it is unnecessary to reproduce its  contents  here:  the  Respondent's
      decision was taken with reference in particular to paragraphs 317(iii)
      and (v), paragraph 276ADE(iii) and  (vi)  of  the  Immigration  Rules;
      reference was also made to Appendix FM.

   3. The Appellant lodged a Notice of Appeal on 29 July 2013 requesting  an
      oral hearing. The  Grounds  of  Appeal  were  limited  to  the  single
      sentence: "The decision  is  incompatible  with  the  Article  8  ECHR
      Private and Family Life Rights of myself, my daughter, my grandson and
      my son as it  represents  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the
      same." Mr Ward confirmed to me today that this was, to date, the  only
      formal response to the Respondent's decision.

   4. The appeal was duly listed for hearing,  and  came  before  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Colvin on 16 December 2013. There was no appearance  by
      or on behalf of the  Appellant.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
      regard to the information on file,  which  appeared  to  indicate  due
      service of the Notice of Hearing on both the Appellant and  her  legal
      representative: see,  for  example,  paragraph  3  of  Judge  Colvin's
      determination. An attempt to contact  the  Appellant's  representative
      was  unsuccessful.  In  the  circumstances  the  Judge  proceeded   to
      determine the appeal in accordance with the evidence in the papers  on
      file. These papers essentially consisted of the  Respondent's  bundle,
      the Appellant not having filed any evidence further to the  Notice  of
      Appeal. For reasons  set  out  in  her  determination  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

   5. The determination was promulgated on 2 January 2014.

   6. It was not  until  7  August  2014  that  the  Appellant  applied  for
      permission to appeal. (See further below in respect of the intervening
      period.) The application for permission to appeal was considered,  and
      granted, by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chambers on 18  September  2014.
      However, although Judge Chambers identified that the  application  for
      permission to appeal was made 'out of  time',  he  did  not  expressly
      state that time to appeal was extended, or otherwise offer any  reason
      for extending time, or otherwise give any indication as to  engagement
      with the issue of 'time'.

   7.  Mr  Bramble  indicated  that  the  Respondent  took  issue  with  the
      timeousness of the application for permission to appeal.

Consideration

   8. The application for permission to appeal was made just shy of 7 months
      out of time. The application for permission to appeal  offers  reasons
      why the application was made late, and further particulars are set out
      in the accompanying witness statement signed by  Mr  Ward  on  1  July
      2014. Essentially it is  said  that  because  the  Appellant  and  her
      representative had not  received  the  Notice  of  Hearing  they  were
      unaware of the proceedings on 16 December 2013; it  was  assumed  that
      this was essentially a product of an administrative error on the  part
      of the Tribunal and accordingly in the first instance  a  request  had
      been made to set aside  the  decision  rather  than  challenge  it  by
      appealing.

   9. Further to the above I note the following:

(i) It is acknowledged that  the  Appellant's  representative  received  the
      determination on 5 January 2014.  The  deadline  for  appealing  would
      therefore have been 13 January 2014.

(ii) It is said that Mr Ward initially contacted the Tribunal on  8  January
      2014 asserting a failure of service of  the  Notice  of  Hearing,  and
      requesting a fresh hearing.

(iii) In the absence of any response  to  the  communication  of  8  January
      2014, Mr Ward sent an email to the Tribunal on 12 February 2014  again
      requesting a fresh hearing.

(iv) Mr Ward then states in his witness statement: "I  received  a  response
      by return advising that the appeal had been unsuccessful and that "the
      reasons for the judge's decision was set out in the form of a  written
      determination sent to all applicable parties on 02/01/2013".

(v)  Although  Mr  Ward  states  that  there  was  no  information  in  this
      communication about whether it was possible to correct the  error  and
      obtain a fresh hearing, he does not assert that he  took  any  further
      steps to clarify this  matter,  or  otherwise  to  seek  to  have  the
      determination of Judge Colvin set aside. This is  notwithstanding  the
      plainly  conclusive  tone  of  the  communication  received  from  the
      Tribunal; the email response as reported by Mr Ward does not hint of a
      willingness to take any further steps or actions but suggests that the
      determination stands for what it is.

(vi) It appears that no further steps were taken by  or  on  behalf  of  the
      Appellant in the matter until the witness statements of the  Appellant
      and her daughter were signed on 24 April 2014.

(vii) There appears then to have been no further action until Mr Paul's  own
      witness statement was signed on 1 July 2014.

(viii) There is yet further delay before the application for  permission  to
      appeal was sent to the Tribunal by fax on 7 August 2014.

  10. In my judgement Mr Ward  was  wholly  unable  to  offer  any  adequate
      explanation for the absence of any more prompt  action  consequent  to
      the reply by return to his email of 12 February 2014 - either  by  way
      of making further representations or seeking clarification in  respect
      of setting aside the determination, or by way of  an  application  for
      permission to appeal. Mr Ward accepted that there was such delay,  and
      the best that he could manage by way of explanation was  that  he  was
      unsure what to do.  That  is  not  an  adequate  explanation  for  the
      considerable periods of inaction. Moreover, it in no way explains  the
      delay between 1 July 2014 (by which date, according to paragraph 5  of
      Mr Ward's witness statement it is clear that it had been decided  that
      an application for permission to appeal would be pursued) and 7 August
      2014 (when the application was eventually made).

  11. I am grateful to the representatives for drawing my attention  to  the
      cases of AK and others (Tribunal  Appeal-  out  of  time)  Bulgaria  *
      [2004]  UKIAT  00201  and  Boktor  and  Wanis  (late  application  for
      permission) Egypt [2011] UKUT 00422 (IAC). I have also had  regard  to
      BO and Others (Extension of time for appealing) Nigeria  [2006]  UKAIT
      00035, which is cited in Boktor. I have had due regard  to  all  three
      cases: in particular I have noted paragraphs 20-23 and  24-28  of  AK,
      the headnote and paragraphs 16-19 of  Boktor,  and  the  headnote  and
      paragraphs 9-22 of BO. BO relates to  applications  for  extension  of
      time for lodging a Notice of Appeal against an  immigration  decision,
      and not specifically  to  an  application  for  permission  to  appeal
      against a First-tier determination: nonetheless in  general  terms  it
      provides relevant instructive guidance as to the applicable principles
      when considering 'time'.

  12. I have  also  had  regard  to  paragraphs  24-27  of  the  Asylum  and
      Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005, which relate  to  appeals
      to the Upper Tribunal, and in  particular  rule  24.  These  were  the
      Procedure Rules in force at the date  Judge  Chambers  considered  the
      application for permission to appeal, and are the  Rules  that  formed
      the framework of the consideration of the issues in  the  cases  cited
      above. In this latter regard, in particular, the  Tribunal  in  Boktor
      considered the relevance of rule 24(4) as reinforcing the reasoning in
      AK.

  13. New procedure rules are now in force with effect from 20 October 2014:
      the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum
      Chamber) Rules 2014. Rules  33  and  34  relate  to  applications  for
      permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal;  rule  33(5)(e)  provides
      that an application  for  permission  to  appeal  should  include  any
      application for an extension of time  and  the  reasons  why  such  an
      extension should be given. The Rules are otherwise silent  as  to  the
      'test' to be applied, and do not carry a similar provision to that  of
      rule  24(4)(a).  However,  the  overriding   objective   and   parties
      obligations to cooperate with the Tribunal set out under rule  2,  and
      the Tribunal's powers in circumstances where there has been a  failure
      to comply  with  the  rules,  both  preserve  the  concept  of  acting
      'justly', which informed the test under the old rule 24(4)(a).  I  see
      nothing in the reformulation  of  the  Procedure  Rules,  which  would
      warrant a departure from the established jurisprudence of the Tribunal
      in considering applications for extension of time.

  14. Even if it were otherwise, bearing in mind the transitional provisions
      set out at rule 46 of the 2014 Rules, which  permit  the  Tribunal  to
      apply provisions of the 2005 Rules - and specifically  make  reference
      at 46(2) to a time period that started to run before the date on which
      the new Rules came into force (albeit in the context of one where  the
      time period is still running), and bearing in mind that the contingent
      grant of permission to appeal  that  is  before  me  was  itself  made
      pursuant to the 2005 Rules, I would be minded to  apply  the  approach
      and jurisprudence founded on the 2005 Rules and to disapply  the  2014
      Rules. However, for the reasons already given,  in  my  judgement  the
      principles involved are the same irrespective of  the  specific  'rule
      regime' to be applied.

  15. My starting point is that where Judge Chambers  did  not  address  the
      issue of extending time, the grant of permission must be  seen  as  in
      effect conditional on time being extended (AK at  paragraph  23).  The
      matter having been raised by Mr Bramble, plainly  there  has  been  no
      waiver  of  the  irregularity  in  granting  permission  without  also
      extending time. It is, then, for  the  Appellant  now  to  pursue  the
      application for extension of time further to the matters  set  out  in
      the application for permission to appeal.

  16. I have addressed above the circumstances  in  which  it  is  said  the
      application came to be made out-of-time. There  is  very  substantial,
      delay with no adequate explanation.

  17. A passage from paragraph 14 of BO is very slightly mis-paraphrased  in
      the first sentence of paragraph 17 of Boktor. The passage is, in  fact
      in the following terms:

"So the first question is, what is the  explanation  for  the  lateness?  If
      there is no explanation at all, or no satisfactory explanation, or  an
      explanation which is not supported by evidence that ought to have been
      readily available, we regard it as very unlikely indeed that  it  will
      be right to say that time should be extended."

  18. However, as is made clear in BO, such a circumstance is not inevitably
      determinative. Indeed, consideration will need  to  be  given  to  all
      relevant matters which, as identified at the end of  paragraph  17  in
      Boktor "may include the strength  of  the  grounds  of  appeal...  the
      consequences of the decision, the length of delay,  prejudice  to  the
      respondent  and  mistakes,  delays  and  breaches  of  Rules  by   the
      respondent".

  19. In this context Mr Ward places reliance on three matters: the  grounds
      of appeal assert that the Appellant lost the opportunity of presenting
      her case through no fault of her own but  by  reason  of  an  apparent
      administrative failure in properly serving Notices of Hearing, and  to
      that extent the grounds have merit; the Respondent's initial  decision
      was not in accordance with the Immigration  Rules  because  the  wrong
      rules were considered; there was delay on the part of  the  Respondent
      between 6 August 2012 (when the application was made) and 9 July  2013
      (when it was determined).

  20. There is nothing  to  indicate  that  the  delay  in  determining  the
      Appellant's application was excessive by the normal standards  of  the
      Respondent. I do not consider that this adds anything of substance  to
      the issue before me.

  21. As regards the Respondent's consideration of the wrong Rules,  I  note
      the following.

(i) In the first instance this was not a matter  raised  in  the  Notice  of
      Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal which was restricted  to  Article  8
      grounds.

(ii) In any event, whilst it might be the case that the  application  should
      not have been considered  with  reference  to  paragraph  317,  it  is
      nonetheless the case that the Respondent did also  give  consideration
      to Appendix FM, and particularly so  -  albeit  briefly  and  somewhat
      perfunctorily  -  to  the  Appellant's  relationship  with  her  adult
      children: "It is noted that some of your adult children  are  resident
      in the United Kingdom. You have stated that some are  settled  in  the
      United Kingdom, whilst others are here  on  a  temporary  basis.  Your
      relationship with  adult  children  is  not  sufficient  to  meet  the
      criteria of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. Nor is it considered
      that this is a sufficiently compelling factor to justify  a  grant  of
      leave on exceptional grounds."

(iii) In general terms, it is to be observed that the regime  for  an  adult
      dependent parent under Appendix FM is  somewhat  stricter  than  under
      paragraph 317, and  accordingly  it  is  difficult  to  see  that  any
      technical error in this regard  is  one  that  could  have  materially
      assisted the Appellant or otherwise strengthens the overall merits  of
      her case.

  22. Again, in my judgement, this aspect of the case carries no  particular
      weight in a consideration of the issue of extending time.  Indeed,  in
      general terms, it seems to me that the Appellant  is  in  considerable
      difficulty in placing any particular weight on the  overall  merit  of
      her case in circumstances where even to date - and notwithstanding the
      Directions issued by the Upper Tribunal on  14  October  2014  to  the
      effect that the parties should prepare for the forthcoming hearing  on
      the basis that the Tribunal may wish to remake  the  decision  at  the
      hearing listed for today, such  preparation  to  include  filing  "any
      further evidence" - no further evidence has been filed in response  to
      the Respondent's decision. The only response on record is  the  single
      line asserting Article 8 in the Notice of Appeal.

  23. As regards the merits of the specific challenge to the decision of the
      First-tier Tribunal - in effect, that it  was  in  breach  of  natural
      justice, because of the failure of service of Notice of  Hearing  -  I
      accept that in the abstract (and without having  tested  the  evidence
      contained in the witness statements as to that  failure  of  service),
      there may be some merit. However, such merit should not in  itself  be
      determinative: see, for example, AK at paragraph 27. In any event,  in
      my judgement, the overall merits of the Appellant's case on  appeal  -
      i.e.  the  merits  of  succeeding  substantively  rather   than   just
      succeeding in overturning the decision  of  Judge  Colvin  -  are  not
      apparent in the absence of any proper  response  to  the  Respondent's
      decision and in the absence of the filing of evidence.

  24. In all of the circumstances I am not satisfied that  there  exist  any
      special circumstances such that it would be unjust not to extend time.
      Accordingly I refuse the Appellant's application for an  extension  of
      time to make an application for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal.

  25. Pursuant to paragraphs 19-20 of the decision in Samir (see paragraph 1
      above), my consideration of whether time to appeal should be  extended
      must be seen as part of the First-tier Tribunal process of considering
      the application for permission  to  appeal.  Accordingly  I  make  the
      decision herein in my capacity as a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  The
      consequence - as intended in Samir - is  that  the  Appellant  is  not
      deprived of the opportunity of putting  her  case  for  permission  to
      appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

Decision

  26. Permission to extend time to appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  refused.
      There is no appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

  27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.




Judge of the First-tier Tribunal I. A. Lewis 11 November 2014
