
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/26664/2014
     IA/26671/2014
     IA/26682/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 December 2014                            |On 9 December 2014           |
|Oral judgment                                 |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         PRAVINKUMAR SURSINH PARMAR
                           KRISH PRAVINBHAI PARMAR
                             RANJNABAHEN PARMAR
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   First Appellant in person.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Cheales,  promulgated  on  2  October  2014
    following a hearing in Birmingham on 23 September 2014,  in  which  she
    allowed the appellant's appeal against the refusal of the Secretary  of
    State to vary his leave to permit him to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student and other  family  members  in  line  and
    against a direction to remove the appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom
    made under Section 47 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 2006.

2.   The applications for Tier 4 Student  status,  both  in  respect  of  Mr
    Parmar as the primary applicant and other family members as  dependants
    in line was refused by the Secretary of State for reasons  set  out  in
    the respective refusal notices dated 10 June 2014.  In  respect  to  Mr
    Parmar it was said he had submitted a bank statement for an account  in
    the name of another party but the decision maker did  not  accept  that
    document as evidence of available funds because it was said he had  not
    provided evidence of his relationship to the person named on  the  bank
    statement as the holder of the account.  Mr Parmar's  case  has  always
    been as set out in his grounds of appeal, that that is his  father  and
    that he has established the relationship.

3.   Judge Cheales having  considered  the  documents  allowed  the  appeal,
    stating in paragraph 9 of her determination

         "The issues in this refusal are narrow.  From the refusal notice it
         does not seem to be disputed that the  required  money  is  in  the
         account of Surinh Ratansinh Parmar.  The  refusal  is  because  the
         appellant has submitted  a bank  statement  in  the  name  of  that
         individual but has not said what relationship this has to  him.   I
         have now received, albeit in photocopies, evidence that  Mr  Parmar
         is the appellant's father."

    The judge allowed the appeal on that basis.

4.   The Secretary of State  challenged  that  conclusion  by  reference  to
    Section 85A of the 2002 Act which prohibits judges taking into  account
    evidence not before the decision maker where it relates to  acquisition
    of  points  in  a  points-based  appeal  and   particularly   prohibits
    consideration by a judge of evidence adduced  after  the  decision  has
    been made in these circumstances.

5.   I am grateful to both Miss Isherwood  and  Mr  Parmar  today.   He  has
    referred the Tribunal to a  document  he  describes  as  a  declaration
    signed by his father confirming that the appellant  before  us  is  his
    son.  Miss Isherwood has referred me to page 13 of the application form
    where the appellant, in relation to a question concerning  evidence  of
    funds held by the appellant's parents or legal guardian  and  the  need
    for evidence that those funds are available to him for which a document
    must be submitted such as a letter from the parents or legal  guardian,
    has answered "yes".

6.   Miss Isherwood is clearly in  some  difficulty  today.   She  has  gone
    through her file as best she can but it  appears  from  the  weight  of
    evidence that the statement by Mr Parmar  that  the  declaration  is  a
    document submitted with the application is one  this  Tribunal  has  to
    accept.  Miss Isherwood has not stated  she  has  anything  before  her
    indicating that it was not included with the application. The judge has
    not helped the cause by failing to identify exactly the nature of  that
    document and what she means by the term "I have now received" in  light
    of the fact it could have been provided with the appeal form, it  could
    have been with the respondent's bundle, or sent in later,  we  just  do
    not know.

7.   The test in this case, on the balance of probabilities, is whether  the
    Secretary of State has established that the judge has erred in law.  It
    has to be my finding in these circumstances  that  she  has  not.    My
    decision is that no  legal  error  has  been  proved  material  to  the
    decision to allow the appeal.  The determination shall stand.

Decision

8.   There is no material error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision. The determination shall stand.



   Anonymity.


     1. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
        2005.


          I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
   (Upper         Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson


