
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26927/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 22 September 2015                     |             On 25 September 2015   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                               MR Kwesi Arhin
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Waithe of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana, born on 1 July 1973.   He  applied
    for leave to remain on 4 July 2013 as the parent of a  child  currently
    in the United Kingdom.  That application was refused by the  respondent
    on 3 December 2013.

 2. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal was allowed  by
    a panel comprising Judge R J Tiffen and Judge  N  Bridgman  Baker  (the
    panel) promulgated on 11 March 2014.

 3. The panel found the appellant and his witnesses to be  credible.   They
    found the application did not meet the requirements of the  Immigration
    Rules but went on to allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds on the basis
    that the respondent's refusal was disproportionate.

 4. The grounds claim the panel made a material error  of  law  in  finding
    that the appellant's removal would be disproportionate bearing in  mind
    the finding that he enjoyed family life with his child whom he  saw  at
    weekends.  See [23] of the decision.

 5. The panel did not set out the appellant's immigration  history  or  the
    detail of the refusal which the respondent considered to be significant
    and which was set out in [2] and [3] of the  grounds.   The  respondent
    claimed that the appellant's immigration history and custodial sentence
    made it undesirable that he remain in the United Kingdom.  He  did  not
    meet S-LTR.1.6.  Further, bearing in mind his child was not British nor
    settled here, nor had he lived in the United Kingdom for seven years, E-
    LTRPT.2.2. was not satisfied.  The appellant could not benefit from the
    criteria set out at EX.1.

 6. Further, the appellant did not meet the requirements of 276ADE(vi).

 7. The grounds set out the relevant case law in terms of  the  appellant's
    failure to meet the Immigration Rules  and  the  consequent  compelling
    circumstances which had to be shown outside the Rules:

    Haleemudeen [2014] EWCA Civ 558;

    PG (USA) [2015] EWCA Civ 118 at [28];

    Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74.

 8. The grounds submitted that how a person failed  to  succeed  under  the
    Rules would always be materially important when  assessing  the  public
    interest outside the Rules and what the consequences of the  individual
    remaining in the UK was, for instance, where the party  had  failed  to
    show that they could maintain themselves.  In this particular case, the
    Appellant could not meet the suitability requirements  of  Appendix  FM
    because he had committed a criminal offence for which he had received a
    six month sentence.  That was a clear material expression of the public
    interest - the effect of that failure was that the appellant should not
    be entitled to the benefit of EX.1/EX.2 of the Immigration  Rules.   In
    purporting to find that there were exceptional circumstances, the panel
    ignored the appellant's criminal history  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    indeed, did not even acknowledge the same.

 9.  Further,  the  panel  failed  to  take  into  account  the   mandatory
    requirements of S.117B even though the statute explicitly required them
    to do so.  See Dube (SS.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT  90  (IAC).   The  panel
    erred because the public interest had not been considered nor had there
    been any consideration of the fact  that  the  appellant  had  been  an
    overstayer since 2005 and the child did not have settled status here.

10. Judge Mark Davies granted permission to appeal on 1  May  2015  on  the
    grounds that the panel had failed to have any regard  to  S.117B.   All
    grounds were allowed.

11. Mr Waithe made a Rule 24 response dated 2 June 2015.

Submissions on Error of Law

12. Mr Waithe conceded that the appellant  was  not  able  to  satisfy  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules but that there was  no  error  in
    the panel's approach, taking into account the evidence that was  before
    them.  There was no necessity to set everything out in detail.

13. Mr Waithe submitted that the panel gave full reasons for  allowing  the
    appeal.  Their reasons  largely  turned  on  their  acceptance  of  the
    appellant's account of historical facts as  being  credible.   Further,
    the panel properly directed themselves with  regard  to  Article  8  in
    terms of Huang [2007] UKHL 11 and ZH Tanzania [2011].

14. As regards S.117, Mr Waithe submitted that the panel's  statutory  duty
    to consider the same was satisfied if the  Tribunal's  decision  showed
    that it had regard to such parts of it as were relevant  and  that  the
    panel had given consideration as per the statute.  Dube  (ss.117A-117D)
    [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC) assisted the appellant.  See head note (2).  It
    was not an error of law to fail to refer to SS.117A-117D considerations
    if the panel  had  applied  the  test  they  were  supposed  to  apply,
    according to its terms.  What mattered was substance, not form.

15. Mr Kandola submitted that there was  no  analysis  of  the  appellant's
    immigration history.  The Immigration Rules could not be met but  there
    was no explanation by the panel of the appellant's failure to meet  the
    Rules  with  reference  to  his  criminal  background  and  immigration
    history. At [23] the panel said that there  was  "undisputed  evidence"
    before them that the appellant enjoyed family and private life  in  the
    United Kingdom but that was to disregard what the respondent had to say
    and which the panel set out at [17] of their decision.   There  clearly
    was disputed evidence which the panel failed to analyse.

Conclusion on Error of Law

16. Section 19 of the 2014 Immigration Act introduced into the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 a new part 5A containing  new  Sections
    117A-117D.  It is headed  "Article  8  of  the  ECHR:  Public  interest
    considerations".   The  new  Sections  117A-117D  set   out   statutory
    guidelines that must be applied.   S.117B  refers  to  public  interest
    considerations applicable in all cases (my emphasis).

17. There is no reference to S.117 in the panel's decision.  I accept  that
    at [30] they say "Having considered all of the evidence in case law and
    carried out the necessary balancing exercise ......" but  there  is  no
    evidence in their decision that the public interest considerations were
    taken into account notwithstanding that it is apparent  the  Presenting
    Officer raised the same.  There was no consideration of the appellant's
    poor immigration history, criminal offending and failure to satisfy the
    Immigration Rules which the panel were obliged to take into account.

18. I conclude that the decision contains material errors of law such  that
    it should be set aside, and re-heard  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  de
    novo.  None of the findings are to stand.

Notice of Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law, is  set
    aside and shall be remitted to the First-tier to be heard again de novo
    by a panel or a judge sitting  alone,  not  Judges  R  J  Tiffen  or  N
    Bridgman Baker.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date  22 September 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart



