
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26333/2013
                                                               IA/26348/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 December 2013                            |On 25 March 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                            Sunil Sitaram Shetty
                              Rohan Jeraco Pais
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by two citizens of India against  a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing their appeal against a refusal  to  grant
    them leave to remain under the Rules relating to entrepreneurs.

 2. I am satisfied that the whole approach of the Secretary of State to this
    case has been entirely wrong.  The  applications  were  supported  by  a
    letter.  The letter was dated 9 May 2013 and was headed "entrepreneurial
    team members".  It then  identified  the  appellants.   The  appropriate
    application form was completed and, although very  slightly  confusingly
    because of the way the form is  laid  out,  it  spelled  out  absolutely
    unequivocally  that  the  applications  were  made   as   part   of   an
    entrepreneurial team. For example, question G1 on page 22 requires a box
    to be ticked if  the  person  making  the  application  is  part  of  an
    entrepreneurial team.  The box was clearly ticked.   The  next  question
    required the members of the team to be identified and that was done.

 3. Given this clear steer as well as other things in the  application  form
    that confirmed that the applications were made as part of a team  it  is
    slightly surprising that the decision was made not on  the  basis  of  a
    team application but on the basis  of  an  individual  application.   It
    should have been. The respondent's approach was clearly wrong.

 4. The respondent recognised that to some extent in the Rule 24 notice that
    appeared before me but the respondent tried to salvage the  position  by
    saying that, in any event, the  applications  would  have  been  refused
    because the applicants did not satisfy the  requirements  of  the  rules
    relating to team members.   That  may  turn  out  to  be  right  but  Ms
    Jegarajah has given very good reasons to suggest that  it  is  not.  The
    rules, supported or hindered by policy documents, have to be  read  very
    careful to work out precisely what is required at each stage.

 5. I am satisfied that this is a case where it really is incumbent upon the
    Secretary of State to make a proper decision on the application that was
    made.  When that decision is reached then, if  appropriate,  it  can  be
    appealed but I am  not  in  any  way  determining  the  outcome  of  the
    application.  I am satisfied that the decision that  has  been  made  is
    completely wrong because the purpose of the application is not reflected
    in the decision.

 6. Mr Walker realistically conceded that  the  applications  made  as  team
    members had not been decided and he could not really say  very  much  to
    support the suggestion that the application should be decided  first  by
    the Upper Tribunal.  Indeed he agreed that in this area of untested law,
    where there are still contentious points to be resolved, the  appellants
    are at the very least entitled to a clear decision  on  the  application
    they have made, which they have not got.

 7. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in each case  and  I
    substitute a decision allowing  the  appeals  to  the  extent  that  the
    decision of the Secretary of State is not in accordance with the law and
    the applications remain outstanding to be decided properly.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 21 March 2014                  |







