

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26110/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre         |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 9 September 2016                           |On 16 September 2016         |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                               yvonne campbell
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kumar, J M Wilson Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant argues that FtT Judge Law erred by failing  to  recognise
    that her sponsor is settled in the  UK.  If  she  is  correct  and  her
    husband is settled here then the judge's decision must be wrong in  law
    because the judge dismissed the appeal  because  the  sponsor  was  not
    settled here.

 2. Although this was the  appellant's  appeal,  at  the  outset  Mr  Mills
    explained the Home Office's original decision (dated 10 July 2015)  was
    not saying the sponsor was not settled in the UK but that the  evidence
    did not show that he was. Unfortunately, this was misunderstood by  the
    judge who failed to recognise the significance of the evidence provided
    for the appeal.

 3. The school records show the sponsor was resident in the UK in 1963.  At
    that time Jamaica was a colony and was not independent. As  such  there
    were no restrictions in the sponsor entering of remaining in the UK. On
    Jamaica becoming independent the sponsor (who was born on  the  island)
    ceased to be a Citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies and became  a
    Jamaican citizen. But he remained a Commonwealth citizen and his status
    in the UK was unaffected. As he was already resident in the UK when the
    Commonwealth Immigrants Act 1968 came into force has immigration status
    was unaffected.

 4. As a result of his residence in the UK from 1962 or 1963, on 1  January
    1973 he  became  a  settled  person  by  operation  of  s.1(2)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.   He has never lost this status. He can  only  do
    so if he were absent from the UK for a period of more  than  two  years
    and there is nothing to suggest that has ever happened.

 5. Mr Mills said there may be some confusion as to whether the sponsor has
    ever acquired a right of abode or British citizenship. On the  evidence
    provided he has not. This is undisputed since  the  sponsor  has  never
    claimed to have a right of abode or British citizenship.

 6. In light of Mr Mills's observations, I advised Mr Sarwar that  I  would
    allow the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   Both  representatives  agreed
    that because Judge Law had failed to  make  any  relevant  findings  in
    relation to paragraph EX.1 of appendix FM  (which  must  be  considered
    since the appellant is in breach of the immigration laws and the couple
    cannot meet the financial requirements for the five-year partner route)
    the case must be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  hearing  de
    novo.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal will proceed  on  the  understanding  that  the
    sponsor is a settled person in the UK. This is because  of  Mr  Mills's
    concession. Of course, a concession can be withdrawn. It is unlikely in
    this case unless other evidence comes to light. If the concession is to
    be withdrawn, the Home  a  Office  must  provide  confirmation  of  its
    decision at least 14 days before the First-tier hears the appeal and  a
    skeleton argument.

Decision

The decision and reasons statement of Judge Law  contained  an  error  on  a
point of law and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh  hearing
before any judge other than Judge Law.

No findings of fact are preserved although the judge  hearing  the  remitted
appeal will have regard to the above comments.



                    Signed                   Date 16 September 2016

     Judge McCarthy
     Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
