
                                    [pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/26784/2015
                                                               IA/26788/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd November 2016                 |On 15th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                        Fenghao [Z] (FIRST APPELLANT)
                        Hui ji [Z] (SECOND APPELLANT)
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                             NOTICE OF DECISION

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against the decision of Judge Heynes of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 7th April 2016.

 2. The First Appellant is a female Chinese citizen born 28th January 1971,
    and the Second Appellant is her partner, a male  Chinese  citizen  born
    10th February 1963.

 3. The Appellants and their daughter, who was an Appellant before the FtT,
    but subsequently withdrew her appeal to the Upper Tribunal, applied for
    leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  10th  July  2013.   The
    application was a human rights application, based upon their family and
    private life.

 4. The Respondent refused the applications  on  14th  July  2015  and  the
    Appellants  appealed  to  the  FtT  pursuant  to  section  82  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).

 5. The FtT found that the Appellants could not satisfy the requirements of
    Appendix FM in relation to family life as neither are British citizens,
    they are not present and settled in the United Kingdom and they are not
    in this country with refugee leave or humanitarian protection.

 6. The FtT considered the Appellants'  private  lives  with  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1) noting that  they  had  not  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom  continuously  for  at  least  twenty  years  at  the  date  of
    application,  and  they  had  not  proved  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to their integration back into China.

 7. The FtT did not find that there were any compelling circumstances which
    would justify granting leave to remain pursuant to  Article  8  of  the
    1950 European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention)  outside
    the Immigration Rules.  If that conclusion were held to be  wrong,  the
    FtT considered that the Respondent's decision to refuse the Appellants'
    leave was proportionate and therefore the appeals were dismissed on all
    grounds.

 8. In relation to the Appellants'  child,  the  FtT  considered  the  best
    interests of the child at paragraphs 29-34 and concluded that the  best
    interests of the child were not served by her remaining in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 9. The FtT went on to find that if that  conclusion  was  wrong  then  the
    removal of the child would still be proportionate, as when a  balancing
    exercise was carried out in relation to proportionality, the  FtT  view
    was that "the need for proper immigration control outweighed  the  best
    interests of the child".  In reaching that conclusion the FtT took into
    account the poor immigration history of the Appellants.

10. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    and the grounds for so doing are summarised below.

11. It was contended that  the  FtT  had  erred  in  considering  the  best
    interests of the child and the proportionality of removal.   The  child
    was born in the UK on 21st April 2006, and  had  almost  completed  ten
    years' uninterrupted residence in the United Kingdom  at  the  date  of
    hearing.

12. It was contended that the FtT had erred in failing to assess whether it
    was reasonable to expect the child to leave the  United  Kingdom.   The
    FtT had not taken into account that the child had never been to  China,
    that she had no practical experience of life in China, and that she was
    born and raised in the United Kingdom.

13. In addition the child had no  experience  of  the  Chinese  educational
    system and she could speak only basic  Cantonese  and  therefore  would
    struggle to adapt to life in China.  The child  suffers  from  alopecia
    which was a medical factor that should have been properly considered.

14. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Hodgkinson in  the  following
    terms;

         "2.  The grounds argue that the judge failed adequately to consider
             what was in the Third Appellant child's best interests, failed
             to consider whether it was reasonable to expect her  to  leave
             the United Kingdom and  failed  satisfactorily  to  apply  the
             provisions of the Respondent's relevant IDI.

         3.   Having read the  judge's  decision  in  its  entirety,  it  is
             evident that nowhere therein does he  refer  to  the  question
             what is, or is not, reasonable  for  the  child,  and  nowhere
             therein does he refer to the fact that the child is, indeed, a
             qualifying child, with reference to paragraph  276ADE(iv)  and
             s117B(6) and 117D of the 2002 Act.  It is  arguable  that  the
             judge has not  satisfactorily  or  adequately  considered  all
             relevant factors, as highlighted in the  grounds,  bearing  in
             mind also that, at the date of the appeals hearing, the  child
             Appellant had lived in the United Kingdom for nearly ten years
             and was very close to being in a position  of  entitlement  to
             British citizenship.  The judge's  decision  reveals  arguable
             errors of law."

15. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In summary the Respondent contended that the  FtT  had  directed
    itself appropriately in taking into account all relevant  circumstances
    and noting the  poor  immigration  history  of  the  First  and  Second
    Appellants.  The FtT had taken into account the best interests  of  the
    child as a primary, and not a paramount consideration and  weighed  the
    best interests against the public  interest  in  maintaining  effective
    immigration control.

16. It was contended that the FtT  had  considered  the  reasonableness  of
    removing the child and her parents from the United Kingdom and  reached
    a decision open to it on the evidence.

17. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal  to  decide  whether  the  FtT  had
    materially erred in law.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

18. Both Appellants attended.  Their solicitors did  not  attend,  and  had
    advised the Tribunal in advance that they would not  be  attending.   I
    ascertained that both Appellants could communicate with the interpreter
    in Cantonese.

19. The Appellants confirmed that their daughter was not in attendance, and
    that she did not pursue her appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  because  she
    had, following the FtT hearing, been granted British citizenship.   The
    Appellants'  solicitors  had  indicated  to  the  Tribunal   that   the
    Appellants' daughter did not wish to proceed with  her  appeal,  and  I
    have issued a separate Notice of Withdrawal in relation to her.

20. The Appellants confirmed that they were aware in  advance,  that  their
    solicitors would not be attending the hearing and they were content  to
    proceed without legal representation.

21. I explained to the Appellants that I had to decide whether the FtT  had
    made a mistake of law, and I  ensured  that  they  were  aware  of  the
    representations made on their behalf by  their  solicitors,  which  had
    resulted in permission to appeal being granted.

22. Having summarised the Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal, I  asked
    the Appellants whether they wished to add anything  further,  and  they
    did not.

23. I then advised the Appellants to listen carefully to what was  said  on
    behalf of the Respondent, and I would  give  them  the  opportunity  to
    respond if they wished.

24. Mr Bates relied upon the rule 24 response.  He  pointed  out  that  the
    Appellants' daughter was not a British citizen at the date of  the  FtT
    hearing.  The FtT was aware of the length of time that  the  child  had
    been in the United Kingdom and the FtT had properly assessed  the  best
    interests of the child.  Mr Bates submitted that there was no need  for
    the FtT to make specific reference to either paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) or
    section 117B(6) if all the relevant factors had  been  considered.   In
    this case Mr  Bates  submitted  that  the  relevant  factors  had  been
    considered by the FtT and adequate reasons given for the findings made.
     Mr Bates placed reliance upon MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA  Civ  705  and
    submitted that the FtT had  correctly  approached  the  proportionality
    assessment.  I was asked to find that the  FtT  decision  disclosed  no
    material error of law.

25. I asked the Appellants if they wished to reply to what had been said on
    behalf of the Respondent, and they indicated that they did not.

26. I then reserved my decision, explaining to the Appellants that I wished
    to reflect upon what had been said, and that I would  issue  a  written
    decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

27. The appeal of the Appellants' daughter, who  was  the  Third  Appellant
    before the FtT has been withdrawn.  The challenge to the  FtT  decision
    rests upon the FtT's consideration of the child's best  interests,  and
    whether it would be reasonable for  her  to  live  outside  the  United
    Kingdom.  Although the child's appeal has been withdrawn, the challenge
    is relevant to the Appellants, as her parents.

28. The normal  course  would  have  been,  when  considering  the  child's
    interests, for the FtT to consider whether the child could benefit from
    the provisions of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)  if  she  had  lived  in  the
    United Kingdom continuously for seven years at the date of application.
     In this case the date of application was 10th July 2013, and the child
    was born in the United Kingdom on 21st April  2006  and  therefore  had
    resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  seven  years  at  the  date  of
    application, and the issue that needed to be  decided  was  whether  it
    would be reasonable to expect her to leave the United Kingdom.   It  is
    the same test as contained in section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, although
    the seven year qualifying period relates to the date of hearing  rather
    than the date of application.

29. The FtT did not specifically consider either paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) or
    section 117B(6) but notwithstanding this, I do not find  that  the  FtT
    materially erred in law for the following reasons.

30. In my view the FtT did take into  account  the  relevant  factors  when
    considering the child.  The FtT considered the best  interests  of  the
    child at paragraphs 29-34.  In ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 at paragraph
    29 it was confirmed that the best interests of a  child  broadly  means
    the well-being of the child, and this will involve asking whether it is
    reasonable to expect the child to live in another country.

31. At paragraph 47 of MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 it  was  confirmed
    that considering the best interests of a child does  not  automatically
    resolve the reasonableness question.  This is because even  if  it  was
    found to be in the  child's  best  interests  to  stay  in  the  United
    Kingdom, it may still be not  unreasonable  to  require  the  child  to
    leave.

32. In this case the FtT considered Azimi-Moayed  [2013]  UKUT  197  (IAC),
    finding that the starting point is that it is in the best interests  of
    a child to remain with both parents, even if they are  to  be  removed,
    unless there are reasons to the contrary.  The  FtT  acknowledged  that
    children should  have  the  stability  and  continuity  of  social  and
    educational provision, the benefit of growing up in the cultural  norms
    of a society to which they belong, and  that  lengthy  residence  in  a
    country other than the state of origin can lead to ties that  it  would
    be inappropriate to disrupt.  The FtT acknowledged that seven years can
    be described as a relevant period, and seven years from the age of 4 is
    likely to be more significant.

33. The FtT also took into account the guidance given in  EV  (Philippines)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

34. The FtT took into account that the child was nearly 10 years of age  at
    the date of hearing, and had always lived in the  United  Kingdom.   It
    was noted that she attends school  and  is  doing  well  and  has  made
    friends and had been brought up in a Cantonese-speaking family.  It was
    acknowledged that removal to China would cause a significant degree  of
    disruption, but it was noted  that  China  has  an  educational  system
    "capable of producing students with the  highest  qualifications",  and
    the child is a citizen of China.

35. The FtT acknowledged that the child had never visited China and clearly
    took into account that  the  child  had  always  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It was not suggested that there  were  any  relevant  medical
    conditions that could not be treated in China.  The FtT was entitled to
    find that the Appellant would have no linguistic difficulties in China.



36. In my view although another  Tribunal  may  have  reached  a  different
    conclusion, the FtT was entitled to find on  the  evidence  before  it,
    that it was not in the child's best interests to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom, and her best interests would be to remain with her parents and
    return to China.

37. I accept that the FtT  did  not  specifically  consider  the  issue  of
    reasonableness, but in reaching the conclusion that the best  interests
    of the child would be to return to China with her parents,  I  conclude
    that the issue of reasonableness must have been considered by the  FtT,
    although it would have been helpful had there been a specific reference
    to this.  However by reaching the conclusion that the best interests of
    the child would be to return to China with her parents, the FtT  in  my
    view clearly found that it would not be unreasonable for the  child  to
    return to China.

38. I therefore conclude that the FtT did not materially err in law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT did not involve the making of a material error on  a
point of law.  I do not set aside the decision.  The appeals are  dismissed.


Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FtT.  There has been no  request  for
anonymity to the Upper Tribunal.   I  see  no  need  to  make  an  anonymity
direction.


Signed   Date 7th November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeals are dismissed there are no fee awards.


Signed   Date 7th November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
