
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26048/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19th June 2014                             |On 3rd July 2014             |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                         DIANNA MAE TURINGAN YUMANG
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Respondent:    Mr S Jeshani, Counsel
For the Appellant:     Mr David Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. In this determination I will refer to the parties in the same way that
      they were referred to before the First-Tier Tribunal.
   2. The appellant is a female citizen of the  Philippines  born  10  April
      1987.  She entered the United Kingdom as a visitor in August 2009  and
      was subsequently granted further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)
      Student until January 2013.  In November 2012  the  appellant  applied
      for variation of her leave to remain and on 19 June  2013  a  decision
      was made to refuse the appellant's application and to  remove  her  by
      way of directions under Section 47 of Immigration Asylum & Nationality
      Act 2006.  The appellant appealed that decision.

   3. The appellant's appeal came before Judge of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      James on 27 November  2013.   The  appellant  was  represented  by  Mr
      Jeshani.  The Home Office was also represented.  Paragraph 12  of  the
      judge's determination records  that  Mr  Jeshani,  on  behalf  of  the
      appellant, confirmed that she could not meet the requirements  of  the
      Immigration Rules  in  terms  of  family  or  private  life  and  that
      consequently the appeal before Judge James related only to  Article  8
      ECHR.  For reasons set out in the determination  the  judge  dismissed
      the appeal under the Immigration Rules  but  allowed  the  appeal  "on
      human rights grounds".

   4. Paragraph  40  of  the  judge's  determination  records  "I  regard  a
      proportionate  implementation  of  the  decision  would  be  for   the
      respondent to vary the appellants leave by a  period  of  3  years  to
      enable her to remain in the United Kingdom on  a  discretionary  basis
      outside the Immigration Rules".

   5. The respondent then sought leave to appeal.  There is one  allegation,
      namely "making a material misdirection of law".   This  allegation  is
      explained by way of four paragraphs.  It is suggested that allowing an
      Article 8 appeal should only happen where an appellants  circumstances
      are found to be "exceptional or very  compelling".   It  is  suggested
      that this appellants circumstances do not  amount  to  exceptional  or
      very compelling.  The appellant has  family  in  the  Philippines  and
      could rely upon financial assistance from her  parents  (presently  in
      the UK) and that any right of the appellant must  be  weighed  against
      the public interest.

   6. In granting leave to appeal another Judge of the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      gave the following as reasons:

         "1.  The respondent seeks permission to appeal, in time, against  a
      decision  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge   James   who,   in   a
      determination promulgated on 29 November 2013 allowed the  appellant's
      appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse to vary leave.  The
      appeal under the Immigration Rules was dismissed but  the  appeal  was
      allowed under Article 8 ECHR.

      2.  The grounds argue that the judge erred in his  assessment  of  the
      evidence in support of the Article 8 appeal and in his analysis of the
      law.


      3.  Given the Tribunal's decision in Gulshan (Article 8 - New Rules  -
      Correct Approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 it  is  arguable  that  the  judge
      misdirected himself as to the correct approach to Article 8.
   7. On behalf of the appellant Mr Jeshani drafted a response under Rule 24
      of the Upper Tribunal Procedure  Rules.   That  response  contains  14
      paragraphs wherein he  argues  that  the  judge  was  correct  in  her
      approach and that her decision should stand.  In particular Mr Jeshani
      relies upon the case of Patel & Others v Secretary of  State  for  the
      Home Department [2013] UKSC 72 and the principles set out in  Huang  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] UKHL 11.  Mr Jeshani
      (at paragraph 7) refers to MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State  for  the
      Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.

   8. At paragraph 8 of the response Mr Jeshani noted  the  new  Immigration
      Rules with effect  from  9  July  2012  but  highlighted  the  primary
      legislation contained in the Human Rights Act 1998 and the Nationality
      Immigration & Asylum Act 2002.

   9. At paragraph 11 Mr Jeshani noted that the judge had  not  referred  to
      Gulshan (Article 8 - New Rules - Correct Approach) [2013]  UKUT  00640
      he argues that the judge would have reached the  same  conclusion  and
      that as a result she did not make any material errors of  law  in  the
      determination.

  10. At the commencement of the hearing before me Mr Jeshani confirmed that
      his client was present and that  she  understood  the  nature  of  the
      proceedings.  An Interpreter was not required.  I enquired as  to  the
      existence of a Rule 24 response.  No such document was  on  the  court
      file.  Mr Jeshani supplied me with a copy the contents  of  which  had
      been referred to above.

  11.  Each  representative  then  made  a  submission.   A  note  of  those
      submissions is contained within the record of proceedings but  I  will
      summarise them as follows.

  12. Mr Mills emphasised that there was a difference  with  regard  to  the
      application of Article 8 under a case decided under the  "New  Rules".
      In this case the rules  could  not  be  met  and  the  respondent  now
      contends that the approach set out in paragraph 13 was not the correct
      approach.  There was no longer a "free wheeling"  approach.   The  new
      rules encompassed most situations/cases.  It was conceded  that  there
      will be cases falling outside the rules but one can  only  go  outside
      the rules when compelling or exceptional circumstances exist.

  13. Mr Mills suggested that this was a prime case of a judge  allowing  an
      appeal under Article 8 in a situation not open to her.  The  appellant
      was 26 years of age and wishes to remain with her parents.  There  has
      been financial dependency upon them  but  there  is  simply  a  normal
      relationship that exists.  There  is  nothing  compelling.   Mr  Mills
      referred to the Rule 24 response and the case  quoted  of  Patel.   He
      pointed out that that was not a case involving the "New Rules".  There
      was nothing more than  normal  ties  between  the  appellant  and  her
      parents and Mr Mills referred to the Court of Appeal case of Kugathas.
       He referred me to paragraph 38 of the  determination  which  he  said
      contained an astonishing statement.  The judge had said  that  it  was
      hard to conclude that the decision in this case  was  necessary  in  a
      democratic society nor could it be justified.  The judge had  put  too
      much weight on the appellants skills.  The appellant's occupation  was
      not on the "shortage list".  Mr Mills submitted that I should come  to
      the conclusion that the judge was wrong and set the decision aside.

  14. Mr Jeshani referred to the Rule 24 response.  He pointed out  that  at
      the time of the hearing before Judge James the case of Gulshan had not
      been promulgated so how could she follow it?  He accepted the case  of
      Patel did not look at a case under the "New Rules" but whether it  was
      old rules or new rules they were  only  rules.  No  statues  had  been
      repealed in particular Section 84, no test had been  put  forward  for
      "exceptional circumstances".  Mr Jeshani did not accept  that  Gulshan
      was just stating the law.  In this case Judge James  had  taken  great
      care.  There were emotional ties and the  judge  found  the  witnesses
      credible.  He referred to  paragraph  11  of  the  response  and  also
      referred to the Scottish case of MMM and in  particular  paragraph  35
      where Lady Scott found  that  a  failure  to  comply  with  the  rules
      remained the starting point where any Article  8  enquiry.   The  test
      should be whether or not there was a realistic prospect of success and
      in this case the decision of Judge James should stand as there was  no
      material error of law.

  15. In response Mr Mills conceded that Section 84 still  remained  but  it
      should be rare case that succeeds under Article 8.   This  was  a  far
      from compelling case and the judge  had  not  engaged  with  a  proper
      examination.

  16. Mr Jeshani concluded by saying that the judge had properly adopted the
      Five Stage Razgar Test.

  17. At this stage I announced my decision that I found a material error of
      law contained within the judge's determination and that  as  a  result
      the decision must be set aside and remade.

  18. I would emphasise at this stage that Judge James cannot be  criticised
      in any way for failing to take into account the case of Gulshan.  That
      case had not been promulgated at the time  of  Judge  James  decision.
      However Gulshan cannot be ignored  in  this  case.   Gulshan  did  not
      change the law but it did explain the law in the way that  cases  such
      as this must be dealt with where a claim is made in respect of Article
      8 ECHR and the Immigration Rules.

  19. The judge was required to consider the  merits  of  the  human  rights
      claim in accordance with the approach set out by the Court  of  Appeal
      in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, the High Court in  Nagre  [2013]
      EWHC 720 (Admin) and subsequently by the Upper Tribunal in Gulshan, as
      confirmed by Shahzad (Article 8: Legitimate Claim) [2014]  UKUT  00085
      (IAC).  These judgments have  made  it  clear  that  the  question  of
      proportionality must be looked at in the context  of  the  Immigration
      Rules with no need to go onto a specific assessment under Article 8 if
      it is clear from the facts that there are no particular compelling  or
      exceptional circumstances requiring that course  to  be  taken.   This
      approach has now been further confirmed by the Court of Appeal in  the
      more recent case of Haleemundeen v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2014] EWCA Civ 558.

  20. Again it is the case that Judge James did  not  have  the  benefit  of
      these cases at the time of the hearing before her.  She did  correctly
      direct herself so far as MF (Nigeria) was concerned  and  she  adopted
      the five step approach as set out in Razgar and noted the question  of
      ties as set out in Kugathas.  However the  judge  was  conscious  that
      this was a case under the new rules and I consider that she  erred  in
      failing to properly take into account what has been described  as  the
      Article 8 consideration contained  within  the  rules  themselves.  In
      doing so  she  has  not  explained  what  she  considered  to  be  the
      exceptional elements so as to take the case into the area for specific
      assessment under Art 8.  I also conclude  that  the  judge  fell  into
      error in her assessment of the public interest element  Mr  Mills  was
      correct in identifying the comments contained in paragraph 38  of  the
      determination.

  21. For these reasons I conclude that the judge fell into error in the way
      she dealt with this case and that such errors  were  material  to  the
      eventual outcome.  The decision therefore falls to be set aside.

  22. In remaking the decision I took into account the submissions  made  by
      the representatives following the announcement of my decision  to  set
      aside the judge's determination.   A  note  of  those  submissions  is
      contained in the record of proceedings but in  summary  the  following
      submissions were made.

  23. Mr Mills said there was no challenge to  the  strong  connections  the
      appellant had with her parents but it was  disputed  that  that  would
      engage Article 8.  It is not disputed that the appellant has family in
      the United Kingdom but she also has other family in  the  Philippines.
      It was acknowledged that the appellant could  get  employment  in  the
      United Kingdom but it is disputed that she could not get employment in
      the Philippines.  There is no reason to suppose that the parents could
      not provide  financial  support  in  the  future.  There  was  nothing
      compelling within the appellant's case to find Article  8  is  engaged
      outside the rules.

  24. Mr Jeshani adopted his skeleton argument before Judge James.   I  note
      that document runs to some 29 paragraphs.  It sets out the issues  and
      the law and emphasises  the  family  life  enjoyed  by  the  appellant
      together with private life (paragraph 24) and at paragraphs 17 and  25
      Mr Jeshani sets out his submissions on proportionality.

  25. Before me Mr Jeshani  argued  there  were  compelling  reasons  to  go
      outside the rules as in this case it  would  result  in  unduly  harsh
      consequences for the appellant.  The findings of the First-Tier  Judge
      could be preserved and he referred me to witness statements  contained
      in the original bundle.  He submitted there were far more than  normal
      emotional ties.  The appellant had no siblings nor grandparents in the
      Philippines and there was no one there that she could depend upon.  It
      would not be reasonable to expect her to return.  The appellant  could
      have expected to continue in the United Kingdom with  her  career  but
      the rules had changed and there was  no  longer  an  urgent  need  for
      people in her profession.

  26. At this stage I indicated that I would reserve my determination.

  27. In remaking this decision I  have  noted  the  date  of  the  original
      respondent's decision.  The application fell to  be  considered  under
      the "New" Immigration Rules in force since July  2012.   I  also  note
      that it is not  an  issue  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
      requirements of those rules especially in terms of family  or  private
      life.  This was accepted in the appeal before Judge James and recorded
      at paragraph 12 of her determination.

  28. The required consideration that I must give to the appellant's case is
      summarised in paragraph  19 above.

  29. In short I have to consider whether there are particular compelling or
      exceptional circumstances in the appellant's case before I can go to a
      specific assessment under Article 8 ECHR.  Whilst I note the  comments
      made with regard to the Supreme Court case of  Patel  I  am  conscious
      that that was decided without reference to the new rules and for  that
      reason I restrict myself with the requirement  set  out  paragraph  19
      above.

  30. I have considered the statements and other documents that were set out
      in the appellant's original bundle.

  31. The appellant is 26 years of age and spent 22 years of  that  time  in
      the Philippines.  She entered the United Kingdom as a visitor and then
      went on to become a student.  She claims  to  be  dependent  upon  her
      parents who are British citizens.  That dependency involves the simple
      and normal emotional ties between an  adult  child  and  her  parents.
      There is no evidence before me that those emotional  ties  exceed  the
      normal.  It  is  correct  that  the  appellant  has  been  financially
      dependent upon her parents but again I find  that  normal  bearing  in
      mind that they have assisted her financially  during  her  time  as  a
      student and in work training.  That would be normal for any parent  in
      such a situation assuming that they have the financial means to do so.
       In short those ties do not exceed the normal.

  32. Nothing has been placed before me that suggests that the appellant  is
      under any form of disability or that she needs  any  form  of  special
      assistance.

  33. The appellant has spent the majority of her life in  the  Philippines.
      She did have grandparents but sadly that is no  longer  the  case  but
      there is reference to other relatives in that country.

  34. The appellant is in possession of a university degree.  It  is  argued
      by her that she would not find it  easy  to  gain  employment  in  her
      chosen field in the Philippines.  I do  not  necessarily  accept  that
      contention.  The appellant is clearly educated and has some experience
      in healthcare and that must put her in a better position  than  others
      when comes to seeking employment.

  35. The appellant's parents have assisted her financially and there is  no
      reason why that could not continue if it were necessary  even  if  the
      appellant is living in the Philippines.  It is  indeed  arguable  that
      any financial contribution made by the parents would be worth more  in
      real terms in the Philippines than it would be in the United Kingdom.

  36. I acknowledge that I must also, to an extent, consider the position of
      the appellant's parents but there is nothing to stop them visiting the
      appellant in the Philippines or continuing to  communicate  by  modern
      means.

  37. The all important question before me is whether there  any  particular
      compelling  or  exceptional   circumstances   requiring   a   specific
      assessment under Article 8.  In this case the answer is no.

  38. The appellant's appeal is therefore dismissed.

  39. By reasons of this decision I reverse the fee award made by the First-
      Tier Tribunal Judge.




Signed                                  Date  1/7/14


Upper Tribunal Judge Poole

