
IAC-TH-CP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/26898/2014
                                                               IA/26899/2014
                                                               IA/26891/2014
                                                               IA/26894/2014
                                                               IA/26895/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 February 2015                  |On 4 March 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Dara Faramade Okusaga
                               Abraham Okusaga
           (and three children: Samuel, Smith, and Sandra Okusaga)
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr A Seelhoff, Solicitor, of A Seelhoff Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   These are appeals that were allowed at the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the  Secretary  of  State.   For
    clarity and convenience, however, I will refer to the parties  in  this
    decision as they were at the First-tier.

2.   The appellants are a Nigerian family.  The first  two  appellants,  the
    parents, are long-term overstayers of visit visas.   The  children  are
    aged 15, 10, and 7.  The oldest has been in the UK for thirteen  years;
    the middle child for nine years; and the youngest was born  in  the  UK
    and is soon to be 8.  Their appeals were allowed by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge McWilliam, in a decision promulgated on 19  November  2014.   She
    allowed the appeals of the children under the Immigration  Rules,  with
    reference to paragraph 276ADE.  The appeals of the parents were allowed
    on Article 8 grounds, but with reference  to  section  117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as  amended  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014).

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Davidge,
    on 8 January 2015.  The grounds seeking permission to  appeal  referred
    to the Azimi-Moayed and EV (Philippines) cases,  and  argued  that  the
    judge had taken a fundamentally flawed approach which  had  led  to  an
    inadequate balancing exercise.  The grant of permission was as follows:
    "On the face of the short reasoning provided by the judge  the  grounds
    are at least arguable."

4.   Mr Seelhoff, for the appellants, provided a Rule 24 response  dated  21
    January 2015.  This included an extract from the debate in the House of
    Lords about the clause that became section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

5.   Mr Avery, for the Secretary of  State,  referred  to  Azimi-Moayed  and
    Others (Decisions  affecting  children:  onward  appeals)  [2013]  UKUT
    00197, and the Court of Appeal case of EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ
    874.  His main submission was that  the  judge  had  not  followed  the
    correct reasoning steps to be found in these cases.  The starting point
    should have been that it was in the best interests of the  children  to
    leave the UK with their parents.  In addition the reasoning  was  thin,
    so it could not be said whether a different decision  would  have  been
    reached if all of the factors had been taken into account.

6.    Mr  Seelhoff,  for  the  appellants,  made  two  main  points  in  his
    submissions.  The first was that it was clear  from  the  decision,  at
    paragraphs 34 and 37, that the judge had given proper consideration  to
    the immigration history of the parents, which she referred to as  being
    "extremely unattractive".  Her decision could not be criticised for not
    having taken into account or given weight to this factor.   His  second
    main point was that the facts were unusually strong.  The oldest  child
    was doing well at school and was close to his GCSEs.  He  had  been  in
    school for ten of the thirteen years that he had been in  the  UK,  and
    all three children had now passed the seven year mark.  If this was not
    a case that would succeed under paragraph 276ADE  and  section  117B(6)
    then it is hard to see what case would, and  the  judge's  decision  in
    allowing the appeal was in effect the  only  one  that  any  reasonable
    judge could reach.  There had been no criticism of the judge's reliance
    on section 117B(6) and 117D of the  2002  Act.   The  relatively  short
    reasoning was justified because the  conclusion  was  obvious.   Having
    identified the relevant case law and the relevant facts it  was  not  a
    proper approach to infer that the judge had not applied the correct law
    to the facts.

Error of Law

7.   As I indicated at the hearing I have decided that no material error  of
    law has been established.

8.   The point was made by both representatives that the  reasoning  in  the
    decision was brief.  I accept  the  submission  made  by  Mr  Seelhoff,
    however, that the reasoning was not inadequate in view  of  the  facts,
    and in view of the relatively  uncontentious  outcome.   I  accept  the
    point that he made that the position  of  the  oldest  child,  who  had
    reached such an important stage of his education in the UK, led to  the
    relatively uncontroversial finding that it would not be  reasonable  at
    this stage to expect  him  to  leave  the  UK,  without  the  need  for
    extensive reasoning in support.

9.   It may be that in the  brief  reasoning  the  judge  did  not  separate
    clearly two different aspects.  The first was whether it was reasonable
    to expect the children to leave the UK, and the second was whether  the
    parents could  successfully  resist  removal  on  the  basis  of  their
    children's best interests.  The end point of  the  reasoning  was  that
    both the children and the parents should be permitted to remain in  the
    UK, but it could be said that the two stages were not clearly separated
    in the decision.

10.  That concern does, however, appear to  me  to  be  a  relatively  minor
    quibble that falls well short of establishing  an  error  of  law,  let
    alone a material one.  It appears to me  that  this  was  a  relatively
    straightforward and uncontentious decision under paragraph  276ADE  and
    with reference to section 117B of the 2002 Act.  There is no  need  for
    me to consider the issue of whether it would  have  been  open  to  the
    judge to reach a different  decision  on  these  facts,  but  it  could
    certainly be said that any decision in  relation  to  a  child  in  the
    position of the oldest child in this case other than that it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect him or her to leave the UK would be  surprising,
    and potentially open to challenge.

11.  Having looked carefully at the steps  identified  in  the  Azimi-Moayed
    case I cannot see that anything in the judge's decision can properly be
    said to amount to a failure to follow  the  legal  principles  in  that
    case.  The same can be said of EV Philippines, which was in  any  event
    not directly concerned with children who had been in the UK for  longer
    than seven years.

12.  It was not suggested  that  there  was  any  need  for  anonymity,  and
    despite the involvement of the children I can see no particular  reason
    in this appeal to justify an anonymity order.  No fee award  was  made,
    and in any event no issue could arise in relation to a fee award.



Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  is  dismissed.   No
material error of  law  having  been  shown  in  it,  the  judge's  decision
allowing the appeals remains undisturbed.



Signed        Date 3 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb

