
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26421/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th December 2017                         |On 19th January 2018          |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              ms FANDEEP BADHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Bellara (Counsel) instructed by Louis Kennedy
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a citizen of India whose date of birth is recorded as
    18th November 1987.  On or about 27th July 2015 application was made on
    her behalf for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on  the  basis  of
    her private life.  A decision was made to refuse  the  application  and
    the Respondent appealed. The appeal was heard by Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Dr Majid sitting at Taylor House on 14th June  2017.   He
    allowed the appeal.

 2. Not content with that the decision, by Notice dated  11th  August  2017
    the Secretary of State made application for permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal. In summary, the grounds submit that the judge took into
    account irrelevant  matters.   I  would  go  further  having  read  the
    decision and indeed noted on the front of the file that the decision of
    the judge was rambling and incomprehensible.  It  is  unfortunate  that
    the Respondent has been put through this and will, I find, need  to  go
    through the matter again.

 3. Mr Bellara quite properly told me that he  was  under  instructions  to
    protect the decision although he was in some difficulties in  advancing
    the Respondent's case.  He was realistic.

 4. I have no hesitation whatsoever in saying  that  this  decision  simply
    cannot stand.  It is so fundamentally flawed that it would be  a  waste
    of the Tribunal's time for me to go through in detail  what  the  flaws
    are.  In many ways, they are replications if there is such  a  word  of
    those matters already identified by the panel who  heard  a  sample  of
    this judge's cases in June 2017 (AA/06906/2014 & Ors).

 5. The decision is set aside.  The matter will be remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be heard afresh by a judge other than Dr Majid.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 17 January 2018










Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker


