
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26349/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th September 2016                        |On 12th October 2016          |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                    A.A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Iqbal, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. There has been
no application to remove that direction. It is therefore appropriate to
continue that direction.




                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Pakistan (born  1st  April  1987),  appeals
    with permission against the decision of a  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Holmes) dismissing his appeal against the Respondent's refusal to grant
    him leave to remain in the UK on account of his Article 8  ECHR  rights
    as the spouse of a British citizen.

 2. The Appellant's immigration history is as follows.  The Appellant first
    entered the UK on 24th May 2010 as a Tier 4 student with a valid  grant
    of entry clearance until 20th August 2011.   He  became  an  overstayer
    upon the expiry  of  that  leave.   He  then  made  an  application  to
    regularise his  status  on  26th  January  2012  which  was  ultimately
    successful and a grant of leave to remain in the capacity of a  Tier  4
    student was later made, expiring on 3rd July 2014.

 3. The Appellant and the Sponsor married on 23rd April  2014  [Appellant's
    bundle page 6].

 4. The Appellant applied to vary his leave as a spouse on 1st  July  2014,
    but this application was refused  for  a  variety  of  reasons,  and  a
    Section 47 removal decision was  made  in  relation  to  him,  on  15th
    January 2015.  His appeal against  these  decisions  was  dismissed  on
    appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer under the Immigration Rules,
    and also on Article 8 grounds.  His appeal  rights  were  exhausted  in
    relation to these decisions on 18th May 2015.

 5. Rather than depart the UK, and make an entry clearance application from
    Pakistan as a spouse, as Judge Saffer had clearly suggested  he  do  in
    the course of considering the proportionality of the removal  decision,
    the Appellant chose to remain in the UK.  On 4th June 2015  he  applied
    on human rights grounds for a grant of leave to  remain  as  a  spouse.
    This application was refused on 8th July 2015  because  the  Respondent
    was of the view the Appellant had failed to show  that  his  article  8
    right to family/private life would be  breached  as  a  result  of  the
    decision. The refusal decision contained  a  Section  120  notice.  The
    Appellant appealed to the FtT. The FtT, the appeal was dismissed.

Onward appeal

 6. The  Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal.   The  grounds  seeking
    permission claimed that the FtT had materially erred in this way:

         The  sole  issue  of  refusal  by  the  Respondent  was  under  the
         provisions of the Immigration Rules under  Appendix  FM  E-LTRP4.1.
         The grounds assert that the FtT correctly stated that the Appellant
         under the  transitional  provision  arrangements  met  the  English
         language  requirement,  but  nevertheless  applying   the   current
         jurisprudence brought in by the changes  implemented  by  the  2014
         Act, found that the Respondent's  decision  did  not  amount  to  a
         disproportionate interference with the Appellant's Article 8 rights
         and accordingly dismissed the appeal.  It is claimed that this  was
         an error because it was contrary to natural justice.

 7. Permission  was  granted  and  the  relevant  parts  of  the  grant  of
    permission read as follows:

         "1.  Permission is sought to appeal, in time, the decision of First-
             tier  Tribunal  Judge  J  M  Holmes,  dated  29  March   2016,
             dismissing the appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
             decision to refuse to grant him leave to remain in the  United
             Kingdom  on  human  rights  grounds,  with  reference  to  the
             appellant's  relationship  with  his  British  partner.   With
             reference to  the  'partner  route'  under  Appendix  FM,  the
             respondent appears to have refused the appellant's application
             solely with reference to the English language requirement  (E-
             LTRP.4.1).

         2.   The grounds argue that, the Judge having  concluded  that  the
             appellant's submitted English language  test  certificate  met
             the requirements of the (unspecified) transitional  provisions
             of the Rules, he then fell into error in concluding  that  the
             respondent's decision was a proportionate one, the sole  valid
             ground of appeal being that the decision  was  unlawful  under
             the HRA 1998.  Bearing in mind that  the  relevant  Article  8
             Rules reflect the proportionality balance,  the  grounds  have
             arguable merit."

    Thus the matter comes before me  to  determine  initially  whether  the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains  such  error  of  law
    requiring it to be set aside and re-made.

Error of Law Hearing

 8. Before me Mr Iqbal appeared for the Appellant; Mrs  Pettersen  for  the
    Respondent.  Mr Iqbal's submissions essentially amounted to a  reliance
    on the grounds seeking permission.  He submitted that the sole issue of
    refusal by the Respondent  was  that  the  Appellant  did  not  provide
    evidence to establish that he met  the  English  language  requirement.
    The judge in his proportionality  assessment,  should  have  recognised
    that  factor  which  resulted  in  the  Respondent   disproportionately
    concluding that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the  English  language
    requirement. In fact it would seem  he  did  and  this  of  itself  was
    sufficiently compelling reason to conclude that under the fifth limb of
    the Razgar  test  the  Respondent's  decision  was  a  disproportionate
    interference with the Appellant's family life.

 9. Ms Pettersen responded by serving a Rule 24 response.  She kept to  the
    lines of that response.  She  submitted  that  Mr  Iqbal's  submissions
    amounted to no more than a disagreement with  Judge  Holmes'  findings.
    She emphasised that  what  was  before  the  judge  was  an  Article  8
    consideration only. The judge had focused on  that  aspect  as  he  was
    bound to do.  She referred to [24] and submitted  that  the  judge  had
    correctly set out what was before him.  She referred to  that  part  of
    [24] where the judge had expressly set out that a claimant may  succeed
    in showing that their application should have been allowed  as  meeting
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules at the date of decision,  and
    yet fail to succeed in an Article 8 appeal, because they are unable  to
    show that the decision under  appeal  was  disproportionate  one  under
    Article 8.  That was the task which the judge had before him.   He  had
    clearly taken into account the factors he  was  obliged  to  take  into
    account and had set out fully his findings on the  evidence.   He  gave
    full  reasons  why  he  found  the  Respondent's  decision  to   be   a
    proportionate one under Article 8 ECHR.  The decision  was  a  properly
    reasoned one and was one open to the judge on the  available  evidence.



Consideration and Discussion

10. My first task is to decide whether or not, the FtT can be said to  have
    erred in law requiring the decision to be set aside and re-made.

11. I am conscious that what was before the judge was  an  Article  8  ECHR
    appeal only.  The Appellant through his representative accepted at  the
    hearing before the FtT that following the changes  implemented  by  the
    2014 Act, the only route available  to  the  Appellant  was  an  appeal
    within the context of Article 8.

12. In [22] to [24] the judge takes great care to point out that  what  was
    before him was an Article 8 claim only.  He points out at [24] that  it
    is plain that an appeal with the new limited Grounds of  Appeal  cannot
    simply be argued and determined on the basis that the decision was  not
    in accordance with the law, under the guise of cloak  of  a  conclusion
    that the decision under appeal is disproportionate within  the  context
    of an Article 8 appeal.

13. I find force therefore in Ms Pettersen's submissions that  the  judge's
    decision is a carefully crafted and thorough one.  He has  focused,  as
    he was bound to do so, on the issue before him; which was  whether  the
    Respondent's decision to refuse the Appellant's leave to remain  was  a
    disproportionate one.

14. The difficulty for the Appellant as the judge pointed out was  that  in
    any Article 8 consideration he was bound to give effect to the  changes
    implemented by the 2014 Act.

15. Furthermore, the judge acknowledged  at  [23]  that  it  appeared  that
    transitional arrangements existed which meant that the English language
    test results of the type held by the Appellant were to be  accepted  by
    the Respondent as evidence that the  language  requirements  were  met.
    However, he gave full consideration to that in [32].

16. As this was an Article 8 application and appeal  only,  the  judge  was
    obliged, as he said, to look at matters in the round through the  prism
    of the Section 117 stipulations set out in the Rules.

17. Having done so he has  arrived  at  conclusions  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence.  I find that the Appellant's application amounts to  no  more
    than a disagreement with the judge's  findings.  the  judge's  decision
    stands.  This appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     12 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     12 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

