
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/26901/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 May 2016                                |On 01 August 2016            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR SYED ADEEL HASSAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Bukhari, Bukhari Chambers Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision by Judge
    of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Scott  allowing  an  appeal  under   the
    Immigration Rules by Mr Syed Adeel Hassan (hereinafter referred  to  as
    "the claimant").

 2) The claimant was born on  11  September  1981  and  is  a  national  of
    Pakistan.  He arrived in the UK in August 2004  as  a  student.   After
    various extensions as a student he was granted leave  to  remain  as  a
    Tier 1 (Post-Study) Migrant until January 2014.  He made an application
    in time for indefinite leave to remain in the UK on the basis  of  long
    residence.  This application was refused by the Secretary of  State  on
    22 April 2014.

 3) In the view of the Secretary of State the claimant did not qualify  for
    indefinite leave on the basis of long residence in terms  of  paragraph
    276B of the Immigration Rules.  In terms of  paragraph  276B(i)(a)  the
    claimant had to show that he had at least 10 years'  continuous  lawful
    residence in the UK.  In terms of paragraph 276B(v) the  claimant  must
    not be in the UK in breach of immigration laws except that  any  period
    of overstaying for a period of 28 days or less would be disregarded, as
    would any period of overstaying between  periods  of  entry  clearance,
    leave to enter or leave to remain of up to 28 days and  any  period  of
    overstaying pending the determination of  an  application  made  within
    that 28 day period.  In terms of  paragraph  276A,  "lawful  residence"
    means residence which is continuous residence pursuant, so far as  this
    application is concerned, to existing leave to enter or remain.

 4) In considering the application the Secretary of State noted  that  both
    at the date of the  application  and  the  date  of  the  decision  the
    claimant had been in the UK for less than 10 years.   In  addition,  in
    terms of lawful residence, one of his grants of leave had expired on 30
    September 2007.  An application for leave made on 25 September 2007 had
    been rejected as invalid on 5 October 2007 due  to  missing  supporting
    documents.  The claimant received this notice of rejection on 9 October
    2007.  He made a valid application for leave on 14  November  2007,  40
    days after the rejection of his invalid application and 36  days  after
    he was deemed to have received notice of that rejection  on  9  October
    2007.  The valid application was granted on 13 July 2008.

 5) In part because of this gap in 2007 the Secretary of State  found  that
    the claimant did not have continuous lawful residence for 10  years  or
    more.  Account was taken of  Home  Office  published  guidance  to  the
    effect that short gaps of lawful residence of no more than 28 days will
    be ignored and that discretion may be exercised in relation to a single
    application more than 28 days out of time where there  are  exceptional
    circumstances.  Examples of  exceptional  circumstances  given  in  the
    guidance are a postal strike, hospitalisation, or administrative  error
    by  the  Home  Office.   As  the  claimant  had  not  referred  to  any
    exceptional circumstances, it was decided  that  the  exercise  of  the
    discretion did not arise in this case.

 6) The Secretary of State  went  on  to  consider  the  application  under
    Appendix FM and under paragraph 276ADE but the claimant  did  not  meet
    any of the requirements of these provisions.

 7) Finally, the Secretary of State considered the claimant's  position  as
    an "informal carer" for his aunt, Mrs Saleha Khan,  who  is  a  British
    citizen and suffered an accident in 2006.  It was noted that  the  aunt
    has NHS carers who visit her 3 times a day.  She  lives  alone  and  is
    able to mobilise with a stick.  There  are  other  nieces  and  nephews
    present and settled in the UK  who  could  assist  her.   The  claimant
    visits her on an occasional basis only.   There  were  no  sufficiently
    compelling or compassionate circumstances  to  justify  granting  leave
    outside the Rules.

 8) At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal it was  not  disputed  by
    the claimant that his application of 14 November 2007 was made 36  days
    out of time, which was 8 days beyond the 28 day period which  falls  to
    be ignored under the  Immigration  Rules.   The  question  was  one  of
    whether discretion in the Home  Office  guidance  ought  to  have  been
    exercised in favour of the claimant.

 9) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal accepted  that  at  the  time  the
    claimant overstayed he had ceased living at his  uncle's  house,  where
    notification of the rejection of his application of 25  September  2007
    was sent.  After he left that address he became aware that  an  attempt
    had been made to deliver a registered letter to him there, but  he  did
    not know its contents and it was 10-12  days  later  that  he  went  to
    collect the Royal Mail delivery card from his uncle's house and  go  to
    the appropriate office to collect the letter.  He  delayed  because  he
    was attending college at the time.  By the time he received  notice  of
    the rejection of his original application he had lost more than 8 days,
    the period by which he later exceeded the 28 day  period.   There  were
    obstacles in the way of the claimant obtaining the necessary  documents
    to support a fresh application, including the illness of his parents in
    Pakistan.  The Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  that  the
    claimant  progressed  matters  as  quickly  as  possible.   The   judge
    concluded that discretion ought to have been exercised in favour of the
    applicant and the appeal should therefore be allowed.

10) The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State on the basis that there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances  to
    warrant the appeal being allowed.   The  failure  by  the  claimant  to
    produce the relevant documents with his first application and the  fact
    that  he  had  changed  his  address  did  not  constitute  exceptional
    circumstances.  The claimant was under  an  obligation  to  notify  any
    change of address to the Home Office and his failure to  do  so  should
    not count in his favour, especially given his experience by making  six
    earlier claims.

11) Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not set out  what  evidence
    the judge had taken into account or make  any  finding  as  to  whether
    there was anything exceptional which would have justified the Secretary
    of State exercising her discretion differently.

12) A further issue was raised at the start of the hearing before me.   The
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had found in favour of the claimant in
    terms of a discretion which was not conferred by the Immigration  Rules
    but was conferred by Home Office guidance outside the Rules.  In  terms
    of section 84(1)(f) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002, the judge had power only to allow the  appeal  where  the  person
    taking the decision should  have  exercised  differently  a  discretion
    conferred by the Immigration Rules.  Where the discretion  was  outside
    the Rules, it was open only to the judge to make findings of  fact  and
    then ask the Secretary of State to exercise her discretion outwith  the
    Rules.

Submissions

13) Mr Wilding referred to the Home Office guidance of 8 May 2015  on  long
    residence.  The claimant could only succeed if the discretionary  power
    in the guidance was ignored but the decision  maker  did  consider  the
    guidance.  Mr Wilding relied on the case of Abdi  [1996]  Imm  AR  148.
    The finding of the Secretary  of  State  was  that  there  was  nothing
    exceptional about this case.

14) Mr Wilding continued  that  the  judge  had  compounded  the  error  by
    allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules.  The claimant had  not
    been here for 10 years residence.  The best decision  the  judge  could
    have made from the point of view of the claimant was that the Secretary
    of State's decision was not in accordance with  the  law.   Mr  Wilding
    said he was not sure if a case was being pursued under Article 8.

15) The point was made that the claimant has now been  in  the  UK  for  11
    years.  Mr Wilding pointed out that this appeal  pre-dated  the  coming
    into force of the Immigration Act 2014.  Even  if  the  claimant  could
    show more than 10 years' residence there was still the question of  the
    gap in 2007.

16) For the claimant, Mr Bukhari submitted that the decision of  the  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal although  short  was  complete.   The  judge
    accepted that at the date of decision there  was  less  than  10  years
    residence.  The judge considered the gap of 36 days and looked  at  the
    circumstances.  In finding in favour of the claimant the judge was  not
    making a discretionary decision but  deciding  whether  discretion  was
    correctly exercised.  In his first  application  the  claimant  made  a
    simple error by failing to submit a bank statement, which he had in his
    possession.  Although the Secretary of State referred to  the  claimant
    as having made six applications, he had only made one before 2007.   It
    was  for  the  judge  to  decide   whether   there   were   exceptional
    circumstances in relation to the gap while the claimant made a  further
    application.   These  circumstances  were  not  within  the  claimant's
    control.  The examples given in the guidance were only  examples.   The
    guidance was not part of the Immigration Rules.

17) Mr Bukhari continued that the judge had not usurped the decision of the
    Home Office.  The judge had said the decision ought  to  be  different.
    The judge was not exercising discretion but simply passing judgment  on
    the wrong exercise of discretion.

18) Mr Bukhari said an Article 8 case  was  advanced  but  because  of  the
    decision under 276ADE the Article 8 case was not expounded upon  before
    the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  judge  limited  the  decision  to  the
    Immigration Rules.  If, however, the claimant did not  meet  the  Rules
    then compassionate grounds ought to be considered.   The  claimant  had
    been on track for 10 years residence for  settlement.   There  were  no
    criminal convictions or  other  problems.   His  disabled  aunt  relied
    heavily upon him.  The claimant was her main carer.   If  the  decision
    was set aside, Mr Bukhari said he would seek a  further  hearing  under
    Article 8.

19) Mr Wilding responded that it was clear  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had exceeded his  powers.   The  discretion  in  question  was
    outside the Rules.  The lawfulness of the decision  would  only  be  in
    question if the policy had not been considered.   It  was  pointed  out
    that half a page of the refusal letter was taken up with  the  exercise
    of this discretion.  Mr Wilding said the judge  could  not  reach  this
    decision on his own and certainly could not allow the appeal under  the
    Immigration Rules.

20) Finally, Mr Bukhari submitted that even if  there  was  no  case  under
    Article 8, there should be consideration of the appeal under  paragraph
    276ADE(vi) on the basis that the claimant had lost all  ties  with  his
    country of origin.

Discussion

21) The decision of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal is  clearly  based
    on an error of law.  The judge had no jurisdiction to allow the  appeal
    on the basis of a discretion exercisable  outside  the  Rules.   As  Mr
    Wilding contended, the judge could only have found that  the  Secretary
    of State's decision was not in accordance with  the  law  because,  for
    example, the Secretary of State had failed to have regard to a relevant
    factor, or  had  failed  to  exercise  a  discretion,  or  had  made  a
    misapprehension of a material fact.  None of these errors apply in this
    case, nor any other error affecting the legality of  the  Secretary  of
    State's exercise of discretion.  Accordingly, the basis of the decision
    of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal is wrong in law.  The judge had
    no power to allow the appeal on the basis stated and the decision  must
    be set aside.

22) Mr Bukhari submitted that if the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    were to be set aside, there should be a further hearing in relation  to
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) and Article 8.  Mr Bukhari was not, however,  able
    to point to any relevant factor under either of these provisions  which
    had not been taken into account by the Secretary of State or  would  be
    likely to lead to a different decision from the decision  made  by  the
    Secretary of State.

23) Taking 276ADE(vi), at the time of the Secretary of State's decision  of
    22 April 2014 this applied to a person aged 18 years or above  who  has
    lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years  but  has  no  ties
    (including social, cultural or family) with the  country  to  which  he
    would have to go if required to leave the UK.  The Secretary  of  State
    in the refusal letter pointed out that the claimant is aged 32 and  had
    spent the vast majority of his life, approximately 23  years,  resident
    in his country of origin, namely Pakistan.  It was reasonable to expect
    that the claimant would be able to re-adjust to life in Pakistan and to
    obtain  employment  within  a  reasonable  period.   The  claimant  had
    returned to Pakistan to visit family who still lived there.  It was not
    accepted that he had severed all ties.

24) As far as Article 8 was concerned, the Secretary of State was aware  of
    the claimant's relationship with his aunt, who is aged 71 and  claiming
    Disability Living Allowance.  She was visited by carers 3 times  a  day
    and  the  claimant's  visits  to  her  were  described  as  occasional.
    Although it might be the claimant's  and  his  aunt's  desire  for  the
    claimant to be considered as a care assistant,  this  would  not  be  a
    sufficiently compelling and compassionate factor to justify a grant  of
    leave to remain in the UK.

25) At the hearing before me it was said by Mr Bukhari that the  visits  by
    carers 3 times per day was an error and that in fact the carers visited
    3 times per week.

26) I note that the reference to carers visiting 3 times a day is made in a
    letter  dated  13  September  2013  from  the  Department  of  Clinical
    Gerontology  of  King's  College  Hospital.   This  states   that   the
    claimant's aunt has back pain and lives alone.  It  is  said  that  her
    nephew visits her occasionally and will try to help her out but she was
    finding life quite a struggle at the moment.

27) Another letter from the same Department, dated 3 September 2012, states
    that the claimant's aunt lives alone and is independently mobile with a
    stick.  She has a private carer once a week  and  goes  to  the  mosque
    regularly.

28) The evidence before the Tribunal showed that the claimant did not  live
    with his aunt and showed, in addition, that  his  visits  to  her  were
    occasional, even if much appreciated.  Her  other  nephews  and  nieces
    were said by the claimant to be busy with their immediate family and to
    live some distance away.  Nevertheless, it is difficult to see that the
    claimant's case under respect for private or family life contained  any
    compelling circumstances as described in SS  (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    387.  On the basis of the evidence the First-tier  Tribunal  would  not
    have been able to find that the claimant's removal was disproportionate
    and for this reason the appeal under Article 8 would be bound to  fail.
    No application was made for the submission of further evidence  at  the
    hearing before me.

29) Because on the available evidence the appeal would not  succeed  either
    under paragraph 276ADE(vi) or under Article 8, there is no  purpose  to
    be served by having a further hearing, either before the Upper Tribunal
    or the First-tier Tribunal on these issues.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    could not have reached a decision in favour  of  the  claimant  if  the
    tribunal had been properly directed as to the law.

Conclusions

30) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

31) I set aside the decision.

32) I re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal.

Anonymity

33) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for  anonymity.   I  have
    not been asked to make such an order and I see no reason  of  substance
    for making one.

Fee Award              Note: this is not part of the determination

As the appeal has been dismissed no fee award can be made.


Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
