
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26130/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 4 November 2014                         |On 7 November 2014             |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                   THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ANDREWS DBE
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MD SHAHADAT HOSSAIN
                        anonymity direction NOT MADE
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Rahman, solicitor.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a determination
         by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Kaler)  promulgated  on  24  June
         2014 allowing an appeal by the appellant, Mr Hossain,  against  the
         refusal of his  application  for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
         (Entrepreneur).  We will refer to Mr Hossain as "the claimant"  and
         to "the Secretary of State " who is the  appellant,  to  avoid  any
         confusion of terminology.


      2. The claimant was represented before the First-tier Tribunal by  his
         previous legal representatives (both solicitors and Counsel).   His
         application for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) had been
         refused on 10 June  2013  on  the  grounds  that  the  third  party
         declaration was unsigned contrary to the requirements of  paragraph
         41-SD(b)(i)(3).  In the course of the hearing before the First-tier
         Tribunal the claimant agreed when it was put to him that neither he
         nor the relevant third party had signed the declaration.


      3. The First-tier Tribunal  allowed the appeal on the basis  that  the
         Secretary of State should have applied the Home  Office  evidential
         flexibility policy.  She decided that the omission  (if  there  was
         one) was a minor matter which, in  fairness,  the  claimant  should
         have been given the opportunity to rectify[10].  Reference was made
         to Secretary of State for the Home  Department  and  Rodriguez  and
         Others [2014] EWCA Civ 2[9].


      4. The flexibility policy is now enshrined in paragraph 245AA(a)(b) of
         the Rules. As Mr Nath on behalf of the Secretary of  State  pointed
         out to us today, the policy is inapplicable and that paragraph does
         not cover this type of case. It relates to a situation  where,  for
         example, a series of documents has been submitted and  one  in  the
         sequence is obviously missing; or where the documentation is in the
         wrong format which is obviously capable  of  remedy.   However,  it
         does not apply to a situation where the relevant document has  been
         provided, and there is no deficiency in it, but it has  never  been
         signed, and therefore the application  is  invalid  from  the  very
         outset.


      5. The real difficulty that faced the claimant before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal (and indeed before us) is  that  he  had  known  that  the
         signatures were missing, and had had the   opportunity  to  rectify
         that omission for over a year, but despite that,  when  the  matter
         came before the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appropriate  signatures
         still did  not  appear  on  the  document.   Paragraph  13  of  the
         determination refers to the fact  that  the  third  party  who  was
         supposed to have attended the hearing to sign the  declaration  was
         then in Scotland and would return by the  end  of  the  week.   The
         Tribunal was understandably concerned as  to  why  the  declaration
         still remained unsigned a  year  after  the  application  had  been
         refused, but notwithstanding those concerns  she  was  prepared  to
         allow the claimant's appeal.


      6. This morning, Mr Rahman on  behalf  of  the  claimant  renewed  his
         application  for   an  adjournment.   His  firm   had   only   been
         instructed  on  2  October  2014.   His  client  had  a  colorectal
         operation, which took place on 13 October. The  claimant's  current
         solicitors have not had the opportunity to take  instructions  from
         him. In addition they were  in  difficulties  in  relation  to  the
         documentation because the files remained with his former solicitors
         and they had left it to the claimant to arrange for the transfer of
         the files to them. The claimant  is  still  recuperating  from  his
         operation. Medical evidence was produced last night in the form  of
         a doctor's certificate demonstrating that  he  was  too  unwell  to
         attend the hearing today.


      7. Whilst of course we are sympathetic to the fact that  the  claimant
         has been ill, it seemed to us that only issue in this appeal turned
         on a very short point of law. As it was an error of law hearing  it
         was unnecessary for the claimant to attend.  Mr  Nath  very  kindly
         allowed Mr Rahman access to his papers, and we  rose  for  a  short
         time so as to give him an  adequate  opportunity  to  consider  the
         matter in the light of  those  documents  so  that  he  could  make
         appropriate submissions to us on the law, but we refused any longer
         adjournment.  This is not a case in which any unfairness is created
         by the refusal of the adjournment of the hearing beyond today.  The
         point is a short one, and Mr Rahman has had an adequate opportunity
         to make submissions about it.


      8. Mr Rahman submitted that it was clear from the  way  in  which  the
         First-tier Tribunal reasoned in paragraphs 8 to 12 that  there  had
         been no error of law and that the deficiency in  the  documentation
         had been considered properly in accordance with the  principles  in
         Rodriguez and the Home Office policy.


      9. We conclude that this was not a situation falling within the policy
         on evidential flexibility, the new rules  or  following  Rodriguez.
         Besides this, it was clear that a very considerable length of  time
         had already been given to the claimant to rectify the situation, in
         excess of twelve months.  For  reasons  that  remained  unexplained
         before the First-tier Tribunal,  the  third  party  still  had  not
         countersigned the document.  The application  remained  an  invalid
         one. There was no reason to believe  that  the  document  would  be
         signed.  The policy was not designed  to  given  an  applicant  the
         opportunity  first  to  remedy  any  defect  or  inadequacy  in  an
         application  or  supporting  documentation  so  as  to   save   the
         application from refusal after consideration. (Rodriguez [92])


     10. We concluded that the Tribunal was wrong to approach the absence of
         the  signatures  as  a  minor  error  capable  of  attracting   the
         flexibility policy.   There  was  no  unfairness  inherent  in  the
         underlying process, and the Home Office was entitled  to  make  the
         decision that it did.






         Decision


    11.  There was an error of law  in  the  determination  such  that  the
         decision allowing the appeal under the immigration rules should  be
         set aside.


    12.      As far as the original appeal  is  concerned,  we  remake  the
         decision  by  dismissing  the  claimant's  appeal  on   immigration
         grounds.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date 4/11/14

Mrs Justice Andrews



No anonymity order made.
No fee award is payable as the appeal is dismissed.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date 4/11/14

Mrs Justice Andrews


