


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26557/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 30 June 2014                             |On : 2 July 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between


                            mohammed jewel melon
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

      Representation:

      For the Appellant:        Mr A Sayem of Uzma Law Ltd
      For the Respondent:       Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                             DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 1 February  1986.  On  7
   December 2012 he made an application for leave to remain  in  the  United
   Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant. His application  was  refused
   on 6 June 2013 on the grounds that he was unable to meet the requirements
   of paragraph 245DD with reference to Appendix B and C of the  Immigration
   Rules.


2. The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard in the  First-tier
   Tribunal on 14 October 2013  and  was  dismissed  under  the  immigration
   rules, but with respect only  to  the  decision  under  Appendix  B  (the
   requirements of Appendix C having been found to have been  met),  and  on
   human rights grounds. The appellant then applied for permission to appeal
   to the Upper Tribunal.


3. Permission was granted in  relation  to  the  grounds  of  refusal  under
   Appendix B of the Immigration Rules and the appeal was listed for hearing
   before the Upper Tribunal on 2 April 2014.

4. In an emailed rule 24 response on 21 March 2014  the  respondent  advised
   the following:

       "The Secretary of State has sought policy advice in this case and has
      concluded that the decision is unsustainable. I  have  withdrawn  this
      with a view to further leave being  granted  and  on  that  basis  was
      wondering whether consideration could be given to taking this case out
      of the list for 2 April."

5.   On 26 March 2014 directions were  issued  to  the  parties  inviting  a
   response, as follows:

    "The parties are therefore invited to advise the  Tribunal  as  to  the
    manner in which it is to dispose of the proceedings. In the absence  of
    any reasonable response within 5 days  following  the  issue  of  these
    directions, the Tribunal proposes to treat the respondent's  letter  as
    an indication of a lack of challenge to the appellant's case before the
    Upper Tribunal, with the effect that the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal shall be set aside.  The  Tribunal  intends  to  substitute  a
    decision formally dismissing the appeal for lack of jurisdiction, given
    the withdrawal of the original decision, whilst noting that that is not
    a reflection on the merits of the appellant's case."

6. The appellant's representatives, in a letter of response dated  31  March
   2014, requested that the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  be  set  aside,
   that the respondent's withdrawal of the original decision be accepted and
   that confirmation be given that the respondent had no  sustainable  case.
   The Tribunal was invited to make directions that the appellant be granted
   further leave as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur Migrant).


7. In a decision made on 23 April 2014 I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal but, in view of the lack of an agreed course for  the
   disposal of the appeal, I made directions for the matter to be listed for
   a resumed hearing at which the disposal of the appeal could be concluded.


8. At the hearing on 30 June 2014 Mr Tarlow confirmed the withdrawal of  the
   respondent's decision but advised me that no grant of leave to remain had
   yet been made to the appellant. Both parties agreed that the decision  in
   the appeal could be re-made by the appeal being formally dismissed on the
   basis that the decision giving rise to the appeal had been withdrawn.

9. Accordingly, the respondent's decision having been withdrawn,  no  appeal
   against it can succeed and I therefore formally dismiss the appeal whilst
   making it clear that this is not  a  reflection  on  the  merits  of  the
   appellant's case. The appellant's application remains outstanding and the
   appellant awaits a grant of leave by the Secretary of State, as indicated
   in the email of 21 March 2014.


   DECISION

10. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. The decision has been set aside.  I
   re-make the decision in the appeal  by  formally  dismissing  it  on  the
   limited basis stated above.











                               Signed                                  Date
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
