
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26847/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 24 February 2016             |On 16 March 2016                    |
|                                |                                    |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     DEPUTE UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             ROGER NATHAN SUUBI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Elliott-Kelly, Counsel instructed by Owens
Stevens Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of the Secretary of State (to whom  we  shall  refer
    as the respondent) against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated on  11  September  2015  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal
    against her decision to revoke his indefinite leave to remain.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Uganda born on 15 July 1990.  He  arrived
    in the United Kingdom in February 2000 aged 7  months  and  his  family
    were granted indefinite leave to remain.  In July 2010 he was convicted
    of four counts of possession of a  prohibited  firearm  and  possession
    with intent to supply diamorphine and cocaine.   He  was  sentenced  to
    three years' imprisonment following pleas of  guilty.   The  sentencing
    judge found exceptional circumstances and did not therefore impose  the
    minimum sentence of five years in respect of the firearms charge.   The
    appellant served eighteen months and was released in November  2011  on
    licence.

3.   The Secretary of State made a deportation  order  against  him  in  May
    2012 which he  appealed  unsuccessfully  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    However, his appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  was  allowed.   The  Upper
    Tribunal judge found that his removal to Uganda would be in  breach  of
    his rights under Article 8 of the European Convention of Human  Rights.
    That decision was promulgated on 7 January 2013.

4.   On 9 June  2014  the  respondent  decided  to  revoke  the  appellant's
    indefinite leave  to  remain  under  Section  76  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  He appealed  that  decision  to  then
    First-tier Tribunal on the basis that that decision also  breached  his
    rights under Article 8.

5.   In the determination the First-tier Tribunal sets out the  offences  of
    which  the  appellant  was  convicted,  describing  them  correctly  as
    "serious offences" and noted that, since his  release  from  prison  in
    2011, he had started a drama course  in  Essex  University  in  October
    2013.  The course was of three years duration.  He had  obtained  loans
    for tuition and maintenance in order to allow him to  do  so.   It  was
    also noted that he had got good  grades  for  studies  as  set  out  in
    paragraph 15 of the determination.   The  removal  of  the  appellant's
    indefinite leave to remain would mean that he would be unable to obtain
    funding for his final year at university and thus would  be  unable  to
    complete his course.  Accordingly it was  found  that  there  would  be
    interference with his Article 8 rights.  He would have lost the benefit
    of two years of study.  He would have to seek a further purpose in life
    as he had built his rehabilitation around  hopes  of  a  future  acting
    career.   He  had  committed  no  further  offences  since  his  single
    conviction in 2010.  He had been free of probation supervision for more
    than two years and had not been considered to be of any concern by  the
    probation authorities.

6.   In those circumstances the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  described  the
    public interest in revocation of his indefinite  leave  to  be  "rather
    weak in the circumstances" and to be  outweighed  by  the  impact  that
    decision would have on his  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  future
    career.  Accordingly, the judge  found  that  the  decision  to  revoke
    indefinite leave to remain to be disproportionate.

7.   Mr Duffy for the respondent submitted before  us  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law.  Since the Secretary of State's decision  to
    revoke indefinite leave was replaced by limited  leave  to  remain,  he
    would not  be  required  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   Accordingly
    interference with private life would be minimal.  He pointed out  that,
    in terms of Section 76 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002, the Secretary of State had a wide discretion to revoke indefinite
    leave to remain since the appellant was liable to deportation but could
    not be deported for legal reasons.  He was a foreign criminal and these
    were  weighty  considerations  which  justified  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State in this case.  There was no adequate  reasoning  why
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge concluded that the Secretary  of  State's
    decision was disproportionate.  The appellant would be able to continue
    to work with limited leave to remain albeit he would  not  be  eligible
    for further student loans.

8.   Ms Elliott-Kelly for the appellant pointed out that this challenge  was
    one to the First-tier Tribunal's assessment  of  proportionality.   She
    submitted that the conclusion to which the judge had come was  entirely
    open to him on the facts found established.  The  appellant's  previous
    criminal offending had been taken into account  as  were  the  original
    sentencing judge's remarks together with the assessment reports on  the
    appellant.

9.   As to the criticism  that  the  judge  had  no  regard  to  the  public
    interest in the appellant being financially independent, that was of no
    materiality in the current case since the appellant had  been  eligible
    for a loan from the student finance organisation and was  committed  to
    repaying that loan in the future.  He was  thus  not  someone  who  was
    financially dependent upon the state.  There was no direct reference to
    this issue in the determination but the judge refers to Section 117B in
    paragraph 32.  In any event, even if that matter  had  not  been  taken
    into account, it did not constitute a material error in law.

10.  We do not consider that the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge contains a material error of law.  He had regard to the nature of
    the serious offences to which the appellant  had  pled  guilty.   These
    were tempered by the fact that he had remained out of trouble since his
    release in 2011 and had made substantial efforts in  rehabilitation  by
    attending his drama course at university.  The consequence of  revoking
    indefinite leave to remain would undoubtedly have the consequence  that
    he would have to abandon his course and lose the benefit  of  at  least
    two  years  study.   That  in  turn  would  endanger  the  progress  in
    rehabilitation that he had made.  In our view, the judge  was  entitled
    to reason in that way and to conclude that the public interest  element
    was outweighed by the impact on the appellant's life and future career.
     Such a conclusion was one which was open to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.

11.  We also consider that, in the circumstances, if there was a failure  to
    have regard in particular to the public interest consideration that the
    appellant was not a burden on taxpayers, that consideration was  not  a
    material one in the circumstances.  This was not a case of  someone  in
    receipt of public funds in the form  of  state  benefits.   He  was  in
    receipt of loans which are due to be repaid.

12.  For these reasons we do not consider that the First-tier Tribunal  fell
    into error and we will refuse this appeal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is refused.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date


Lord Burns
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD




We have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                                  Date


Lord Burns
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

