
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: IA/26830/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st December 2017                         |On 11th January 2018          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                             Mr william brobbey
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Sharma, Counsel instructed by Justice and Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana whose date of birth is recorded  as
    25 December 1977.  On 2 April 2015, he made application  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of family and  private  life.
    On 15 July 2015, a decision was made to refuse the application and  the
    Appellant appealed.  This appeal has an unfortunate history.

 2. The appeal was heard in the first instance on 14 October 2015 by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Manchester.  He  dismissed  the  appeal  but
    after a successful application for permission to appeal the decision of
    Judge Manchester was set aside on 17 June 2016, in the Upper  Tribunal,
    by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup; his decision being dated 28 June
    2016.  The appeal had been a "paper appeal".  At paragraph 18 of  Judge
    Pickup's decision one of the  consequential  directions  was  that  the
    appeal was to remain a "paper case".  Eventually, on 2 March 2017,  the
    matter came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Dearden.  He  dealt
    with the matter consistent with the consequential directions,  "on  the
    papers".  He made certain observations in his decision in  relation  to
    the lack of  evidence  in  respect  of  certain  matters.   It  is  not
    necessary, given what is about to follow, for me to deal  with  any  of
    those aspects of the appeal save to note that Judge  Dearden  dismissed
    the appeal on human rights grounds, being  the  basis  upon  which  the
    appeal was brought.

 3. Not content with that decision, by  Notice  dated  30  March  2017  the
    Appellant sought permission to appeal and it is important to note  that
    the Grounds of Appeal were drafted by, and signed by,  the  Appellant's
    solicitors.  They make the point that between  the  decision  of  Judge
    Pickup and the  decision  of  Judge  Dearden  they  instructed  by  the
    Appellant, wrote to the Tribunal requesting  that  the  appeal  not  be
    dealt with on the papers but that the  Appellant  be  allowed  an  oral
    hearing.  The documentation on file is not satisfactory  in  the  sense
    that there is no particular correspondence that  definitively  supports
    what the Appellant's solicitors say, though there is a  document  which
    is headed 'facts job log' dated 30th March  2017.   That  came  to  the
    Tribunal after the decision of Judge Dearden but  the  essential  point
    taken by the Appellant's solicitors is  that  they  requested  an  oral
    hearing.  It is unfortunate that a reality of this  Tribunal,  being  a
    large Tribunal with many files that from time to time documents sent to
    the Tribunal get misfiled.  If the Appellant's solicitors,  they  being
    officers of the  court,  say  that  they  sent  correspondence  to  the
    Tribunal, then on balance I am prepared to accept what  they  say.   Of
    course, if they were misleading the Tribunal they would know that  very
    serious consequences would follow.  Indeed, it would be  possible  that
    the appropriate body might consider very serious sanctions  indeed  let
    alone any criminal sanctions that might follow  and  it  is  for  those
    reasons that I am prepared to accept what the solicitors  had  to  say.
    It follows that there has been procedural unfairness.

 4. Mr Melvin was concerned to know whether or not the appropriate fee  had
    in fact been paid by the  Appellant's  solicitors  in  support  of  the
    contention that a request for an oral hearing had been made but that is
    not my experience of the procedure.   A  letter  from  the  Appellant's
    solicitors, or indeed an Appellant, requesting an  oral  hearing  would
    result in the Tribunal putting the matter before a judge who  generally
    speaking would then have a letter or  notice  sent  from  the  Tribunal
    inviting the  Appellant  or  the  Appellant's  solicitors  to  pay  the
    appropriate fee.  In other words, the fee would  not  be  paid  on  the
    application.  It would be paid once the request  had  been  considered.
    There is no evidence of any consideration having been given to an  oral
    hearing.  I am satisfied that there has been procedural unfairness.

 5. Mr Melvin also makes the point that this matter has been going  on  far
    too long.  I agree.  It is most unfortunate that this has occurred  and
    it would have been far better if the First-tier Tribunal Judge  dealing
    with the application had put this matter before his/her Resident  Judge
    with a view to having had  the  matter  set  aside  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  That was not done.  However, I find for all the reasons  set
    out above that there has been a material error of law  because  of  the
    procedural unfairness.  I set aside the decision and remit  it  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo.  The consequential  directions
    are as follows:

      1) If there is  to  be  an  oral  hearing  of  this  appeal  then  the
         Appellant's solicitors shall write again to the First-tier Tribunal
         at Taylor House to where this appeal shall  be  remitted  and  that
         upon payment of the appropriate fee the matter shall convert to  an
         appeal to be heard with live evidence.

      2) That letter to the Tribunal requesting that  the  matter  be  dealt
         with, with live evidence, shall be sent to the Tribunal  within  14
         days of the date upon which this decision is promulgated.

      3) No interpreter is required.

      4) For the avoidance of doubt, the matter having been set aside, there
         are no preserved findings

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed. The decision of the  first-tier
Tribunal is set aside. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed                              Date: 10 January 2018





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker








