
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA264732015
     IA264762015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25 April 2017                          |On 17 May 2017                    |
|Determination given orally at the hearing |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                           mr mohammad jalal uddin
                              mrs parvin akter
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A I Khan, instructed by Universal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants appeal against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Phull who in a determination promulgated on 5  September  2016
    dismissed the appellants' appeal against a decision of the Secretary of
    State to refuse their application for an extension of stay as a student
    and his dependant.  The judge dealt  with  the  issue  of  the  student
    application clearly.  She noted that  it  was  accepted  that  the  1st
    appellant did not have a CAS and found  that  he  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the student Rules.  She therefore dismissed the appeal.



2.   Although that issue was challenged in the grounds of appeal  permission
    was not given to  argue  that  before  me  the  judge  considering  the
    application for permission to appeal clearly and quite  correctly  said
    there was no merit in that point.  What he did give permission  on  was
    the issue of the fact that the judge had not dealt with the question of
    the rights of the appellants under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   It  is
    correct that the judge did not do so and I have to consider whether  or
    not that error is material and if it were material then to  remake  the
    decision.

3.   The reality in this case is that the  appellants  came  to  Britain  in
    2009 as a student and  his  dependant.   The  principal  appellant  has
    studied here and he has received qualifications here including  an  MBA
    and a diploma in IT.  They also have a child born here in  2014  and  I
    consider it likely that their second child was born recently.   Clearly
    the appellants do not qualify for  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds under the Rules and I have to consider whether or not there are
    any other  factors  which  would  mean  that  their  removal  would  be
    disproportionate.

4.   Mr Khan has put to me that the father of the first  appellant  died  in
    2011 and that his mother is ill  and  elderly  and  supported  by  him.
    Given of course that he has been a student here,  that  support  cannot
    have been of any great size.  Moreover it is said  that  the  appellant
    has no financial resources in his own country nor was he  able  to  get
    work  there.   I  have  to  say  that  that  surprises  me  given   his
    qualifications.  His qualifications should assist him in obtaining work
    in Bangladesh and of course if he returned to Bangladesh  he  would  be
    able to give his mother the emotional support of his being  present  in
    that country.  It is clear that the appellant has  taken  part  in  the
    local community and I understand that he is also a member of the Labour
    Party but the reality is that he entered as  a  student  indicating  an
    intention to return at the end of his studies.  He does not qualify for
    leave to remain here and I consider that, particularly given the  short
    period of time which the appellants have lived in Britain,  that  there
    seems no obstacles to their returning to their home  country  and  that
    their removal to Bangladesh would in no way be disproportionate.

5.    There  is  realty  nothing  that  the  judge  could  have  taken  into
    consideration which could have led her to conclude that this was one of
    those exceptional or compelling cases in which permission  should  have
    been given for leave to remain on human rights grounds.  The fact  that
    she did not take into account what had been stated in  the  grounds  of
    appeal is in my view not material and therefore it is appropriate  that
    her decision to dismiss the appeal on immigration side should stand and
    that she should have dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.

6.    Insofar  as  the  end  of  the  determination  clearly   referred   to
    immigration grounds, for the reasons which  I  have  set  out  above  I
    remake the decision and  also  dismiss  this  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds. This was an appeal which simply could not  have  succeeded  on
    those grounds.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on both immigration and human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 15 May 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
