
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26606/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20th July 2015                    |On 31st July 2015                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     NM
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Sood, instructed by Trent Centre for Human
Rights
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. On 28th July 2014 the President of the  Upper  Tribunal  allowed  the
       Appellant's appeal against the determination of a judge of the First-
       tier Tribunal who dismissed the appeal for the reasons set out in the
       error of law finding.

    2. The matter comes before me to day for the  purposes  of  the  Resumed
       hearing after which a decision shall  be  made  to  either  allow  or
       dismiss the appeal.

    3. The Appellant asserts a right to  remain  in  the  UK  by  virtue  of
       Articles 8, 9 and 12 ECHR.

    4. Evidence was received from the Appellant, his  wife  and  two  family
       members in addition to the written material, all of  which  has  been
       considered with the required degree of anxious scrutiny.

Background


    5. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  born  on  the  12th  November
       1983.  An application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom under
       Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration  Rules  on  the
       basis of a partnership with NK was refused on 12th June  2013  and  a
       direction for the Appellant's removal to Pakistan issued.

    6. NK was born in Pakistan but is now  a  British  citizen.  The  couple
       married in a civil ceremony on  10th  December  2013  in  the  United
       Kingdom having entered into an Islamic marriage (Nikkah) on 19th  May
       2012, with parental agreement. Following  the  Islamic  marriage  the
       couple attempted to start a family but have experienced  difficulties
       by way of a miscarriage and a still born  child  on  15th  May  2013.
       Their son is buried at a cemetery  in  Nottingham  which  they  visit
       weekly.

    7. The Appellant entered the UK as a student in 2005. He is said to have
       'dropped out' of Nottingham Trent University in 2011 although  claims
       to have studied there again in 2012 for a period of two weeks.

    8. Members  of  the  Appellants  extended  family  live  in  and  around
       Nottingham and  Middlesbrough.  For  approximately  eight  years  the
       Appellant lived with his brother, B,  and  his  brother's  family  in
       Nottingham during which  time  it  is  said  he  developed  a  strong
       attachment to his brother's children (born 2001, 2003, 2011 and 2013)
       to whom he is the testamentary guardian.  An older sister also  lives
       in the UK.

    9. It was said earlier in the proceedings that the Appellants wife is  a
       carer for her own parents as her mother has a heart condition and her
       father has other health issues, including Type 1 Diabetes.

   10. The Appellant has  also  provided  support  to  his  sister  who  was
       diagnosed with breast cancer in 2012,  as  detailed  in  her  witness
       statement of 20th July 2015 and oral evidence.

   11. The Appellants brother sponsored him to come to the UK as  a  student
       and provided accommodation until May 2013 when the Appellant and  his
       wife moved to their current address. Financial support  was  provided
       for college fees, living accommodation and two years university fees.
       The brother refers in his statement and oral evidence to  the  nature
       of the relationship within the family and the issues relating to  the
       child buried at Bulwell Cemetery.

   12. The skeleton argument of Mrs Sood prepared for  the  purposes  of  an
       earlier hearing, dated 21st February  2014,  contains  the  following
       statement:

           "The Appellant and his British wife are at a  pivotal  stage  in
           their family planning.  They had hoped to have children of their
           own but have been advised to wait for the time being.  They  are
           very much integrated into the lives of their extended family and
           the Appellant enjoys a special relationship and  a  strong  bond
           with his nieces and nephews, especially as he has been  part  of
           their household for 8 years which is for all or the majority  of
           their young lives..... "

Expert and documentary evidence


   13. At pages 16 -26 of the Appellants bundle  is  a  report  commissioned
       from  Dr  Zena  Schofield  who  conducted  a  Perinatal   Psychiatric
       Assessment of NK. The report is dated 8th September 2014 (signed 24th
       September 2014). Dr Schofield notes Mrs K was born and  raised  in  a
       village in Pakistan and is the youngest of four siblings, having  two
       older sisters and an older brother. She  had  a  happy  childhood  in
       Pakistan being raised by her mother as her father was working in  the
       UK. Mrs K studied Art in Pakistan up until the age  of  20  when  she
       entered an arranged marriage to a British Muslim man and moved to the
       UK. The marriage failed and at the age of 23 Mrs K was separated  and
       later divorced. Both Mr and Mrs  K  expressed  to  Dr  Schofield  the
       importance to them of being able to visit the grave of their son  who
       they lost in 2013 and who is buried in Nottingham. Dr  Schofield  set
       out her opinion in section 5 of the report in the following terms:

           "5.1   During my assessment Mrs K was upset  and  distressed  at
                talking about her miscarriages, the  immigration  status  of
                her husband, and her perceptions of how life  would  be  for
                her if she returned to Pakistan.  However, she was, with the
                assistance of an interpreter,  able  to  articulate  herself
                well. In my  opinion  Mrs  K  is  fit  emotionally  to  give
                evidence in  Court,  however  this  will  be  a  distressing
                process for her, and  she  will  require  the  Court  to  be
                understanding and supportive of this.  She is likely  to  be
                better able to give evidence  once  her  current  depressive
                episode has resolved.

           5.2     In  my  opinion  the  triggers  for  Mrs  K's   moderate
                depressive episodes are the miscarriage in May  2013  at  21
                weeks gestation and the ongoing uncertainty of her husband's
                immigration status.

           5.3    Regarding prognosis, the evidence  base  is  that  for  a
                moderate depressive episode the best course of treatment  is
                combination for antidepressant medication and  psychological
                treatment.  To date Mrs K has only received six-sessions  of
                counselling using a  CBT  style  framework.   The  screening
                tools from the Let's  Talk-Wellbeing  Practitioner  indicate
                that there has been some improvement in her  mental  health,
                however she continues to be symptomatic.  In my opinion  she
                requires treatment with an  antidepressant  medication  that
                would be suitable for  use  during  pregnancy  as  she  will
                continue to require this medication for six-months once  her
                symptoms have fully resolved.  She may also require  further
                psychological sessions  particularly  as  her  symptoms  are
                continuing. The most  appropriate  source  of  psychological
                sessions would be through the Let's  Talk-Wellbeing  Service
                at present.  However, given that the two clear triggers  for
                this depressive episodes are Mrs K's  husband's  immigration
                status   and   her   second   miscarriage    with    ongoing
                childlessness, it may well be that this episode will not  be
                fully resolved unless Mr M is granted permission  to  remain
                in the UK as a spouse.  As part of the ongoing treatment for
                her moderate depressive episodes she requires the  continued
                support of her husband.

           5.4    At present, due to her husband's support, Mrs K  presents
                a low risk of suicide or self-harm.  However it is difficult
                to predict how this risk might  change  if  her  husband  is
                deported to Pakistan.  My concern would be that her risk  of
                suicide may  increase  if  her  husband  was  deported.   In
                addition, given that childlessness is a  maintaining  factor
                in this depressive episode, and the cultural implications of
                childlessness within a Muslim culture for a  married  woman,
                Mrs K's depressive episode may deteriorate if she is  forced
                to remain in the UK alone.

           5.5    From the information given to me by Mr M and Mrs K in  my
                opinion currently being able  to  visit  the  grave  of  her
                miscarried foetus is beneficial to Mrs  K's  mental  health,
                although this activity alone will not result in  a  recovery
                from the depressive episode."

   14. A second report dated 9th May 2015 has been provided from an  Islamic
       Scholar who has been asked to comment  upon  the  Islamic  ruling  in
       Adoption and the weight it holds in Islam. It is said the content  of
       the report is not based upon the author's personal  understanding  of
       Islamic beliefs, but rather demonstrates an  understanding  of  Islam
       with reference to Quranic verses.

   15. It is said adoption has no effect in Shariah although  a  person  can
       adopt a child for his emotional and psychological satisfaction [2.1].
       Adoption to provide a child shelter is said to  be  a  virtuous  deed
       which carries much reward in the hereafter but so far  as  the  legal
       aspects are concerned, adoption has no consequence.  A  child  should
       not be attributed except to the natural father, and not  to  the  one
       who has adopted him [2.2].

   16. In relation to artificial insemination (AI)  it  is  recognised  that
       modern techniques for AI were not available at the time the Quran was
       written and thus is silent on the  issue  [2.10].  It  is  said  some
       scholars in Islam declare it absolutely impermissible for a couple to
       try and conceive a child where the sperm  and  egg  is  from  another
       whereas others are of the view that provided the sperm and  egg  used
       to fertilise the ovum are from  the  same  married  couple,  a  child
       derived from AI can be recognised as the off-spring of the couple  in
       Shariah Law [2.12].

   17. In relation to the issue of exhumation, it is said to be unlawful  to
       open the grave of a Muslim even though he or  she  may  have  been  a
       child or insane as the sanctity of the  dead  is  like  that  of  the
       living and it is not permissible to subject graves to any  disrespect
       [4].

   18. It is also said that based upon  Quranic  verse  and  Hadith,  it  is
       inferred that the soul enters the foetus at around 4 months/120  days
       after gestation when the child becomes a living human being [8 - 17].

   19. Copy letters have been provided as  evidence  of  contact  made  with
       Nottingham City Council in relation to  being  accepted  as  proposed
       adopters and acceptance of the same.

Preliminary issue


   20. Mrs Sood raised as a preliminary issue the fact  there  has  been  no
       consideration within  the  decision  dated  12th  June  2013  of  the
       application outside the Rules which it is  said  makes  the  decision
       'not in accordance with the law' such that it should be  allowed.  It
       is  also  stated  that  even  despite  the  previous   hearings   and
       observations of the President in setting the decision of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal aside, there has been no response from the  Respondent,
       meaning there is no evidence of the Secretary  of  State  considering
       the claim based upon Articles 9 or 12. In paragraph 5 of the skeleton
       argument in which this point is set out it is said:

           'The Appellant asks the court to find that the SSHD continues to
           err in law in failing to consider the relevance of Articles  8,9
           and 12, and in maintaining the original position that there  are
           no compelling circumstances to grant Leave to Remain outside the
           Immigration Rules, and in particular, that  relocation,  in  the
           circumstances known of the  importance  or  continuing  physical
           contact with the grave of their child, would constitute  "a  non
           standard or particular feature demonstrating that  removal  will
           be unjustifiably harsh" per  Gulshan  (article  8  -  new  Rules
           -correct approach) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC).'

   21. The position of  the  Respondent  has  always  been  known  to  those
       involved in this case, namely  that  the  application  for  leave  is
       rejected for the reasons provided in the refusal  letter.  There  has
       been no additional decision or an indication of a change of view.

   22. It was accepted by Mrs  Sood  that  there  is  no  prejudice  to  the
       Applicant for the nature of the case and  reasons  for  the  decision
       under appeal were known. Although there may be a  general  obligation
       upon parties to review cases they are involved in on an ongoing basis
       and inform all concerned of changes to their positions,  it  has  not
       been shown a failure to make comment on additional material makes any
       difference to the position taken, outside  the  usual  procedure  for
       disclosure,  pleadings,  skeleton  arguments   etc.,   or   makes   a
       refusal/decision 'not in accordance with the law' to the extent  that
       an appeal could or should be allowed  on  this  basis.  There  is  no
       direction from the Upper Tribunal for such a decision to be made with
       sanctions if not. The Tribunals are experienced  at  being  the  body
       tasked with making a decision in the first instance on many occasions
       where issues are raised in response to section 120 notices or  during
       the course of an appeal process. In any event, neither article 9  nor
       12 are absolute articles.

   23. In Ullah and Do [2004] UKHL 26 Lord Bingham made it clear that,  when
       considering the qualification of the right  under  Article  9.2  (and
       other qualified rights such as Article 8.2), the balance  is  heavily
       weighted in favour of the decision being proportionate and  indicated
       that  decisions  in  pursuance  of  immigration   control   will   be
       proportionate in "all save a small minority of exceptional cases".

   24. In MB (Article 2 - Article 3)  Algeria  CG  [2002]  UKIAT  01704  the
       Appellant was a Berber and a Christian convert, who claimed to be  at
       risk on the grounds that, for both  reasons,  he  would  attract  the
       adverse  attention  of  the  GIA.  That  was  not  accepted  by   the
       Adjudicator who dismissed the asylum and Article 3 appeal because the
       Appellant had not been targeted to date.   The  Appellant  sought  to
       argue  Article  9  on  appeal.  The  Tribunal  concluded  that   once
       persecution or ill-treatment contrary to Article 3 had been  negated,
       it was difficult to  envisage  circumstances  where  the  immigration
       control would be disproportionate. There may be  difficulties,  there
       may be a degree of hardship in manifesting  the  beliefs,  but  there
       would not be any prevention of that manifestation,  or  at  least  no
       prevention which would be effective because,  unless  there  is  some
       sanction such as penalty or detention or ill-treatment, there can  be
       no effective sanction against the manifestation of that  belief.   In
       those  circumstances  the  Tribunal  concluded  that  it  was  almost
       impossible to see that there could be  breach  of  Article  9  unless
       there was persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

   25. No basis for finding in the Applicants favour on this basis was  made
       out and the application refused.

   26. The Articles being relied upon are:

   27. Article 8 -

       Article 8 provides a right to respect for one's "private  and  family
       life,  his  home  and  his  correspondence",   subject   to   certain
       restrictions that are "in accordance with law" and  "necessary  in  a
       democratic  society".  Furthermore,  Article  8  sometimes  comprises
       positive  obligations:  [20]  whereas  classical  human  rights   are
       formulated as prohibiting a State from interfering with  rights,  and
       thus not to do something (e.g. not to separate a family under  family
       life protection), the effective enjoyment of  such  rights  may  also
       include an obligation for the State  to  become  active,  and  to  do
       something (e.g. to enforce access for a divorced  parent  to  his/her
       child).

   28. Article 9 - conscience and religion -

       Article 9 provides a right to  freedom  of  thought,  conscience  and
       religion. This includes the freedom to change a religion  or  belief,
       and to manifest a religion or belief in worship,  teaching,  practice
       and  observance,  subject  to  certain  restrictions  that  are   "in
       accordance with law" and "necessary in a democratic society"

   29. Article 12 - marriage -

       Article 12 provides a right for women and men of marriageable age  to
       marry and establish a family.

Discussion


   30.  It  is  submitted  the  Applicant  is  able  to  succeed  under  the
       Immigration Rules as the Appellant cohabits with his wife  who  is  a
       British citizen and who cannot relocate abroad, and , if  not,  under
       the ECHR.

   31. It has not been disputed before me that the Appellant  and  his  wife
       are lawfully  married  in  English  law  and  that  the  marriage  is
       subsisting. The date of marriage is 10th December 2013 and the period
       of cohabitation in excess of the two years required by the Rules.

   32. It has not been established that  the  Appellant  has  lost  ties  to
       Pakistan as he has close relatives there including  his  parents  and
       siblings and his wife has admitted  in  the  past  to  having  family
       members there too. Both are fluent in Urdu.

   33. The relevant Rules are Appendix FM and 276ADE. Insufficient  evidence
       has been provided to show the financial requirements of the Rules can
       be met or that the Appellant  can  satisfy  E-LTRP2.2.  unless  EX.1.
       applies.

   34. EX.1. sets out the exceptions to certain eligibility requirements for
       leave to remain as a partner or parent in the following terms:

           EX.1.  This paragraph applies if:

                   a) (i)  the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
                      parental relationship with a child who -

                           (aa) is under the age of 18 years [or  was  under
                           the age of 18 years when the applicant was  first
                           granted leave on the basis  that  this  paragraph
                           applied];

                           (bb) is in the UK;

                           (cc) is a British Citizen or has lived in the  UK
                           continuously for at  least  7  years  immediately
                           preceding the date of application; and

                      (ii) it would be unreasonable to expect the child  to
                      leave the UK; or

                   b)  the  applicant  has   a   genuine   and   subsisting
                      relationship with a partner who is in the UK and is a
                      British Citizen, settled in the UK or in the UK  with
                      refugee leave or humanitarian protection,  and  there
                      are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that
                      partner continuing outside the UK.

   35. In relation to the term 'insurmountable obstacles'  there  are  three
       relevant decisions which have been considered: R(on  the  application
       of Agyarko)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  440  it  was  held  that  the  phrase
       "insurmountable obstacles" as used in this  paragraph  of  the  Rules
       clearly imposes a high hurdle to be  overcome  by  an  applicant  for
       leave to remain under the  Rules.  The  test  is  significantly  more
       demanding than a mere test of  whether  it  would  be  reasonable  to
       expect a couple to continue their  family  life  outside  the  United
       Kingdom. ...The phrase as used in the Rules is intended to  have  the
       same meaning as in the Strasbourg jurisprudence. It is clear that the
       ECtHR regards it as  a  formulation  imposing  a  stringent  test  in
       respect of that factor, as is illustrated by Jeunesse  v  Netherlands
       (see para. [117]: there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
       family settling in Suriname, even though the applicant and her family
       would experience hardship if forced to do so). However, "although  it
       involves a stringent test, it is obviously intended in both the case-
       law and the Rules to be  interpreted  in  a  sensible  and  practical
       rather than a purely literal  way".   Moreover,  the  "insurmountable
       obstacles" criterion is used in  the  Rules  to  define  one  of  the
       preconditions set out in section EX.1(b) which need to  be  satisfied
       before an applicant can claim to be entitled to be granted  leave  to
       remain under the Rules. In that context, it is not simply a factor to
       be taken into account. However, in the  context  of  making  a  wider
       Article 8 assessment outside the Rules, it is a factor  to  be  taken
       into account, not an absolute requirement which has to  be  satisfied
       in every single case across the  whole  range  of  cases  covered  by
       Article 8. The mere facts that Mr Benette is a British  citizen,  has
       lived all his life in the United Kingdom and has a  job  here  -  and
       hence might find it difficult and might be reluctant to re-locate  to
       Ghana to continue their family life  there  -  could  not  constitute
       insurmountable obstacles to his doing so.

   36. R (on the application of Onkarsingh Nagre) 2013 EWHC 720 Sales  J  at
       paragraphs 42 and 43 said "The approach explained in  the  Strasbourg
       case-law indicates  that  ...  consideration  of  whether  there  are
       insurmountable obstacles to the claimant's resident spouse or partner
       relocating to the claimant's country  of  origin  to  continue  their
       family life there, will be a highly material consideration.  This  is
       not to  say  that  the  question  whether  there  are  insurmountable
       obstacles to relocation will always  be  decisive....  Therefore,  it
       cannot be said that in  every  case  consideration  of  the  test  in
       Section  EX.1  of  whether  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to
       relocation will necessarily exhaust consideration of proportionality,
       even in the type of precarious family  life  case  with  which  these
       proceedings are concerned. I agree with the statement  by  the  Upper
       Tribunal in Izuazu in  the  latter  part  of  para.  [56],  that  the
       Strasbourg  case-law  does  not  treat  the  test  of  insurmountable
       obstacles to relocation as a minimum requirement to be established in
       a precarious family life case before it can be concluded that removal
       of the claimant is disproportionate; the case-law only treats it as a
       material factor to be taken into  account.  Nonetheless,  I  consider
       that the Strasbourg guidance  does  indicate  that  in  a  precarious
       family life case, where it is only  in  "exceptional"  or  "the  most
       exceptional" circumstances that removal of  the  non-national  family
       member will constitute a violation  of  Article  8,  the  absence  of
       insurmountable obstacles to relocation of  other  family  members  to
       that member's own country of origin to  continue  their  family  life
       there is likely to indicate that the removal  will  be  proportionate
       for the purposes of Article 8".

   37. In Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640
       (IAC) (Mr Justice Cranston) it was held that the term "insurmountable
       obstacles" in provisions such as Section EX.1 are not obstacles which
       are impossible to surmount: MF (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2012]
       UKUT 393 (IAC); Izuazu (Article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT 45  (IAC);
       they concern  the  practical  possibilities  of  relocation.  In  the
       absence of such insurmountable obstacles, it  is  necessary  to  show
       other non-standard and particular features demonstrating that removal
       will be unjustifiably harsh:  R  (on  the  application  of)  Nagre  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC  720  (Admin).
       The SSHD addressed the Article 8 family aspects of  the  respondent's
       position through the Rules, in particular EX1, and the  private  life
       aspects  through  paragraph  276ADE.  The  judge  should  have   done
       likewise, also paying attention  to  the  Guidance.  Thus  the  judge
       should have considered the Secretary of State's conclusion under EX.1
       that  there  were  no   insurmountable   obstacles   preventing   the
       continuation of the family life outside the UK.

   38.  The  fact  the  Appellants  wife  is  a  British  Citizen   is   not
       determinative. It is accepted that she  is  also  a  citizen  of  the
       European Union and that if she was to be removed  this  will  deprive
       her of the opportunity of living in the Union, but this  is  not  the
       case. The Respondent does not seek to remove the Appellant's wife. It
       is not a case of a decision being made in such terms as this would be
       unlawful as a result of the wife's citizenship unless  the  same  was
       revoked. This is not a case of constructive removal  as  it  has  not
       been shown that if the Appellant was removed his wife would  have  no
       choice other than to follow to meet her basic needs to  survive.  She
       has family and support available in the UK and lived here without the
       Appellant until they met. If the Appellant's  wife  chose  to  follow
       that is a voluntary matter not as a result of an  action  of  the  UK
       government directed against her.

   39. It is accepted both the Appellant and his wife have family in the UK.
       Whilst the wife's parents may have some medical  issues  it  has  not
       been shown they are totally dependent upon her as  evidenced  by  the
       fact she lives with her husband. If the parents are British  Citizens
       they will have access to the NHS and the support required, and it has
       not been shown the impact of their daughter leaving and following her
       husband is such as to amount to an insurmountable obstacle to  family
       life continuing abroad.

   40. It is accepted the Appellant has nephews and nieces in the UK who are
       his brother's children. It is not disputed that the  relationship  is
       likely to be closer than some between an uncle and such relatives  as
       a result of the time the Appellant spent as a member of his brother's
       household as the children grew up. It has not  been  shown,  however,
       that the best interests of these children are other than to remain in
       the UK living with their parents who are their  primary  carers.  The
       Appellant is no longer a member of the children's household  and  has
       lived elsewhere for some time. It has not  been  made  out  that  the
       impact of his moving has had an effect  upon  the  children  that  is
       suggestive of far greater harm if their uncle is removed to  Pakistan
       that  cannot  be  managed  by  their  parents  or  with  professional
       assistance, if required. No insurmountable obstacle is established on
       the basis of the best interests of the children.

   41. The appointment of the Appellant as the children's  guardian  in  the
       event of the death or incapacity rendering the parents  incapable  of
       providing care is noted but this is an expression of  intent  in  the
       event of circumstances which have not yet arisen. The appointment  of
       such is a matter for the parents and is not determinative or  capable
       of amounting to an insurmountable obstacle on the  facts  whilst  the
       conditions required to  give  effect  to  the  appointment  have  not
       occurred. It has not been shown the  children  could  not  live  with
       their uncle in Pakistan, if required, or that other family in the  UK
       could not assist or,  if  none  were  available,  able,  or  willing,
       Social Services.

   42. It is  said  the  Appellant  has  provided  support  for  his  sister
       following the diagnosis of cancer but he has not  made  out  that  no
       other support is available,  that  the  impact  of  withdrawing  such
       support will have  a  serious  effect  upon  the  prognosis  for  the
       sister's survival, or that alternative support is not available  from
       the NHS or any of the first class cancer groups/services  that  exist
       in the UK.

   43. In relation to the issue of fertility, it is accepted that the UK has
       services  that  can  diagnose  causes  of  infertility  and  loss  of
       pregnancy, provide assisted reproduction, and  provide  the  physical
       and psychological support required, some of which is referred  to  in
       the reports. It has not  been  shown  that  such  assistance  is  not
       available in Pakistan or that the Appellant  and  his  wife  will  be
       unable to access the same if they lived in that country.

   44. It has not been shown that if returned the Appellant or his wife will
       suffer destitution. They both originate from  Pakistan  and  grew  up
       there until early adulthood. They are fluent with  the  language  and
       educated. Family have not been shown to be unwilling to assist and it
       has not been shown that, notwithstanding the understandable  problems
       in establishing themselves, the practical reality of continuing  life
       together in Pakistan gives rise to any insurmountable  obstacles.  It
       has not been shown that remunerative employment is not available.

   45. In relation to the application to Nottingham County Council regarding
       adoption, there is no right to adopt in  law.  A  letter  dated  27th
       September 2014 from Calico Social Work Consultancy Ltd refers  to  an
       appointment on 9th October 2014 for the purposes of  Part  1  of  the
       assessment to  Foster  with  Nottingham  Country  Council.  A  person
       wishing to adopt or foster is required to undergo  an  assessment  to
       see if they are suitable to provide care for other people's children.
       It is a lengthy and personal piece of  work,  which  impacts  on  and
       involves everyone who lives in the applicant's home.

   46.  In  addition  to  establishing  whether  an  applicant   meets   the
       requirements to care for a child it also assesses whether it  is  the
       right time for an applicant and their household  to  be  fostering  a
       child, which may require an examination of motives and in relation to
       which the lack of settled status and any mental health issues may  be
       problematic.

   47. An assessment should also enable Nottingham County  Council  and  the
       applicants to identify their family's skills  and  strengths,  whilst
       giving them a realistic view about what it involves. After the  first
       stage a report is prepared which will go to a panel  for  discussion.
       The report needs to demonstrate that an applicant is suitable to care
       for a child and that their home provides an appropriate environment.

   48. Stage two, ordinarily,  is  a  visit  from  a  Fostering  Supervising
       Worker. Stage three the checking of an applicant's suitability  which
       includes checks on all adults who will be involved  directly  in  the
       care of the child placed with agencies such as Health, Education, the
       Police, NSPCC, and Adults Services.  There is also a medical and need
       for two people to act as referees (non-relatives). Stage four is  the
       training stage for an applicant which forms part  of  the  assessment
       process. Stage five is the home  assessment  during  which  a  Social
       Worker will carry out a number  of  visits  during  which  a  lot  of
       personal information is gathered about an applicant's history to date
       and which consists of approximately eight visits as well as visits to
       nominated personal referees and preparation of the report.

   49. There is insufficient evidence to show all steps have been  completed
       and the Appellants approved to foster. Even though it is an admirable
       intention, if for genuine reasons, it is an aspiration at this  stage
       on the facts and no more.

   50. Although a report was provided in relation to the Islamic teaching on
       the subjects  referred  to  above,  insufficient  evidence  has  been
       provided to show that adoption is  not  available  in  Pakistan.  The
       Tribunal has judicial notice that agencies do  exists  to  facilitate
       adoption in Pakistan which is not prohibited in law,  as  do  clinics
       who offer assisted reproduction services  such  as  the  Reproductive
       Research Laboratory and IVF  Centre,  21-E,  Fazle-e-Haq  Road,  Blue
       Area, G-6 (Opp. Federal  Government  Services  Hospital),  Islamabad,
       Pakistan. The desire to parent if other  than  by  natural  means  of
       conception has not been shown to be an insurmountable obstacle.

   51. In relation to the pregnancy issues, there  is  no  evidence  from  a
       Consultant Gynaecologist relating to the  causation  of  unsuccessful
       pregnancies. Prevalence of miscarriage in pregnancy  is  more  common
       that many realise, the NHS stating that miscarriages are quite common
       in the first three  months  of  pregnancy  and  around  one  in  five
       confirmed pregnancies ends this way. Many early  miscarriages  happen
       because there is something wrong with the baby, such as a chromosomal
       abnormality. There can  be  other  causes  of  miscarriage,  such  as
       medical problems, infection, a poorly developed placenta  or  a  weak
       cervix that opens too early in the pregnancy.

   52. In R (on the application of Erimako)  v  SSHD  [2008]  EWHC  Civ  312
       Burnton J said  that  it  was  not  disproportionate  to  remove  the
       Appellant, whose wife, in her 40's had leave  to  remain,  when  they
       were undergoing  fertility  treatment  here  that  would  not  be  as
       effective in his home country, particularly in this  case  where  the
       prospects were at best uncertain.

   53. The remaining issue is that of the presence of the grave  in  the  UK
       where the Appellants stillborn child is buried.  It is accepted  that
       the grave cannot be opened and the child reburied in Pakistan as that
       is said to be contrary to Islamic beliefs. The evidence of  a  weekly
       visit to the  grave  side  was  not  contested.  Notwithstanding  the
       teaching in Islam, a foetus is  not  a  'person'  to  whom  the  ECHR
       applies in their own right until they are born, a  position  mirrored
       in English law.  It is accepted that even if family  life  cannot  be
       enjoyed with a child who has not been  born  the  foetus  would  have
       formed part of the private life of his mother during his time in  the
       womb and to a lesser existent his father at that age.

   54. It has not been shown in the evidence that there is a need to  fulfil
       a  fundamental  religious  belief  to  attend  the  grave  and/or  to
       undertake a particular ceremony.  The  material  supports  the  claim
       that the reasons for the visits are the most understandable in  cases
       such as this, which is to grieve and seek  comfort  and  to  be  with
       their child. It  is  accepted  this  will  not  be  possible  if  the
       Appellant is removed to Pakistan and is joined with his wife. It  has
       not been shown, however, that the wife cannot return to visit as  she
       is a British citizen and has a right to do so or that  a  visit  visa
       could to be obtained if the requirements for the same  could  be  met
       for the Appellant.

   55. It is accepted that the Appellants'  wife  in  particular  will  have
       strong memories and emotions in relation to the loss, as  the  foetus
       is no doubt in her mind a child in the true sense as if born who  has
       been lost to her, and she may find the prospect of not being able  to
       visit the grave an unacceptable proposition at this time. Counselling
       has been provided and many who experience such loss do learn to  lead
       normal lives with only their  memories.  The  report  refers  to  the
       assistance the appellant's wife will gain from ongoing assistance and
       drug treatment for her depressive symptomology but it  has  not  been
       shown such is not available in Pakistan where she will  be  with  her
       husband and where they can continue to try for a family by natural or
       assisted means and pursue their wish to foster or adopt  if  this  is
       the only solution available to them.

   56. There is insufficient evidence to  show  that  the  impact  upon  the
       Appellant and his wife of being unable to visit  the  grave  is  such
       that it can be said this element creates an insurmountable  obstacle.
       It is an issue of personal grief  and  deep  feelings  following  the
       finality of the prospect of life for this child.

   57. The report refers to the risk of self-harm but it has not been  shown
       that medical treatment is not available in the  UK  and  Pakistan  to
       assist and manage the same if required. What is more important to the
       Appellants wife, the depth of love for her husband and desire  to  be
       with him and to have children together, or the need  to  be  able  to
       visit the grave in the UK on a regular basis? On  the  basis  of  the
       evidence given to the Perinatal Physiatrist the need to be  with  her
       husband and to have a child appears to be the determinative issue.

   58. I do not find the evidence made available established  the  existence
       of insurmountable obstacles and accordingly  that  it  has  not  been
       established that the exceptions to be found in EX.1. can be met.  The
       appeal under the Immigration Rules must therefore be dismissed.

   59. It was not suggested this is a case in which  there  is  no  need  to
       consider Article 8 ECHR although as the case  has  been  assessed  by
       reference EX.1 there is an overlap in the evidence to be  considered.
       An additional element that is not engaged as part of  the  assessment
       under the Immigration Rules but which must be part of  an  Article  8
       assessment is  the statutory provision to be found in Part 5A of  the
       2002 Act.

   60. By virtue  of  section  117A,  in  considering  the  public  interest
       question, the tribunal must (in particular) have regard  (a)  in  all
       cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and (b) in cases
       concerning   the   deportation   of   foreign   criminals,   to   the
       considerations listed in section 117C. Subsection (2)  provides  that
       "the public interest question"  means  the  question  of  whether  an
       interference with a person's right to respect for private and  family
       life is justified under Article 8(2). Section 117A(2)  is  mandatory.
       As  the  public  interest  provisions  are   contained   in   primary
       legislation they override existing case law. Section 117A(3) confirms
       that the Tribunal is required to carry out a balancing exercise.   In
       other words, the Tribunal cannot  just  rely  on  the  listed  public
       interest factors as a basis for rejecting a claim but must carry  out
       a balancing exercise where a person's  circumstances  engage  article
       8(1) to decide whether the proposed interference is proportionate  in
       all the circumstances. Section 117B  sets  out  the  public  interest
       considerations applicable in all cases.

   61.  Section  117B  reads:  Article  8:  public  interest  considerations
       applicable in all cases: (1)The maintenance of effective  immigration
       controls is in the public interest; (2) It is in the public interest,
       and in particular in the interests of the economic well-being of  the
       United Kingdom, that persons who seek  to  enter  or  remain  in  the
       United Kingdom are able to speak English,  because  persons  who  can
       speak English- (a) are less of a burden on  taxpayers,  and  (b)  are
       better able to integrate into  society;  (3)  It  is  in  the  public
       interest, and in particular in the interests of  the  economic  well-
       being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain
       in the United  Kingdom  are  financially  independent,  because  such
       persons- (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and (b) are  better  able
       to integrate into society; (4) Little weight should be given to-  (a)
       a private life, or (b)   a  relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying
       partner,  that is established by a person at a time when  the  person
       is in the United Kingdom unlawfully;  (5)  Little  weight  should  be
       given to a private life established by a person at a  time  when  the
       person's immigration status is precarious;  (6)  In  the  case  of  a
       person who is not liable to deportation, the public interest does not
       require the person's removal where- (a) the person has a genuine  and
       subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, and (b)  it
       would not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave  the  United
       Kingdom.

   62. In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) (Ockelton)  the  Tribunal
       held that Parliament has now drawn a sharp  distinction  between  any
       period of time during which a person has been in the UK "unlawfully",
       and any period of time during which that person's immigration  status
       in the UK was merely "precarious"; those who at any given date held a
       precarious  immigration  status  must  have  held  at  that  date  an
       otherwise lawful grant of leave to enter or  to  remain.  A  person's
       immigration status is "precarious" if their continued presence in the
       UK will be dependent upon their obtaining a further grant  of  leave;
       in some circumstances  it  may  also  be  that  even  a  person  with
       indefinite leave to remain, or a person who has obtained citizenship,
       enjoys a status that is "precarious" either because  that  status  is
       revocable by the Secretary of State as a result of  their  deception,
       or because of their  criminal  conduct.  In  such  circumstances  the
       person will be well aware that  he  has  imperilled  his  status  and
       cannot  viably  claim  thereafter  that  his  status  is  other  than
       precarious.

   63. In this case the Appellant entered the UK as a  student  which  is  a
       temporary status with no legitimate expectation of being entitled  to
       remain  without  a  further  grant.  As  such  his  status  has  been
       precarious and remains so to date.

   64. It is also submitted the Appellant has worked illegally in the UK and
       issue was made in  relation  to  the  wife's  account  given  to  the
       therapist at page 60 of the bundle in the psychologist  report  where
       it is recorded "Client  stated  she  has  no  friends  or  family  in
       Nottingham and she is always alone when her husband leaves for work".
       The Appellant had denied working in breach in his evidence  which  is
       contradicted by the evidence considered as a whole.

   65. The Appellant speaks English and gave his evidence in the same but as
       found in AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015]  UKUT  260  (IAC)  (Ockelton)  the
       Tribunal held that an appellant can obtain no  positive  right  to  a
       grant of leave to remain from either s117B (2) or (3),  whatever  the
       degree of his fluency in English, or the strength  of  his  financial
       resources.

   66. It is accepted there is a private and family life in the  UK.  It  is
       accepted that even if the relationship with other family  members  in
       the UK is not sufficient to satisfy the  definition  of  family  life
       under Article 8, it will form part of the Appellants private life.

   67. It has not been shown to be unreasonable for the  Appellant  and  his
       wife to continue their family or private life in Pakistan and  whilst
       there is great sympathy for this couple in relation to  their  child,
       in MG (Serbia and Montenegro) 2005 UKAIT 00113  the  tribunal  stated
       that sympathy for an individual did not  enhance  a  person's  rights
       under Article 8.

   68. The Respondent has discharged  the  burden  upon  her  to  prove,  in
       relation to the fifth of the Razgar questions, that the  decision  is
       proportionate to the legitimate aim relied upon  when  the  balancing
       act required by section 117 is properly undertaken.  Article  8  does
       not enable a person to choose there they wish  to  live  and  it  was
       known the Appellant did not have leave to remain when he was  married
       and that his position and the prospect of being able to live  in  the
       UK was by no means certain.

   69. An issue was raised in relation to the impact  upon  the  Appellant's
       wife if she returns to Pakistan as a person in a second marriage  who
       is childless.  It is accepted that in  some  sectors  of  society  in
       Pakistan there in an expectation of children within marriage and that
       a childless woman can experience harassment  and  discrimination.  It
       has not been shown that in all of Pakistan such will  be  experienced
       or  that  any  difficulties  that  may  be  encountered   from   such
       individuals is sufficient to make the decision disproportionate.

   70. In relation to the claim under Article 9 ECHR, this provides a  right
       to freedom of thought, conscience and  religion.  This  includes  the
       freedom to change a religion or belief, and to manifest a religion or
       belief in worship, teaching,  practice  and  observance,  subject  to
       certain restrictions that are "in accordance with law" and "necessary
       in a democratic society". It has not  been  shown  the  Appellant  is
       unable to practice his religion as a Muslim if returned  to  Pakistan
       which is a predominantly Islamic society. It has not been shown  that
       his faith requires him to remain in the UK or that if he is unable to
       visit the grave of his child as he does at this time that this  is  a
       disproportionate restriction on religious grounds.

   71. Article 12, the right for women and men of marriageable age to  marry
       and establish a family is pleaded but the appellant and his wife  are
       married and it has not been shown the State is preventing  them  from
       having a family. To find that this provision  permits  the  Applicant
       and his wife to choose the venue to have a child is in conflict  with
       Article 8 which does not permit a person to choose there they wish to
       live. It has not been  shown  the  couple  cannot  have  children  in
       Pakistan or that if they cannot due to undefined problems, that  this
       is something for which the UK government is  responsible.  As  stated
       above, insufficient evidence of the cause of the  failed  pregnancies
       has been provided. It has not  been  shown  this  element  makes  the
       decision disproportionate.

   72. The appeal under ECHR must therefore be dismissed.

Decision

   73. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has bene found to have materially erred
       in law and his decision set aside. I remake the decision as  follows.
       This appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

   74. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I continue that order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 29th July 2015
