
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/26215/2014
                                                               IA/26216/2014
                                                               IA/26217/2014
                                                           and IA/26218/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City House           |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 28th May 2015                     |On 10th June 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                 MOHAN SINGH
                              SUKHJINDER SINGH
                               ESHA KAUR GHAG
                             ABHIJOT SINGH GHAG
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Singh (Counsel, instructed by Charles Simmons
                    Immigration Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Smith who dismissed their appeals against the  Secretary
    of State's decision to refuse their applications for  leave  to  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules. The applications were made in June  2012
    and initially refused without removal directions  thereby  denying  the
    Appellants an in-country right of appeal. That  was  finally  obtained,
    after other legal proceedings, on the 6th or the 30th of June 2014.

 2. The Appellants immigration history and the basis of the applications is
    set out in full in the Tribunal papers and it is not intended to repeat
    it here. In summary the First Appellant came  in  1997  and  failed  to
    leave after the dismissal of his asylum  claim.  The  Second  Appellant
    came in May 2005 and overstayed after the expiry of her visit visa. The
    First and Second Appellants married in a Sikh ceremony in 2005 and have
    2 children who are the other Appellants, the Third Appellant  was  born
    in the UK on the 15th of December 2006.

 3. For the reasons given in the decision it was found that the  Appellants
    did not succeed under the Immigration  Rules  and  their  position  was
    considered under article 8  with  reference  to  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the best interests of the
    children and the case of EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874,  amongst
    others. The Judge clearly focussed on the position of the children  and
    expressly considered the position of the Third Appellant given that  he
    had been born in the UK more than 7 years before the appeal.

 4. The Appellants sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    grounds of the 17th of September 2014. Permission was  refused  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal but granted following submission of new grounds  to
    the Upper  Tribunal  of  the  20th  of  November  2014.  The  grant  of
    permission by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce was on the  basis  that
    the First-tier Tribunal may have erred  by  conflating  proportionality
    with reasonableness and had considered the former but not the latter.

 5. At  the  hearing  the  Appellants  were  represented  by  counsel.  The
    submissions made by both representatives are set out in the  Record  of
    Proceedings and referred to where relevant below. A central part of the
    Appellants' submissions was that the Judge  had  placed  too  great  an
    emphasis on the First Appellant's refusal to name the  place  where  he
    was working illegally and that infected the reasoning  applied  in  the
    decision. It was argued that the best interests of the children had not
    been fully considered and that further guidance was needed.

 6. It is clear from the decision in EV (Philippines) that the  immigration
    history of the parents is a highly relevant factor in assessing whether
    the removal of a child who has been in the UK for more than 7 years can
    be justified. Neither that case, nor Zoumbas [2013]  UKSC  74,  can  be
    said to assist the Appellants in this case and the  Judge  was  clearly
    entitled to have regard to  the  behaviour  of  the  First  and  Second
    Appellants in assessing the circumstances of the Appellants overall and
    to have regard to the fact that they would be removed as a family unit.

 7. There was a question raised by the Home Office whether the question  of
    the reasonableness of the children's removal arose as paragraph  276ADE
    was not engaged. By paragraph 400 of the  Immigration  Rules  in  cases
    where removal is being considered article 8 private life considerations
    are to be assessed against paragraph 276ADE. On that basis it would  be
    appropriate, by analogy to consider the reasonableness of the removal.

 8.  Whilst  there  is  some   difference   between   proportionality   and
    reasonableness that is limited and it has not been shown in this appeal
    that there is any  practical  difference  in  the  considerations  that
    apply. The differences were discussed in the case of ex p. Daly  [2001]
    UKHL 26. From the observations in that case it appears that the view of
    their lordships was that the proportionality assessment in the  context
    of the ECHR would be more demanding than a  reasonableness  review.  In
    effect if the decision could be said to be proportionate it would be  a
    reasonable decision. As Lord Steyn  observed  at  paragraph  27,  "Most
    cases would be decided in the same way whichever approach is adopted."

 9. There is nothing in this case  to  suggest  that  there  would  be  any
    difference in the result whichever approach were to  be  used  and  for
    practical purposes this is a distinction without a difference. In order
    to challenge a proportionality finding it would have to be  shown  that
    the Judge had acted irrationally, Mukarkar [2006] EWCA Civ  1045.  That
    is not alleged and is not made out.

10. The addition of a consideration of reasonableness to  the  question  of
    the removal of a child who has been in the UK for  over  7  years  must
    contain  an  assumption  that  a  child  will  have  settled,  received
    education and, as the get older, become  more  involved  in  the  wider
    community and with an extended family. More is needed than the sort  of
    life that one would expect to be established in the time that the  rule
    contemplates otherwise anyone who had lived a normal life in the UK for
    7 years or more would succeed.

11. The fact is that the First and Second Appellants had chosen  to  ignore
    the rules that apply to them and had obtained for themselves and  their
    children advantages to which they are  not  entitled  including  health
    care and education. The  family  would  be  removed  together  and  the
    parents can assist the children with integration  into  Indian  society
    and education. The situation they find themselves in is  of  their  own
    making and could have been  avoided  if  they  had  returned  to  their
    country of nationality when required or at any point in the intervening
    period.

12. The Judge referred to the First Appellant's refusal to name  his  place
    of work at paragraphs 11 and 27. While  the  First  Appellant  was  the
    subject of adverse comments in paragraph 27 it cannot be said that this
    was an issue that unduly  infected  the  decision.  The  Judge  clearly
    considered  all  relevant  factors  and  the  evidence  that  had  been
    presented. The decision reached was clearly open to him on the evidence
    presented and for the reasons given by him. Accordingly I find that the
    decision contains no error of law and it stands as the disposal of  the
    Appellants' appeals.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  make  no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing these appeals I make no fee award.



Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Parkes(IAC)
Dated: 9th June 2015

