
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26907/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27 September 2017                     |On 10 October 2017                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                        Mr Md Shajedur Rahman shajid
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr A Razzaq-Siddiq, Counsel.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use the titles by
    which the parties were known before the First-tier  Tribunal  with  the
    Secretary of State referred to as "the Respondent" and Mr  Md  Shajedur
    Rahman Shajid as "the Appellant".

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who on  3  October  2014  made
    application for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant under  the  Points  Based  System.  Prior  to
    submitting his application, on 6 August 2013, he applied for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant. For this application,  he
    submitted a TOEIC certificate  from  the  Educational  Testing  Service
    (ETS) to  his  Sponsor  in  order  for  them  to  provide  him  with  a
    Confirmation of Acceptance of Studies (CAS).

 3. ETS has  a  record  of  the  Appellant's  speaking  test.  Using  voice
    verification software, ETS is able to detect when a  single  person  is
    undertaking multiple tests. ETS undertook a check  of  the  Appellant's
    test and  confirmed  to  the  Respondent  that  there  was  significant
    evidence to conclude that the certificate was fraudulently obtained  by
    the use of a proxy test taker. ETS declared the Appellant's test to  be
    invalid. On the basis of this information, the Respondent was satisfied
    that the certificate was fraudulently obtained  and  as  a  result  the
    Appellant's application was refused with reference to paragraph  332(2)
    of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended) and paragraph 320(7B). The
    Respondent communicated the same to the Appellant on 10 July 2015.  The
    Appellant appealed and as his application  was  lodged  after  6  April
    2015, the Appellant's right to  appeal  was  limited  to  human  rights
    grounds only.

 4. That appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Kainth who in
    a decision promulgated on 19 December 2016 allowed it.  The  conclusion
    to his decision stating that:-

         "The appeal is allowed to the extent that the Respondent is yet  to
         make a lawful decision."

 5. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  Judge
    of the First-tier Lambert in a decision dated 25 July 2017. The Judge's
    reasons are:-

         "1.  The Respondent seeks permission to  appeal,  10  days  out  of
             time, against a decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
             Kainth) who, in a decision promulgated on 19/12/16 allowed the
             Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State decision  to
             refuse  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  migrant.  The  late
             application is unexplained, but I note that it  occurred  over
             the Christmas/New Year holiday period.

          2. The issue was  a  claimed  fraudulent  English  language  test
             result. The grounds challenge the  judge's  finding  that  the
             Secretary of State had not discharged the burden of  proof  of
             proving deception, arguing failure to have regard to  all  the
             evidence and to  the  Court  of  Appeal  decision  in  Shehzad
             [2016].

          3. There is  an  arguable  absence  of  adequate  evidence  based
             reasoning in the judge's conclusions at paragraphs 15 and  17,
             compounded by arguable failure to distinguish between, and  to
             make findings in relation to satisfaction of,  the  respective
             evidential burdens on each party and the ultimate legal burden
             of proof on the respondent.

          4. There is therefore an arguable error of law disclosed  by  the
             application. Time is extended."

 6. Thus the appeal came before me.

 7. At the outset Mr Bramble handed up the authority  of  Majumder  v  SSHD
    [2016] EWCA Civ 1167 and  submitted  that  the  circumstances  of  this
    appeal fell within Category 3 as referred to in  paragraph  32  of  the
    decision in Majumder. It states:-

         "The third category also consists of appeals by  the  Secretary  of
         State, but where the appeal is against the decision in which it was
         held that the generic  evidence  had  not  discharged  the  initial
         evidential burden and was thus erroneous in that respect, but  that
         other evidence meant that the Secretary of  State  would  not  have
         been able to discharge the legal burden. Mr Kovats  indicated  that
         in this class of  case,  also  without  giving  an  undertaking  in
         respect of any particular case, the Secretary of State  was  minded
         to concede and to abandon the appeal."

 8. In those circumstances, he  submitted,  there  is  within  the  Judge's
    decision a material error of law and the appeal should be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

 9. Mr Razzaq-Siddiq, naturally, did not try to persuade me otherwise.

10. I share Mr Bramble's analysis and find that within the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge there is a material error of law.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
involved the making of an error on a point  of  law.  The  decision  is  set
aside. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  dealt  with
afresh  pursuant  to  Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice 7.(b), before any Judge aside  from  Judge
Kainth.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date 9 October 2017.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard






