
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/26949/2014
     IA/26952/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 23 December 2014                           |On 20 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                               MRS HINA BATOOL
                             Mr ALI KAUSAR RIZVI
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Waheed, Counsel, instructed by Saj Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Miss C Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The  appellants  are  Pakistani  citizens  and  are  wife  and  husband
    respectively.  The second appellant is a dependant of the first.   They
    seek to appeal against the decision of the  respondent  dated  12  June
    2014, refusing to vary their leave to remain in the United Kingdom  and
    to remove by way of directions under Section 47 of the 2006 Act.

2.   The first appellant was issued with a student visa valid  from  12  May
    2011 until 15 September 2012.  She arrived in the United Kingdom on  29
    May 2011 with her dependent spouse.  On 11 September 2012  she  applied
    to extend her leave as a student and was granted leave from 25  January
    2013 to 28 February 2014.  On 26 February 2014  the  appellant  applied
    for leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules on the basis that  to
    remove her to Pakistan in her present precarious state of health  would
    be to expose her to a life threatening  situation  such  as  to  engage
    Article 3 of the ECHR.

3.   The respondent's Reasons for Refusal Letter is dated 12 June  2014  and
    cites six medical reports dated from 6 December  2012  to  25  February
    2014.  The medical condition of the first appellant is noted and it  is
    considered  by  the  respondent  as  can  be  seen,  particularly  from
    paragraphs 7 to 9 of the  decision  letter,  that  treatment  would  be
    available to the appellant in Pakistan.  It  was  not  considered  that
    there was  any  matter  that  was  exceptional  or  compelling  in  her
    circumstances which would preclude her removal.

4.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio on 22 September  2014.   The
    appeal was dismissed both in respect of the Immigration  Rules  and  on
    human rights grounds.

5.   The appellant sought to appeal against that  decision.   Permission  to
    do so was granted on 17 November 2014. Thus the matter comes before  me
    in pursuance of that grant.

6.   Mr Waheed, who represents the appellant, relies  upon  the  grounds  of
    appeal which in effect  makes  two  submissions  of  challenge  to  the
    determination of Judge Adio.  The first challenge is to the effect that
    the appellant is suffering from a  particularly  rare  and  potentially
    dangerous  condition  that  requires  careful  monitoring  and   expert
    handling.  It contends that the Judge failed to understand  the  nature
    of that condition, as indicated by the remark that  the  appellant  was
    not suffering from a life threatening condition.

7.   The second submission being that there would be no  adequate  treatment
    for that condition in Pakistan and that to remove her from the security
    of her treatment in the United Kingdom would expose the appellant to  a
    real risk of harm of the severity as to engage Article 3 of the ECHR.

8.   In support of the first proposition  Mr  Waheed  sought  permission  to
    produce an up-to-date medical report dated 19 December  2014  from  the
    University College London Hospital.  It is to be noted that  a  request
    for an up-to-date medical report was refused by Judge Adio but it seems
    to me that it would be entirely fair to  have  regard  to  all  medical
    reports on this matter.

9.   It is to be noted that  the  appellant  has  a  diagnosis  of  vascular
    ehlers danlos syndrome and that investigation led  to  a  diagnosis  of
    duplicated uterus, small kidney,  and  abdominal  aortic  aneurysm  and
    splenic artery aneurism.  There was before the  First-tier  Tribunal  a
    bundle of documents filed on behalf  of  the  appellant  including  her
    witness statement and a number of  medical  reports,  particularly  one
    from Dr Neeti Ghali who is a consultant  in  clinical  genetics.   That
    clearly sets out the  nature  of  vascular  EDS  which  speaks  of  the
    examinations that have been carried out in relation to that  condition.
    The report contains details of the condition.

10.   Essentially  the  most  significant  implications  are  that  of   the
    fragility of the blood vessels, giving an increased risk of  developing
    aneurisms in the blood vessels and the  perforation  of  blood  vessels
    which could be life threatening.  There is also a significant  risk  to
    hollow organs such as the bowel or womb, which are at an increased risk
    of rupture, which if so ruptured would cause major complications.

11.  The report concludes as follows:-

           "With  regards  to   Mrs   Batool''s   health,   she   is   being
         conservatively managed for her aneurisms by the  vascular  surgeons
         as surgery is avoided if at all possible."

12.  Essentially it is important in this condition that the  blood  pressure
    is monitored and kept under strict control.   The  appellant  has  been
    referred to a cardiologist  at  the  heart  hospital  in  London  which
    specialises in inherited cardiac conditions such as vascular EDS.

13.  Stress is clearly an important factor in relation to blood pressure.

14.  The report concludes as follows:-

          "I am not aware of  special  expertise  into  vascular  EDS  being
         available in Pakistan.  However, there will  be  cardiologists  who
         would be aware of the condition but may not  be  very  familiar  in
         managing the condition as it is rare."

15.  The more recent report adds very little to what has gone  before.   The
    main problem with the aneurisms being that they could suddenly rupture,
    causing  bleeding.  If  that  happened  she  would  require  specialist
    surgery.  The medication which the appellant is taking to  monitor  her
    conditions is  set  out  with  the  statement  that  there  must  be  a
    meticulous control of her blood pressure because if  that  becomes  too
    high then that would put her at an increased risk of vascular  rupture.



16.  It is said that the life expectancy of patients with  vascular  EDS  in
    general is significantly shortened and that limited  access  to  health
    care, particularly expert vascular surgery, in the case  of  emergency,
    might well have an impact on her life expectancy.

17.  The author of the report of 19 December 2014, Professor Elliot, has  no
    knowledge of health care facilities in Pakistan and indicates that  the
    appellant would  require  highly  specialised  care  in  the  event  of
    emergency.  Stress and depression  would  be  likely  to  have  adverse
    consequences for her.  Long journeys are not recommended.

18.  It is clear from the determination that  Judge  Adio  has  set  out  in
    considerable detail the nature of the condition  as  described  in  the
    reports.  Specific mention is  made  in  paragraph  20  of  the  latest
    medical record of  February 2014 and a recognition that  the  appellant
    has an extremely rare condition.

19.  In the report of 25 February  2014  reference  was  made  to  the  last
    correspondence being received from the cardiologists in July 2013.  The
    author, Dr Ghali, indicated that he had met the appellant on 8 February
    2013 and offered annual follow-up clinic.   She was last seen in clinic
    on 24 May 2012.

20.  It is suggested in the grounds of appeal that the  Judge  misunderstood
    the frequency with which the appellant requires to be monitored.  It is
    said it is not annually but four times a year.

21.  Be that as it  may,  the  evidence  that  is  presented,  is  that  the
    appellant has a potential  dangerous  condition  which  is  at  present
    stable; does not require current medical intervention but rather it  is
    carefully monitor both as to her blood reassure and to the condition as
    a whole.

22.  Criticism is made of the Judge for indicating  that  the  appellant  is
    not suffering from a life threatening condition.  Such a comment is  of
    course  to  be  seen  within  the  context  of  paragraph  26  of   the
    determination that the appellant has not been  referred  for  emergency
    medical treatment.  Essentially  the  medical  role  at  present  is  a
    monitoring one with the medication to control blood pressure.

23.  I do not find therefore that the Judge has misunderstood the nature  of
    the condition in the determination.

24.  The next issue is treatment in Pakistan.  Clearly that is  relevant  to
    the appellant's return to Pakistan. The  position  of  the  respondent,
    both in the Reasons for Refusal Letter and indeed in  the  response  to
    the grounds of appeal under Rule 24, is that there is medical treatment
    available to the appellant in Pakistan.  The respondent has set out  in
    some detail clarifying  her  position  so  far  as  the  potential  for
    treatment is concerned.

25.  The appellant has adduced  little  evidence  to  the  contrary.  It  is
    recognised that the heart hospital  in  London  has  the  expertise  to
    monitor and if need be react to the illness. Little evidence  has  been
    adduced that such  expertise  is  not  otherwise  available  elsewhere,
    particularly  in   Pakistan   which   has   a   sophisticated   medical
    establishment.  As  Miss  Johnstone,  who  represents  the   respondent
    indicated, the fact that Dr Ghali is not aware of specialist  expertise
    into vascular EDS being available in Pakistan is not the same as saying
    that there is no expertise available in Pakistan for that condition.

26.  Mr Waheed relies upon the latest report which indicates  that  part  of
    the medication which is set out in that report may not be available  in
    Pakistan and that may be a  cause  of  concern.   However  there  is  a
    paucity of evidence available as to what is  or  is  not  available  in
    Pakistan to help with the monitoring  of  the  appellant's  conditions.
    Such evidence that has been presented, mainly by the respondent,  would
    tend to indicate that there is treatment that is available.  It  is  to
    be borne in mind, as canvassed before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,
    that the medical treatment would be paid for through the  kind  offices
    of the appellant's sister who is also a general practitioner in the UK.



27.  Thus the financing of  medical  treatment  whether  in  the  UK  or  in
    Pakistan perhaps is less of an  issue  than  the  availability  of  the
    medication and/or emergency  treatment  if  required.   Miss  Johnstone
    contends that such treatment  is  available  if  required  outside  the
    United Kingdom and relies  understandably  upon  that  which  has  been
    expressed by the respondent in the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter.   The
    Judge at paragraph 7 notes that particular matter.

28.  Mr Waheed indicates that paragraph 31 of the  determination  the  Judge
    is incorrect in speaking of an annual regular follow up  when  in  fact
    the appellant requires monitoring four times a year.

29.  For my part it is difficult to criticise the Judge for that  conclusion
    bearing in mind the last paragraph of the letter of Dr Ghali namely "We
    offer annual follow-up on our patients with vascular EDS.   Mrs  Batool
    was last seen in clinic on 24 May 2013."

30.  Whether or not she is requires monitoring and check up once a  year  or
    four times a year,  the  reality  of  the  situation  is  that  she  is
    currently not undergoing treatment for her  condition  other  than  the
    strict control of her blood pressure.   Miss  Johnstone  contends  that
    there are cardiologists in Pakistan who are familiar with the condition
    and are perfectly capable of monitoring that  situation  and  there  is
    some support for that conclusion in the Reasons for Refusal Letter.

31.  I do not find the Judge to be in error in  the  approach  taken  within
    the determination.

32.  A further challenge that is made to the determination and  the  grounds
    is essentially that the Judge failed to uphold the appeal under Article
    8 in the sense of the importance for the appellants of  the  family  in
    the United Kingdom.  She and the second appellant have no  children  of
    their own and are very much attached to her husband's brother  and  his
    family. Not only do they accommodate them and look  after  their  moral
    and physical welfare.  There are two children to that couple  and  both
    the appellant and her husband are very attached to them and the family.
    In Pakistan the appellant has her parents  who  are  old  and  retired.
    There is no other family other than in the UK.   Her  husband  has  two
    brothers living in  the United Kingdom and the  appellant  also  has  a
    brother living in the United Kingdom.   Thus  is  it  argued  that  the
    primary support for the appellant and her husband lies  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Such  support  is  both  necessary  for  their  economic  and
    emotional wellbeing as well as being helpful  to  minimise  stress  and
    difficulty.  It is said that the Judge failed  to  take  those  matters
    into account in the balancing exercise that was to be conducted.

33.  Mr Waheed also submitted that it was very  relevant  to  the  issue  of
    proportionality  that  finance  was  available  for  treatment.     The
    appellant would not be a burden upon society and therefore there was no
    good reason why it was in the  public  interest  that  they  should  be
    removed from the jurisdiction.

34.  Miss Johnstone submits that the maintenance of a system of  immigration
    policy is an  important  reason  and  justification  for  removal.  The
    appellant came to the United Kingdom with limited leave and  now  seeks
    to remain on compassionate grounds.  She  submits  that  there  are  no
    compassionate or compelling grounds  that  would  outweigh  the  proper
    exercise of immigration control.   The  appellant  does  not  meet  any
    Immigration Rule and therefore, in the absence of  any  compelling  and
    exceptional circumstances, there is no reason why she should not return
    to Pakistan.

35.  The Judge recognised in paragraph 29  of  the  determination  that  the
    illness was a compelling circumstance not sufficiently recognised under
    the Rules but  concluded in paragraph 31 that  it  is  a  proportionate
    decision because of the ability to manage that condition.

36.  Applying the reasoning in Gulshan it is  difficult,  without  more,  to
    see what  other  than  the  nature  of  the  illness  would  amount  to
    compelling circumstances  outside  the  rules.   Accepting  the  family
    context as set out by the appellant such was enjoyed  on  a  relatively
    short time frame, when the appellant  was  permitted  to  come  to  the
    United Kingdom on a different basis to the one from which she now seeks
    to remain.  Reliance is placed upon family life but the quality of  the
    same is not such as to  engage  the  Kugathas  test.  There  is  little
    evidence of emotional dependency other than  the  companionship  to  be
    expected in a family  setting.   It  is  to  be  noted  that  both  the
    appellant  and  her  husband  seemingly  lived  in   Pakistan   without
    difficulty until relatively recently when she  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in May 2011.

36.  Although it would have been desirable for the Judge to have  looked  in
    a little more detail as to the family situation of the appellants it is
    not of such quality, as I so  find,  as  would  have  made  a  material
    difference to the outcome in relation to Article 8.

37   Overall I there to be no error of law in the assessment  of  the  claim
    either under Article 3 or 8 of the ECHR.

38. In the circumstances therefore the appeal before the Upper Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

39. The original decision shall stand namely that the appeal  is  dismissed
    in respect of Articles 3 and 8 of ECHR.



Signed        Date 23 December 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

