
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/26968/2014
                                                               IA/26969/2014
                                                               IA/26970/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                  |
|On 28 July 2015                      |On 4 August 2015                      |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Miss IFEOMA OKWEREOGU
                   Miss KAOSISOCHUKWU GENEVIEVE OKWEREOGU
                     Master CHUKWEBUKA JOSHUA OKWEREOGU
                        (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms U Uwaezuoke, Duncan Lewis, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1     I have considered whether any party  requires  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of the appellants. Having  considered  all  of  the  circumstances  and  the
evidence, I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity order.

2     For the purposes of this decision, I refer to the Secretary  of  State
for the Home Department as the respondent and to  the  Okwereogu  family  as
the appellants, reflecting their position before the First Tier Tribunal.

3     This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  against  a  decision  of
First Tier Tribunal Judge Adio ("the  judge")  promulgated  on  24  November
2014  which  allowed  the  appellants'  appeals  under   Paragraph   276ADE,
Paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM and under Article 8.

Background

4     The second  and  third  appellants  are  the  children  of  the  first
appellant. They are all Nigerian citizens. On 9 June  2014,  the  respondent
refused the appellants' applications for leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  and
decided to remove each  of  the  appellants  from  the  UK.  The  appellants
appealed against that decision.

The Judge's Decision

5     All three appellants appealed to the First Tier  Tribunal.  The  judge
allowed the appeal of the first and second appellants under the  Immigration
Rules, finding that the second appellant is a qualifying child in  terms  of
Paragraph 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  and
that it is not reasonable for the second appellant  to  leave  the  UK.  The
judge therefore found that the first appellant fulfils the  requirements  of
EX.1(a) of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules. The appellant  allowed  the
third appellant's appeal  after  considering  Article  8  ECHR  outwith  the
Immigration Rules.

6     The  judge's  decision  was  promulgated  on  24  November  2014.  The
respondent sought leave to appeal. Upper Tribunal Judge Deans, sitting as  a
judge of the First Tier Tribunal refused  leave  to  appeal  on  12  January
2015. The respondent renewed their application to appeal and on 1 May  2015,
Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun granted permission to appeal.

The Hearing

7      Mr  Kandola  for  the  respondent  submitted  that  the   judge   had
misdirected himself in law and failed to  apply  the  entire  provisions  of
Section 117B of the 2002 Act. He was critical of the judge  for  considering
the second appellant's circumstances first. He argued that false  logic  had
been applied by the judge to find (at [18]) that it  would  be  unreasonable
for the second appellant to return to Nigeria, arguing that  the  judge  had
not considered that the first appellant (the mother of the second and  third
appellants) would return with both children to Nigeria. He argued  that  the
misdirection in law and the flaws in logic vitiated the finding that it  was
unreasonable for the second appellant to leave the UK and so undermined  the
whole basis of allowing the appeals for each of the  appellants.  He  argued
that the judge had taken an incorrect approach to Section 117B of  the  2002
Act and that had he considered each of the factors set out there as part  of
the balancing exercise, a different decision would have been reached.

8     Ms Uwaezuoke, Solicitor for  the  appellants  argued  that  the  judge
correctly directed himself in law and that there  are  no  errors  contained
within the decision. Ms Uwaezuoke reminded me  that  the  first  and  second
appellants' appeals were allowed within the Immigration Rules and the  third
appellant's appeal was allowed  after  considering  Article  8  outwith  the
Immigration Rules. She argued that a careful reading of  each  paragraph  of
the decision clearly indicates (in  line  with  Dube  (ss.117A-117D)  [2015]
UKUT 00090 (IAC)) the judge considered each of the factors of  Section  117B
of the 2002 Act. I was urged to dismiss the appeal and  allow  the  decision
to stand.

Analysis

9     In Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC) it was  held  that  (i)
Key features of ss.117A-117D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
2002 include the following: (a) judges  are  required  statutorily  to  take
into account a number of enumerated considerations. Sections  117A-117D  are
not, therefore, an a la carte menu of  considerations  that  it  is  at  the
discretion of the judge to apply or not apply.   Judges  are  duty-bound  to
"have regard" to the specified  considerations.  (b)  these  provisions  are
only expressed as being binding on a "court or tribunal".  It  may  be  that
the  Secretary  of  State  will  consider  it  in  the  interests  of   good
administration and consistency of decision-making on  Article  8  claims  at
all levels to have express regard to  ss.117A-117D  considerations  herself,
but she is not directly bound to do so. (c) whilst  expressed  in  mandatory
terms, the considerations specified are not expressed as  being  exhaustive:
note use of the phrase "in particular" in s.117A(2): " In  considering  the
public interest question, the court or tribunal must  (in  particular)  have
regard- ". (d) section 117B enumerates considerations  that  are  applicable
"in all cases", which must include foreign criminal cases. Thus when  s.117C
(which deals with foreign criminals) states that it  sets  out  "additional"
considerations that must mean considerations in addition to  those  set  out
in s.117B. (e) sections 117A-117D do  not  represent  any  kind  of  radical
departure from or "override" of previous case law on Article  8  so  far  as
concerns the need for a structured approach.  In  particular,  they  do  not
disturb the need for judges to ask themselves the five questions set out  in
Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27.   Sections  117A-117D  are  essentially  a  further
elaboration  of   Razgar's   question   5   which   is   essentially   about
proportionality and justifiability. (ii) It is not an error of law  to  fail
to refer to ss.117A-117D considerations if the judge has  applied  the  test
he or she was supposed to apply according to  its  terms;  what  matters  is
substance, not form.

10    In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) the  Tribunal  held  that
when the question posed by s117B(6) is the same question posed in  relation
to children by paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv), it must be posed  and  answered  in
the proper context of whether it was reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to
follow its parents to their country of origin; EV (Philippines). It is  not
however a question that needs to be posed and answered in relation to  each
child more than once.

11    The error  that  the  judge  made  is  that  his  starting  point  was
considering the  second  appellant's  appeal  in  isolation.  The  judge  is
correct that the second appellant is a qualifying child for the purposes  of
Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, but the consideration of whether or not  it
is reasonable for the second appellant to leave the UK did not take  account
of the facts and circumstances of all family  members.  The  judge  did  not
adequately consider the immigration history of each of  the  appellants  nor
did he consider the position  of  the  first  and  third  appellants  before
coming to the conclusion that the second appellant  faced  the  prospect  of
return to Nigeria alone.

12    It is only once the judge decided that the outcome of the  appeal  for
the second appellant that he moved  on  to  consider  the  first  and  third
appellants and  his  decision  in  relation  to  the  second  appellant  was
determinative  of  the  appeals  of  the  first  and  third  appellants.  He
effectively made the first and third appellants dependant  upon  the  appeal
of the second appellant which is an incorrect approach.

13    Although it is clear from  the  decision  that  the  judge  considered
Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, what is not clear is his interpretation  of
the phrase "...the public interest does not require removal where  a  person
has a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a  qualifying
child..." It is equally not clear that he  considered  the  other  balancing
factors set out in Section 117B of the 2002 Act. It therefore  appears  that
an inadequate balancing exercise has been undertaken. I therefore find  that
the decision contains material errors in law and requires to be remade.

My Findings of Fact

14    The first appellant entered the UK illegally in or about  April  2004.
The first appellant has never had leave to enter the UK nor leave to  remain
in the UK.

15    On 25 April 2007, the second appellant was  born  in  the  UK.  On  13
September 2008, the third appellant was born  in  the  UK.  On  16  December
2012, the first appellant delivered her third child in the UK.

16    The first appellant is separated from the father  of  the  second  and
third appellants. The  first  appellant  has  sole  responsibility  for  the
second and third appellants. Their father occasionally sees them.

17    None of the appellants have ever had leave to enter or remain  in  the
UK. On 13 August 2008, the first  appellant  submitted  an  application  for
leave to remain in the UK outside  the  Immigration  Rules.  Her  claim  was
rejected. On 3 October 2008, the first appellant  submitted  an  application
for leave to remain in the UK listing the second  and  third  appellants  on
her claim. Her claim was refused on 20 July 2009 without a right of  appeal.
The first appellant sought reconsideration and the decision  was  maintained
on 2 October 2009.

18    On 3 March 2010, the first appellant submitted an application  as  the
dependent spouse of her partner's parallel application for leave to  remain.
That application was refused with no right of appeal on 28 January 2011.  On
30 November 2012, the first appellant submitted an application for leave  to
remain on the basis of Article 8 ECHR with the second and  third  appellants
as her dependents. That application was refused on 15 July  2013  without  a
right of appeal.

19    The appellants sought reconsideration of the refusal of 15 July  2013.
On 9 June 2014, the respondent adhered to the decision of 15 July  2013  and
issued decisions to remove each of  the  appellants.  It  is  against  those
decisions that the appellants appeal.

20    The second appellant  is  a  qualifying  child  for  the  purposes  of
Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

21    The first appellant was 26 when she entered the  UK.  She  is  now  36
years of age. The second appellant  attends  primary  school  where  she  is
making good progress. She plays a musical instrument and  enjoys  sport  and
dancing. The third appellant goes to the same primary school as  the  second
appellant. He is making good progress there.  He  enjoys  sport  and  school
clubs. Both the second and third appellants have a number of friends.

22    The first appellant's youngest child lives with all three appellants.

23    The first appellant has not had the benefit of anything more than  two
or three years of primary school education. The  first  appellant  has  lost
contact with her relatives in Nigeria. Her  parents  have  died.  The  first
appellant does not have a home to go to in Nigeria and does not have  either
income or employment in either the UK or Nigeria.

The Immigration Rules

24     The  first  appellant  cannot  succeed  under  Appendix  FM  of   the
Immigration Rules because she does not meet the requirements of  E-LTRPT2.2;
it is beyond dispute that the first appellant is (all three appellants  are)
present in the UK in breach of immigration laws.  The  respondent  correctly
goes on to consider whether or not Paragraph EX.1 applies.

25    It is a matter of concession that the first appellant  has  a  genuine
and subsisting parental relationship with each of her children and that  the
second appellant has lived in the UK continuously in the  UK  for  at  least
seven years. The test then becomes that "...it would not  be  reasonable  to
expect the child to leave the UK". The  respondent's  decision  would  cause
upheaval for all three appellants. The effect of the  respondent's  decision
would be that all three appellants would return to  Nigeria  as  one  family
unit. They will have their own mutual support but,  on  return  to  Nigeria,
they will enter the country without a home to go to and without a source  of
income and will have to start from the very beginning.

26    There is, however, no evidence  before  that  any  of  the  appellants
would face anything more than a period of upheaval.  There  is  no  evidence
placed before  me  to  indicate  that  any  of  the  appellants  would  face
destitution  on  return  to  Nigeria.  The  first  appellant   has   already
demonstrated that she is sufficiently resourceful to travel from Nigeria  to
the UK (where she had no home and no source  of  income)  and  to  establish
herself in the UK. There is no evidence placed before me  to  indicate  that
the first appellant's resourcefulness has diminished  with  the  passage  of
time. It is therefore logical to conclude that she would be able  to  return
to Nigeria and make provision for her children there -  where  she  will  be
entitled to work and so generate an income. On  the  first  appellant's  own
evidence, she has not worked in the UK in the 11 years that she has been  in
the UK because she  is  not  allowed  to  work.  On  the  first  appellant's
evidence, she relies on the charity of her local social work department  and
the community of faith at her church.

27    The question of reasonableness  requires  consideration  of  the  best
interests of the children. I am  mindful  of  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, and the case of ZH (Tanzania)  v  SSHD
[2011] UKSC 4.

28.   I remind myself of the cases of  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions
affecting  children;  onward  appeals),  [2013]  UKUT 00197.   It  is  the
intention of the SoS to ensure that the Appellants and the first  appellants
youngest child, stay together. It has long been established that  it  is  in
the interests of children to remain with  their  parents.  The  Respondent's
decision maintains the unity of  this  family  and  does  not  separate  the
children from their  mother.  The  interests  of  the  children  are  served
because the integrity of the family unit is not challenged.

29.   There is insufficient evidence to enable me to make a finding in  fact
that it would  be  unreasonable  for  the  second  appellant  to  return  to
Nigeria. That therefore draws me  to  the  conclusion  that  the  appellants
cannot succeed under Appendix FM.

Paragraph 276ADE

30    Because of the ages of each of the appellants and the length  of  time
they  have  been  in  the  UK,  none  of  the  appellants  can  fulfil   the
requirements of Paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) to (v) of  the  Immigration  Rules.
In order to succeed under  Paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),  the  appellants  would
have to demonstrate that they have no ties (including  social,  cultural  or
family) with Nigeria.

31    The first appellant has been in the UK for 10 years.  The  second  and
third appellants have lived all of their short lives  in  the  UK,  but  all
three appellants are all Nigerian citizens. The first  appellant  spent  the
first 26 years of her life in the UK.  It  is  at  least  implied  that  the
father of the second and third appellants  is  a  Nigerian  citizen  who  is
present in the UK without leave to remain in the UK.  No  reliable  evidence
that cultural ties to Nigeria have been broken is placed before me.  In  her
witness statement dated 2 October 2014, the first appellant  speaks  of  her
fear of return to Nigeria because of a combination of the general  situation
there and her  fear  of  restricted  economic  advantages.  No  evidence  is
offered of a loss of all ties to Nigeria. I can only therefore come  to  the
conclusion that the appellants cannot fulfil the requirements  of  Paragraph
276ADE(1)(vi). The appellants cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules.

Article 8 ECHR

34    Section 117 is a factor  to  be  taken  into  account  in  determining
proportionality. I appreciate that as the  public  interest  provisions  are
now contained in  primary  legislation  they  override  existing  case  law,
Section 117A(2) requires me to have regard to the considerations  listed  in
Sections 117B and 117C.  I am conscious of my statutory duty to  take  these
factors into account when coming to my conclusions.  I am  also  aware  that
Section 117A(3) imposes upon  me  the  duty  of  carrying  out  a  balancing
exercise. In so doing I remind  myself  of  the  guidance  contained  within
Razgar.

35     Section  117B(1)  provides  that   the   maintenance   of   effective
immigration control is in the public interest. I  consider  Section  117B(6)
because the second appellant is a  qualifying  child,  but  I  have  already
found that it would not be unreasonable to expect each of the appellants  to
leave the UK. I therefore have to find that the second  appellant  does  not
benefit from the operation of Section 117B(6).

36    The appellants all speak English and so the public interests  set  out
in  Section  117B(2)  are  met.  None  of  the  appellants  are  financially
independent; as I have already indicated, the appellants rely on  the  local
social work department and charity. Section 117B(3) operates against them.

37    The appellants are all in the UK unlawfully. Section 117B(4)  operates
against them. Section 117B(5) does not require  to  be  considered  in  this
appeal.

38    There are therefore more factors  in  Section  117B  weighing  against
each of the appellants than in their favour.

39    The effect of the respondent's decision  would  be  that  the  private
life that the appellants have established in the UK would come  to  an  end.
They would have to move from their home, they would be separated from  their
friends, they would be removed from the UK education system and  would  have
to start afresh in Nigeria. However, that private life has been  established
almost by stealth whilst the appellants have been in the UK  illegally.  The
first appellant has already demonstrated that she  is  a  resourceful  young
woman. The second and third appellants  are  young,  intelligent  and  able.
They face a big change in their life but  there  is  nothing  before  me  to
indicate that it is a change to which they cannot adapt.

40. In Zoumbas v SSHD 2013 UKSC 74 it was held that there was no  "substance
in the criticism that the assessment of the children's  best  interests  was
flawed because it assumed  that  their  parents  would  be  removed  to  the
Republic of Congo. ....It was  legitimate  for  the  decision-maker  to  ask
herself first whether  it  would  have  been  proportionate  to  remove  the
parents if they had no children and then, in considering the best  interests
of the children in the proportionality exercise,  ask  whether  their  well-
being altered that provisional balance. When one has regard to  the  age  of
the children, the  nature  and  extent  of  their  integration  into  United
Kingdom society, the close  family  unit  in  which  they  lived  and  their
Congolese citizenship, the matters  on  which  Mr  Lindsay  relied  did  not
create such a strong case for the children that their interest in  remaining
in the United Kingdom could have outweighed the considerations on which  the
decision-maker  relied  in  striking  the  balance  in  the  proportionality
exercise (paras 17 and 18 above). The  assessment  of  the  children's  best
interests must be read in the context of the decision letter  as  a  whole."
that there was no "irrationality in  the  conclusion  that  it  was  in  the
children's best interests to go  with  their  parents  to  the  Republic  of
Congo. No doubt it would have been  possible  to  have  stated  that,  other
things being equal, it was in the best interests of the children  that  they
and their parents stayed in the United Kingdom so  that  they  could  obtain
such  benefits  as  health  care  and  education  which  the  decision-maker
recognised might be of a higher standard than  would  be  available  in  the
Congo. But other things were not equal.  They  were  not  British  citizens.
They had no right to future education and health care in this country.  They
were part of a close-knit family with highly educated parents  and  were  of
an age when their emotional  needs  could  only  be  fully  met  within  the
immediate family unit. Such integration as had occurred into United  Kingdom
society would have been predominantly in the context of  that  family  unit.
Most significantly, the decision-maker concluded that they could be  removed
to the Republic of Congo in  the  care  of  their  parents  without  serious
detriment to their well-being".

41. In the case of EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  874
Lord Justice Lewison, stated that the best interests of the  children  must
be made on the basis that the facts are as they are in the real  world  and
if neither parent has the right to remain,  then  that  is  the  background
against which the assessment  is  conducted.   Thus  Lord  Justice  Lewison
thought that the ultimate question was whether it was reasonable to  expect
the child to follow the parent who had no right to remain to the country of
origin.`

42.  I  therefore  find  that  the   respondent's   decision   is   not   a
disproportionate breach of any of the appellants' article 8 ECHR rights.

Conclusion

43.   I therefore have to find that  the  respondent's  decision  is  not  a
disproportionate breach of any rights that  the  appellants  might  have  in
terms of Article 8 ECHR.

Decision

44    The decision promulgated on  24  November  2014  contains  a  material
error of law. I therefore set it aside.

45    I remake the decision.

46     The  appeals  of  all  three  appellants  are  dismissed  under   the
      Immigration Rules.

47    The appeals of all three appellants are dismissed on  Article  8  ECHR
      grounds.

48    There is no need for an anonymity direction.



    Signed                                                               3rd
                                                                 August 2015

                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
