
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/26644/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 January 2016                   |On 3 February 2016                   |


                                   Before


                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                         MR MOSES ADEBOYEJO ADEYOKUN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms C.R. Querton of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  decision
    of the respondent dated 13 June 2014 to refuse  to  issue  him  with  a
    residence card as an extended family member of an  EEA  national  under
    regulation 8 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 (hereinafter, 'the 2006 Regulations').

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas dismissed the appellant's appeal  in  a
    decision dated 1 April 2015.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Martin  on  5
    November 2015 stating that it is arguable that the Judge made a mistake
    of fact in saying that the appellant had not established  his  identity
    when his Nigerian passport was in the respondent's bundle. The lack  of
    identity was treated as significant by the  Judge  and  influenced  the
    adverse credibility findings which arguably an error of law. Permission
    to appeal was also granted on the basis that the Judge has arguably not
    given adequate reasons for finding that the appellant and  his  partner
    are not to be in a durable relationship.

 4. Thus the appeal came before me.

    First-tier Tribunal's findings

 5. The Judge did not accept that the appellant and his EEA sponsor are  in
    a durable or genuine relationship. The appellant's background was taken
    into account. The Judge noted that appellant is said  to  have  arrived
    into the United Kingdom with the valid  visit  visa  in  2008  and  has
    overstayed since that time. There is no evidence provided at all of his
    lawful entry into the United Kingdom. The Judge stated that as  of  the
    date of the hearing, there is no evidence  of  the  appellant's  actual
    identity.

 6. The appellant also made a previous application to remain in the  United
    Kingdom  on  the  same  bases  and  also  made   an   application   for
    naturalisation in 2012. Each of these was refused because he could  not
    and did not provide a valid identity. The Judge did not accept that the
    appellant's relationship is durable.

    The hearing

 7. At the hearing it was agreed between the parties that  the  appellant's
    identity document was not before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  Home
    Office Presenting Officer  stated  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has
    potential suspicions  about  the  appellant's  identity  document.  The
    parties agreed that the appeal be sent back to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for a decision to  be  made  on  the  validity  of  the  identification
    document and the durability of their relationship. Ms Querton said that
    since credibility of the appellant is an issue the appeal  be  remitted
    to the first-tier Tribunal for credibility findings.

    Decision as to whether there is an error of law in the determination

 8. I find that there is a material error of law in the determination which
    cannot be attributed to the Judge. The respondent was in possession  of
    the appellant's identity document and no clear reason has  emerged  for
    why this was not before the First-tier Tribunal Judge. I therefore find
    that as the Judge placed a great deal of weight on the  absence  of  an
    identity  document  for   her   adverse   credibility   findings,   the
    determination is not safe.

 9. The Judge also concluded that there was no substance to the  Article  8
    claim because it is not accepted that the appellant has  established  a
    family life with the sponsor because it is not accepted that  they  are
    in a genuine and/or durable relationship. Therefore, the durability  of
    the relationship is also an issue to be determined after  the  findings
    of fact about the  validity  or  otherwise  of  the  identity  document
    produced by the appellant.

10.  The  credibility  of  the  appellant's  identity  document   and   the
    appellant's claim that he is in a durable relationship is therefore  an
    issue which must be determined by the First-tier Tribunal.

11. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and direct that the
    appeal be placed before a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  other  than
    Judge Lucas on the first available date.

DECISION

The appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


      Dated this 1st day of February 2016
Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
.............................................
Mrs S Chana

