

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/26882/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Sent to parties on:          |
|On 14 November 2016                           |On 25 November 2016          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                               MRS ABISOLA [O]

                        (Anonymity DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills ([Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Elliott-Kelly (Counsel)




                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.  The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary  of  State  for  the
   Home Department (hereinafter the "Secretary of State"). The respondent in
   these proceedings is Mrs. Abisola [O] (hereinafter "the claimant ").  She
   is a national of Nigeria and was born on 12 November 1979.  No  anonymity
   direction has been sought or made.

2. On 9 January 2014 the Secretary of State  made  a  decision  refusing  to
   vary leave to enter or remain and deciding to remove  the  claimant  from
   the United Kingdom. In a determination dated 31 August  2013  the  First-
   tier Tribunal (Judge S D  Lloyd  hereinafter  "the  Judge")  allowed  the
   claimant's appeal against that decision. However, after a  hearing  of  2
   September 2016 I set aside the Judge's decision on the basis that she had
   applied an incorrect legal test but I did preserve  all  of  the  factual
   findings contained in the determination.

3. By way of background, the claimant had entered the UK on 8  May  2010  as
   the dependent of her husband (now  very  sadly  deceased)  who  had  been
   granted a visa on the basis of his employment in the UK. He  passed  away
   in tragic circumstances on 9 February 2011, his having committed suicide,
   and he is buried in the UK. Shortly after his passing, in fact on 21 July
   2011, the claimant gave birth to a daughter. On 5 July 2012  she  applied
   on behalf of herself and her daughter for leave to remain on the basis of
   private and family life. It is that application which has given  rise  to
   this appeal. There have, however, been some further factual  developments
   since  I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Most
   unfortunately, that has been in the  form  of  further  tragedy  for  the
   claimant and her family members. She has a sister in the  UK,  a  British
   Citizen, who is now  part  of  her  household.  Very  unfortunately,  her
   sister's son, who was a student, has passed away unexpectedly. It is said
   that the two sisters have afforded emotional support to each  other  with
   respect to the above events.

4. As I say, when I set aside the decision of the Judge I did  preserve  all
   of the factual findings she had made. It  is  right,  therefore,  that  I
   should set those out, in full, in  this  determination.  The  Judge  said
   this;

      "Private and family life under the Immigration Rules

       17.  It  is  not  averred  by  the  Appellant  that  she  meets   the
           requirements of Appendix FM. Her daughter is four years old  and
           is not a British citizen. She does not have a partner in the UK.

      18.  With  regard  to  private  life  and  paragraph  276ADE,  Bossadi
           (paragraph 276ADE; suitability; ties [2015] UKUT 42  (IAC)  sums
           up the issue. "The requirement set out in  paragraph  276ADE(vi)
           (in force from 9 July to 27 July 2014) to show that a person 'is
           aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously  in  the  UK  for
           less than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment)  but
           has no ties (including social,  cultural  or  family)  with  the
           country to which he would have to go if required  to  leave  the
           UK', requires a rounded assessment  as  to  whether  a  person's
           familial ties could result in support to him in the event of his
           return, an assessment taking into account  both  subjective  and
           objective considerations and also  consideration  of  what  lies
           within the choice of a claimant to achieve."

      19. In this case, the Appellant's parents have both died.  She  denies
           any other family of source of support in Nigeria, which I accept
           given that her evidence was credible and  there  is  nothing  to
           contradict her assertions. She  has  also  provided  documentary
           evidence of her father's death, which is not disputed.

      20. In addition, her evidence is that she has a strong  emotional  tie
           to her husband's grave and it has formed an  important  part  of
           teaching her daughter about her father. In the  refusal  letter,
           it was suggested that the body could be  exhumed  and  moved  to
           Nigeria. In evidence the Appellant clearly regarded this idea as
           abhorrent  and  that  it  would  create  further   problems   in
           connection to her  husband's  suicide,  which  I  have  outlined
           below. At the hearing Mr Evans retreated from  the  Respondent's
           position, at least to some extent, and confirmed that the  point
           was not being strongly pursued.

      21. Although these are relevant factors, by themselves there  are  not
           enough, given that she lived in Nigeria into adulthood, studying
           and working there. However,  she  has  also  given  evidence  in
           respect of the particular position  in  respect  of  suicide  in
           Nigeria. In her statement she firstly describes the reaction  of
           her husband's family, saying they "showed  no  understanding  to
           me, they have threatened and blamed me for the incident as  they
           believe that I should have had  some  indication  or  done  more
           since I was home on the date or  probably  I  was  not  vigilant
           enough...as stated  earlier  they  have  limited  education  and
           superstitions and fetish practices  are  common  and  they  have
           continued to threaten me" Whilst no  doubt  this  is  traumatic,
           again it may not be  enough  by  itself.  However,  one  of  the
           threats, as I understand it, is that  they  have  threatened  to
           remove her daughter from her. Her family life with her  daughter
           is therefore at some risk.

      22. She also goes on, "I am terrified of the thought of  returning  to
           Nigeria due to the social and cultural perception of a  suicidal
           act and the attending implication on me as his spouse and on  my
           child...more  so  it  is  taboo  for  an  individual  to  commit
           suicide..."

      23.  The  Appellant  has  also  provided  some  news  articles,  which
           although of modest evidential value, do  generally  support  her
           claim in respect  of  Nigerian  attitudes  to  suicide  and  the
           problems this can cause. The  Respondent  has  not  offered  any
           objective country information to counter this.

      24. In contrast, the Appellant's sister is in  the  UK  as  a  British
           citizen, she has  a  strong  social  and  religious  network  of
           support, and her daughter, whose best interests and welfare  are
           a primary consideration,  whilst  still  relatively  young,  has
           started school and is entering into an important  stage  of  her
           social and cultural development. I find this  is  likely  to  be
           damaged if she is returned to Nigeria with her mother  and  they
           find themselves as isolated as they expect to be. Other than her
           mother, the Appellant's daughter has no tie to Nigeria at all.

      25. Taking all of this  together,  I  accept  that  her  cultural  and
           social ties to Nigeria have been damaged by the  nature  of  her
           husband's  death.  Having  already  accepted  that  she  has  no
           remaining family ties in Nigeria, I find that 276ADE(vi) is  met
           and allow the appeal under the rules."

5.    I decided the Judge had erred in law because I was persuaded that  she
   had been obliged  to  consider  the  appeal  under  the  version  of  the
   immigration rules in existence at the date of hearing rather  than  those
   in existence at the date of decision. Put simply, an earlier  version  of
   paragraph 276ADE required the claimant to demonstrate that  she  had  "no
   ties" to Nigeria. However, from 28 July 2014 the  test  required  her  to
   demonstrate  that  there  would  be  "very   significant   obstacles   to
   integration" if she were to have to return to her home country. It seemed
   to me that the tests were somewhat different in nature such that it could
   not safely be said that the Judge would not inevitably have  reached  the
   same view had she applied what  I  considered  to  be  the  correct  test
   following what had been said by the Court of Appeal in YM (2014) EWCA Civ
   1292.

6.    The hearing concerned with the remaking of  the  decision  took  place
   before me on 14 November 2016. Representation was as stated  above.  Both
   the claimant and her sister Olubummi Afolake Odeseye were  in  attendance
   and were prepared to give oral evidence. I had been provided with further
   documentation on the claimant's behalf which included an updated  witness
   statement from each of them. However, Mr Mills indicated  that  what  was
   said in the updated statements would not be the subject  of  any  dispute
   before me and so it  was  decided  that  there  was  not,  in  fact,  any
   requirement for further oral evidence.

7.    Accordingly, I simply heard submissions as to how I should remake  the
   decision. Ms Elliott-Kelly, for the claimant, urged me to  conclude  that
   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  integration  or   re-
   integration such that the requirements of the immigration rules were met.
   She said that whilst she was aware that  under  the  new  appeals  system
   appeals can only be brought on human rights grounds,  any  such  positive
   finding as to the rules would translate into  success  on  the  basis  of
   article 8. Insofar as that might be thought to be a  difficulty  for  the
   claimant Mr Mills did not argue that the claimant would  not  succeed  if
   she were to meet paragraph 276ADE applying the post-28 July 2014  version
   of that paragraph.

8.    Ms Elliott-Kelly also contended that  even  if  I  were  to  find  the
   requirements of the rules were not met, the appeal should succeed outside
   of the rules. She  stressed,  amongst  other  things,  the  lack  of  any
   criminality, the findings regarding the claimant's late husband's  family
   and their hostility towards her, the threats they had made to remove  her
   daughter from her, the lack of any  family  to  help  the  claimant  upon
   return  to  Nigeria,  the  taboo  in  Nigeria  surrounding  suicide,  the
   claimant's illness (she  has  a  form  of  cancer  but  happily  that  is
   currently in abeyance), her wish to continue to visit her husband's grave
   and considerations regarding the best interests of her  child.  She  also
   argued that family  life  within  the  meaning  of  article  8  had  been
   established between the claimant and her sister given  the  support  they
   had provided for each other. Turning to section 117B of the  Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, she pointed out  that  the  claimant  is
   able to speak English and  has  supported  herself  without  recourse  to
   public funds.

9.    Mr Mills, in what was a very fair submission, acknowledged  the  force
   of the arguments both with respect to  the  immigration  rules  and  with
   respect to article 8 outside the rules. Nevertheless, he pointed out that
   paragraph 276ADE sets  a  high  threshold  in  view  of  the  term  "very
   significant  obstacles".  As  to  article  8  outside   the   rules,   he
   acknowledged  that  certain  features  of  the  case  could  properly  be
   described as compelling.  He pointed out that the  claimant  clearly  had
   had  free  health  care  provided  by   the   National   Health   Service
   notwithstanding  that  otherwise  she  had  been  financially  supporting
   herself but did conclude by  suggesting  I  might  be  able  to  properly
   conclude that the appeal should succeed.

10. I am grateful to both representatives who have  provided  me  with  much
   assistance.

11.    It is effectively  agreed  between  the  parties  that  if  I  am  to
   conclude that there would be very significant obstacles to integration if
   the claimant were to have to return to Nigeria then  she  would  succeed.
   Accordingly, that is the place for me to start.

12.   I have preserved a number of findings as indicated and they have  been
   set out above. I accept that the test to  be  applied  is  stringent.  Mr
   Mills is right about  that.  However,  I  have  concluded  that,  on  the
   individual facts of  this  case,  that  test  is  satisfied.  That  is  a
   consequence of an accumulation of various factors. In particular, though,
   both the claimant's parents have passed away and she does  not  have  any
   other family in Nigeria who can provide her with any form of support. She
   has been blamed for her husband's suicide by  her  husband's  family  who
   continue to reside in Nigeria. She has received a threat  to  the  effect
   that they will seek to remove her daughter from  her.  Accordingly,  "her
   family life with her daughter is therefore at some risk". Those  are  all
   preserved findings. She will face, in all probability,  some  disapproval
   in Nigeria due to attitudes there towards suicide. Again that  is  to  be
   characterised as a preserved finding given the content of paragraphs  21,
   22 and 23 of the Judge's determination. I  accept  Mr  Mills'  submission
   that the evidence does point to the claimant having previously worked  in
   Nigeria and having some qualifications which might aid her to  find  work
   in the future should that be  necessary.  However,  as  he  acknowledges,
   there may be problems with respect to ensuring someone is  able  to  look
   after her young child if she does work. It is not merely  a  question  of
   the claimant having difficulty with  respect  to  finding  work,  finding
   somewhere for herself and her child to live and  finding  suitable  child
   care arrangements, all probably difficult tasks  of  themselves  given  a
   lack of any family or financial support, but there is reason to think she
   may face positive hostility in setting herself up in  Nigeria  given  the
   accepted antipathy of her late husband's family  towards  her.  There  is
   also the risk that she may have to deal with an attempt of some  sort  to
   take her daughter away from her.  Putting  all  of  that  together  I  am
   satisfied that the necessary threshold is  reached.  The  appellant  does
   meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE,  in  particular   276  ADE(vi)
   which was the part  specifically  in  issue,  and  she  does,  therefore,
   succeed.

13.   I have also decided,  in  the  alternative,  that  she  would  succeed
   outside of the immigration rules if I had decided that  paragraph  276ADE
   was not met. That is because, in  addition  to  the  matters  which  have
   caused me to conclude that it is met, there are a number of factors which
   tie her to  the  UK  and  which  would  render  her  removal  to  Nigeria
   disproportionate. In that context, her late husband is  buried  here.  It
   was accepted by the Judge that she has "a strong  emotional  tie  to  her
   husband's grave and it has formed  an  important  part  of  teaching  her
   daughter about her father". There is the new circumstance surrounding her
   sister and I accept the evidence of increased closeness between them as a
   result of that. In looking at matters from the other  perspective,  I  do
   acknowledge the importance of the public interest in immigration control.
   I do take Mr Mills' point that although the claimant has  to  her  credit
   been able to support herself without recourse to public  funds,  she  has
   had free National Health Service treatment and, of  course,  there  is  a
   cost to that and therefore to the public purse. Nevertheless,  there  are
   here, factors not recognised within the immigration  rules  and  which  I
   find to be compelling. In particular, that relates to the suicide of  her
   husband and her understandable emotional  links  to  his  grave  and  her
   desire to be close to the grave as well as  her,  I  accept  particularly
   close, relationship with her sister given that the two have both  had  to
   deal with tragedy and have, I accept, supported each  other  as  to  that
   such  that  their  relationship  has  grown  closer.  Indeed,  in   those
   circumstances, I would accept Ms Elliott-Kelly's  submission  that  their
   relationship, unusually for one between adult siblings, does amount to  a
   family life within the meaning of article 8.  I find there are compelling
   circumstances which lead me to conclude the appeal should succeed outside
   the rules.

Decision

14.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of  an
   error of law and has been set aside. However, in remaking the decision  I
   allow the claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  of
   9 June 2014.

Anonymity

I make no anonymity order. None was made by the First-tier  Tribunal  and  I
have not been invited to make one.

                                                Signed


                       M                     R                     Hemingway
                  Judge of the Upper Tribunal


   Dated



To the Respondent

Fee award

I make no fee award.



                                                   Signed

                                               M         R         Hemingway
                                                             Judge  of   the
Upper Tribunal

                                                                 Dated
