

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26513/2011

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8 July 2013                                |On 10 July 2013              |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             Ifeanyichukwu Orji
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The respondent, Mr Orji, is an Austrian citizen who was  born  on  8
       June 1984.  He is now aged 29.   The  Secretary  of  State  appealed
       against the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  C.J.E.
       Nichols and Mr A.P.  Richardson  JP)  promulgated  on  23  May  2012
       allowing his appeal against her decision of 27 March 2012 to make  a
       deportation order against the  appellant.  It  replaced  an  earlier
       decision that had been made on 16 August  2011.   For  the  sake  of
       continuity, I shall refer to Mr Orji as 'the appellant', as  he  was
       before the First-tier Tribunal.


    2. The Secretary of State made her decision following the conviction of
       the appellant on 10 January 2011 at Snaresbrook Crown Court  for  an
       offence of assault occasioning actual bodily harm. The circumstances
       of the offences were that, whilst on bail, he breached the terms  of
       his bail by going to the home of his wife (whom  he  had  previously
       assaulted) and carried out a sustained assault upon her  at  a  time
       when she was eight months pregnant. The sentencing judge noted  that
       the appellant punched her in the face and stomach and  later  kicked
       her in the stomach. He remarked that the appellant had  a  piece  of
       tubing which he used to hit her over the body whilst threatening  to
       kill her. The appellant lit a  cigarette  and  pushed  it  into  her
       forehead; at one stage, throwing a match at her and  threatening  to
       kill her. He was sentenced on 7 February  2011  to  2  years  and  4
       months' imprisonment. At the conclusion of his  custodial  sentence,
       the appellant remained in immigration detention.

    3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 1 September  2001  to
       join his mother and two younger half-sisters, the  children  of  his
       mother's  second  marriage.  His  mother   had   acquired   Austrian
       citizenship on the  strength  of  her  re-marriage  to  an  Austrian
       national, the appellant's stepfather. The appellant's father remains
       in Nigeria. Having acquired Austrian  citizenship,  the  appellant's
       mother travelled to the United Kingdom in order to exercise her own,
       or her new husband's, Treaty rights.  The  mother's  acquisition  of
       Austrian citizenship permitted the appellant  to  enter  the  United
       Kingdom from Nigeria. I understand  that  the  appellant  has  never
       lived in Austria.

    4. Since arriving  in  the  United  Kingdom  some  12  years  ago,  the
       appellant has been convicted on nine occasions of nine offences. The
       two most recent offences concerned the two assaults upon  his  wife.
       However, an earlier decision made on 21 December 2006 to deport  the
       appellant was withdrawn when his appeal was allowed.  Unfortunately,
       this failed to deter the appellant who continued to  commit  further
       offences.

    5. Under Reg. 19(3)(b) of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
       Regulations 2006 (2006 No 1003) the respondent is restricted in  the
       circumstances in which she  may  deport  a  Union  citizen.  Such  a
       decision can only be justified on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,
       public security or public health. Pursuant to  Reg.  21,  the  Union
       citizen who has acquired a permanent right of residence may only  be
       deported on serious grounds of  public  policy  or  public  security
       whilst a Union citizen who has resided in the United Kingdom  for  a
       continuous period of at least 10 years  prior  to  the  decision  to
       deport him may only be deported  on  imperative  grounds  of  public
       security. Periods of imprisonment are excluded from the  calculation
       and the Court of Justice is  considering  whether  periods  of  time
       between successive periods of imprisonment should be  aggregated  in
       order to calculate the qualifying periods, see Onuekwere  v  UK  (C-
       378/12) and MG v UK (C-400/12).  As appears from paragraph 3 of  the
       determination, the appellant's counsel  did  not  contend  that  the
       appellant had acquired a permanent right of residence.

    6. In considering whether the  appellant's  deportation  was  justified
       under the Regulations, the Secretary of State took into account  the
       Multi-Agency Public Protection Arrangements under which it had  been
       deemed appropriate for the appellant  to  be  monitored  under  risk
       management strategies in circumstances which demonstrated he posed a
       continuing risk to the  public.  The  appellant's  offender  manager
       found that the appellant posed a high risk of harm to his  wife  and
       children on the basis of identifiable  indicators  of  the  risk  of
       serious harm. The harm included causing emotional and  psychological
       harm such that his wife could be at risk if  he  was  aware  of  her
       location on release  from  prison.  More  worryingly,  the  offender
       manager said the appellant was unable to accept  responsibility  for
       his previous and current offending. He concluded the  appellant  had
       an unrealistic  expectation  of  reconciliation  which  fuelled  the
       appellant's belief that he would be able  to  locate  his  wife  and
       family.

    7. The Secretary of State also relied upon remarks  by  the  sentencing
       judge that an aggravating  factor  was  that,  in  the  most  recent
       assault,  his  three  children  were  present  and,  if  not  actual
       witnesses to the assault, were able to hear it.

    8. In the NOMS 1 assessment the offender manager  found  the  appellant
       posed a medium risk of reoffending.  There  were  issues  about  the
       suitability of the accommodation which would  be  available  to  the
       appellant upon his release and the difficulty  in  finding  approved
       premises as a result of the appellant posing a high risk of  serious
       harm.

    9. The offender manager also noticed that, whilst  in  prison,  he  had
       received several adverse entries including one concerning an assault
       on a fellow prisoner. At one stage, the appellant was transferred to
       a more secure prison. The Secretary of State took the view that  she
       had been provided with no evidence the appellant had  made  progress
       in  prison  to  address  aspects  of  his  offending  behaviour.  In
       particular, there was little material to suggest  he  had  addressed
       his lack of  insight  over  the  effects  upon  the  victim  of  his
       wrongdoing.

   10. These were serious allegations made against the appellant and  which
       supported  the  decision  to   remove   him,   notwithstanding   the
       restrictions  placed  upon  the  Secretary  of  State  by  the  2006
       Regulations at whatever level the appellant was placed in  the  Reg.
       21 hierarchy.

   11. The panel, in paragraph 22 of its  determination,  referred  to  the
       well-established   legal   principles   governing   the   Tribunal's
       consideration of deportation cases where removal would  impact  upon
       the best interests of children and the preservation of family  life.
       The panel properly remarked upon the fact that the best interests of
       the children had to be  a  primary  consideration  and  that,  as  a
       starting point, their best interests  would  usually  be  served  by
       living with both parents. In  the  appellant's  case,  however,  the
       panel was aware that the appellant was estranged from his  wife  and
       children, whom he had last seen in November 2010 when  they  visited
       him in prison. The panel was aware  that  an  application  had  been
       made, and subsequently transferred to the High Court, in relation to
       contact with his  children.  The  appellant's  wife  was  vehemently
       opposed  to  contact,  so  much  so  that  her  and  the  children's
       whereabouts had  not  been  disclosed.  The  panel  noted  that  the
       appellant's anticipated release from prison on 21 December 2011  was
       subject to the specific condition that  the  appellant  was  not  to
       approach or communicate with his wife or any of the children.  These
       conditions had not been challenged by the appellant. Unsurprisingly,
       the panel concluded that the best interests of  the  children  would
       best be served by their remaining  with  their  mother  and  by  not
       having contact with the appellant. As appears from paragraph  31  of
       its determination, however, the panel stressed that this  conclusion
       was limited because of the panel's inability to  access  information
       about the children's needs which would have been  available  in  the
       contact proceedings. The panel found in paragraph 32  the  appellant
       posed a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  affecting
       one of the fundamental interests of society so that, notwithstanding
       his presence in the United  Kingdom  for  at  least  11  years,  his
       removal was proportionate.


   12. In reaching this decision, the panel acknowledged the fact that  the
       appellant did not speak  German  but,  considering  the  nature  and
       seriousness of the appellant's offending, the decision to remove him
       was compliant with the limitations upon removal within the 2006  EEA
       Regulations.

   13. Notwithstanding these findings, the  panel  allowed  the  appeal  on
       human rights grounds. It did so on the basis that whilst  litigation
       was in progress in the Family Division, the Tribunal  was  bound  to
       allow the appeal pending the resolution of the contact  proceedings.
       In paragraph 39 of its determination, the panel concluded that,  but
       for its reliance upon decisions in the Court of Appeal  and  in  the
       European Court  of  Human  Rights,  it  would  have  sanctioned  the
       appellant's removal. However, it considered itself bound  to  permit
       the appellant to remain pending the conclusion of the litigation.

   14. The panel concluded:


             "On that basis alone, we find that the decision to deport  the
             appellant does place the  United  Kingdom  in  breach  of  the
             European Convention on Human Rights, particularly  Articles  6
             and 8, and on that basis that it is unlawful."

   15. On 25 February 2013 the Upper Tribunal (Upper Tribunal  Judge  Coker
       and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I. Lewis) were unable  to  reconcile
       the reasoning of the panel with its conclusion to allow the  appeal.
       In paragraph 10, it decided that the panel reached a conclusion that
       the appellant was not a person with whom the  children  should  have
       close or regular contact and that it would not be in the  children's
       best interests to have contact with him. Further, in  paragraph  11,
       it concluded that the appellant's removal was in accordance with the
       2006 EEA Regulations and was proportionate. Accordingly, there  were
       only two alternatives; either to dismiss the appellant's  appeal  or
       to adjourn it for the Family Division to reach  a  decision  on  the
       contact.  Accordingly,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  panel's  decision
       disclosed an error on a  point  of  law  and  was  set  aside.   The
       decision of the Upper Tribunal  dealing  with  this  aspect  of  the
       appeal was served on the parties and forms part of my determination.




   16. There was no cross-appeal by the appellant.

   17. In a judgment made by Theis J in the Family Division on 13  February
       2013 in the appellant's application for contact with his 4  children
       (the contents of which the Upper Tribunal is permitted to see),  the
       Judge concluded that it would not be in  their  interests  that  the
       appellant has contact with them save  indirect  contact  by  letter,
       perhaps twice a year under the  effective  supervision  of  CAFCASS.
       The conclusion of  the  Family  Division  effectively  prevents  the
       appellant from relying upon his claim that his children's  interests
       preclude his removal.  Since this was  the  only  outstanding  issue
       given the decision of the Upper Tribunal in finding an  error  on  a
       point of law, this determines the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

   18. Nevertheless, I shall set out the salient factors of the appellant's
       Article 8 claim.  It is not, however, necessary to  dwell  upon  the
       position of  the  appellant's  spouse  or  his  children  given  the
       conclusion of Theis J in the Family Division.

   19. By directions made by the Upper Tribunal on 8 April 2013 at  a  Case
       Management Review, the Tribunal directed that the  findings  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal should stand insofar as they were 'amplified' by
       the judgment of Theis J.  The case was to proceed on  the  basis  of
       submissions only.

   20. Mr Melvin provided written submissions on 9 April 2013. He  accepted
       that the appellant's mother and his  two  half-sisters  are  in  the
       United Kingdom as well as other, more distant, relatives  but  there
       was scant evidence that the appellant had lived with his mother  and
       half-sisters since his arrival and, in any event, there  was  little
       or no evidence that his two half-sisters would  suffer  any  adverse
       consequences by reason of the appellant's deportation.  They  would,
       of course, remain with their mother. Effectively, that disposed of a
       protected family life in the United Kingdom.

   21. The respondent accepted the appellant had established a private life
       having lived in the United Kingdom since 2001 although his  criminal
       convictions and sentences amounted to over six years.  It  was  also
       accepted that he attended Newham College but there was  no  evidence
       of his having completed courses of study. There was no  evidence  of
       employment. Accordingly, the  evidence  of  private  life  was  thin
       indeed.  (These findings also undermined the appellant's case to  be
       entitled to a permanent right of residence on the basis of his being
       a qualified person having  exercised  Treaty  rights  for  5  years,
       although as I have said with reference to paragraph 3 of the panel's
       determination, the appellant's counsel did not argue  the  appellant
       had a permanent right of residence.)

   22. The Secretary of State considered the appellant's claim to  have  no
       family contacts in Austria but had  produced  no  evidence  in  this
       regard. For my part, I  am  not  satisfied  that  he  could  produce
       evidence of a negative. Since his mother's acquisition  of  Austrian
       citizenship was derived from his stepfather, the only likely  family
       members are those of his stepfather who  had  lived  in  the  United
       Kingdom for some years. Consequently, the correct  way  to  approach
       this appeal is on the basis that he has no family members with  whom
       he is in close contact in Austria but that he has the support  of  a
       European country, should he require access to support mechanisms.

   23. The appellant gave evidence to me in which he  repeated  he  had  no
       family in Austria. His mother commenced living in Austria in 1985, a
       few months after the appellant was born in June 1984. Meanwhile,  he
       remained in Nigeria. His mother  acquired  Austrian  citizenship  in
       1997 which permitted him to do the same. His mother relocated to the
       United Kingdom in 1999 and the  appellant  arrived  here  two  years
       later in 2001, aged 17 or thereabouts.

   24. He complained about a variety of injustices which he  considered  he
       has suffered both in relation  to  the  hearing  before  the  Family
       Division as well as in the attitude of the respondent in never being
       satisfied that he has done enough to remain in the United Kingdom.

   25. The appellant went on to say that he is no longer a Nigerian citizen
       as Austria does not permit dual nationality  and  his  mother,  too,
       abandoned her Nigerian citizenship when she became a Union  citizen.
       He repeated that he did not want to go to Austria and that he  would
       be homeless were he to do so. His stepfather had died  in  2008.  He
       said that he had never met his father in Nigeria.

   26. Nevertheless, although he had spent the first 17 years  in  Nigeria,
       he told me that he would prefer to be  an  Austrian  citizen  rather
       than a Nigerian citizen. He spoke of his two  half-sisters  both  of
       whom lived with his mother in Canning Town. The elder  was  born  in
       1997 and is now aged 15 or 16. She is an Austrian citizen by  birth.
       In contrast, her younger sister, born in 2003 and now aged 10, is  a
       UK citizen by birth.

   27. There is a presumption that foreign law follows United  Kingdom  law
       unless the contrary is shown; foreign law being a  matter  of  fact.
       If so, and assuming the appellant is correct that Austrian law  does
       not permit dual nationality,  the  appellant  may  be  able  to  re-
       establish his Nigerian nationality (or a right to enter) through his
       grandparents.  However, Mr Melvin did not seek  to  rely  upon  this
       point.  It is, in any event, academic because the  appellant  stated
       that he would prefer the benefits of  Austrian  citizenship,  rather
       than those of Nigerian citizenship.  This  lies  uneasily  with  his
       contention that he could not live in Austria.

   28. I am satisfied that the  disposal  of  this  appeal  before  me  was
       confined to a very limited scope.  Although the First-tier  Tribunal
       has been criticised for allowing the appeal, it is  clear  from  its
       judgment that what was intended  was  to  permit  the  appellant  to
       remain in the United Kingdom pending the outcome of the  proceedings
       in the Family Division. Had it made this perfectly clear, I see very
       little to criticise in the First-tier Tribunal's  approach.   It  is
       open to the Tribunal to allow a claim on human  rights  grounds  but
       then to make it clear in the judgment that it only envisages a  very
       limited right to remain, perhaps a period as short as a month or two
       until, for example, a relevant child sits an examination.  There  is
       nothing wrong in principle with such an  outcome.  It  is,  to  some
       extent, very little different from an adjournment where  the  effect
       is to continue existing  leave  pending  the  determination  of  the
       proceedings pursuant to s. 3C of the Immigration Act 1971.

   29. In essence, this was what the First-tier Tribunal  directed  and  it
       has  borne  fruit.  Had  the  appellant  being  removed  before  the
       proceedings in the Family Division were concluded, there might  well
       have been a procedural error in that the appellant was, potentially,
       deprived of the opportunity of participating. Be that as it may, the
       reason for the grant of leave, the quasi-adjournment, has  now  been
       satisfied in that the decision of Theis J has now resolved the  only
       outstanding issue.

   30. In her decision of 13 February 2013, Theis  J  directed  that  there
       should be no contact between the appellant and  his  children  as  a
       result of his conduct towards  their  mother.   The  fact  that  the
       Family Division has ordered that there be  no  contact  between  the
       appellant and his children (save indirect contact by  the  appellant
       writing to them) firmly establishes that there  is  no  family  life
       that is, at present, to be preserved or fostered or developed.

   31. I have considered the appellant's evidence both in  the  context  of
       the First-tier Tribunal's sustainable findings but also  in  my  own
       free-ranging assessment, untrammelled as it were by  those  previous
       findings.

   32. I am satisfied that the appellant enjoys family life with  his  four
       minor children by reason of his being their father.  The  nature  of
       the family life that he is,  however,  permitted  to  enjoy  is  now
       determined by the ruling in the Family Division. It is a family life
       that can, and must be, preserved only by infrequent letter  writing.
       Since this can be done from Austria  or  Nigeria  as  well  as  from
       within the United  Kingdom,  there  is  no  interference  with  this
       limited, preserved family life by removal.

   33. The appellant is not, of course, currently exercising Treaty  rights
       but, for these purposes, I am prepared to accept that he is a  Union
       citizen and that the limitations upon his removal are to be found in
       Reg. 21 of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
       2006. This requires a  proportionality  balance  but  one  which  is
       somewhat more nuanced than the  same  balance  under  Article  8  by
       reason of the various factors contained within Reg. 21. However,  in
       the circumstances of this case, I detect no significant  difference;
       all the more so since the First-tier Tribunal reached a  sustainable
       conclusion on  the  issue  of  public  policy.  I  accept  that  the
       appellant has a mother and two half-sisters in the  United  Kingdom.
       Even if he were to have a close relationship with them, it would not
       be one that went beyond the normal emotional ties that exist between
       an adult son and his mother  or  an  adult  brother  and  his  half-
       sisters. There is no suggestion that his half-sisters will suffer by
       reason of his removal. This was not a matter that was raised  before
       the Family Division as adding weight to his claim  to  have  contact
       with his own children. Given the absence of a protected family  life
       and the almost negligible evidence  of  a  private  life,  the  only
       viable counterbalance in the proportionality exercise is the  effect
       of the appellant's presence in the United Kingdom since 2001 and the
       greater familiarity he has with the  United  Kingdom  when  compared
       with Austria.


   34. This has to be weighed against the  compelling  public  interest  in
       removing foreign nationals who transgress United Kingdom law. In the
       appellant's case I consider that by far the most worrying aspect  of
       his case is his inability to recognise his  own  responsibility  and
       his readiness to blame others  for  the  consequences  that  he  has
       suffered. In particular, the fact that his wife and  children  have,
       in effect, been required to obtain a different identity demonstrates
       the continuing impact of his criminality and his resolute refusal to
       confront it. Whilst this may not represent a specific threat to  his
       wife and  children  given  their  fresh  identities,  the  appellant
       remains a dangerous man. Apart from this, there is in my judgment  a
       public  interest,  distinct  from  impermissible  factors  such   as
       deterrence [reg. 21(5)(d)] or reliance upon the appellant's previous
       criminal convictions as alone justifying  removal  [reg.  21(5)(e)],
       which  comes  into  play.  The  appellant's  personal  conduct  must
       represent  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious   threat
       affecting one of the fundamental interests of  society  and,  in  my
       judgment, it does. This  conclusion  is  based  exclusively  on  the
       personal conduct of the appellant and arises  from  his  failure  to
       address what has happened in the past as  well  as  the  justifiable
       anxiety  that  society  feels  about  having  within  its  midst  an
       individual who has behaved like the appellant.


   35. For these  reasons,  I  am  satisfied  that,  both  under  the  2006
       Regulations and  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR,  the  appellant's
       deportation is justified and proportionate and  in  accordance  with
       the law.

   36. The appellant's former representatives were telephoned prior to  the
       hearing on 8 July 2013 in order to ascertain whether  they  intended
       to appear.  A representative of the firm notified the Tribunal  that
       they would not be attending the hearing.   I  decided  to  hear  the
       appeal in their absence.


   37. The appeal comes before me as a re-hearing of the appeal before  the
       Upper Tribunal because Upper Tribunal  Judge  Coker  who  originally
       heard the appeal on 23 April 2013 has been unable to  determine  the
       appeal as a result of a serious  road  accident.   The  appeal  was,
       therefore, transferred to me.

DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal panel made an error on a point  of  law  and  I
    substitute a determination dismissing the appeal  on  all  the  grounds
    advanced.







                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                                 8 July 2013






