
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/26775/2013
                                                               IA/26777/2013
                                                               IA/26786/2013
                                                             & IA/26791/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 May 2014                       |On 11 February 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            LALITH ANURA UDUWELA
                           KUMARI THANUJA UDUWELA
                           NISALI THISARA UDUWELA
                           VIHINI THEVINKA UDUWELA
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms N Hashimi, Counsel instructed by Law Direct
                    Immigration Advisors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this decision does  touch  on  the  welfare  of  minors  their
    circumstances  are  not  such  that  I  see  any  need  for  any  order
    restraining publication and I make no order in this case.

 2. The respondents to this appeal, hereinafter "the claimants" are members
    of one family and are citizens of Sri  Lanka.   The  first  and  second
    claimants are married to each other and the third and fourth  claimants
    are their daughters.  The third claimant  was  born  in  1997  and  the
    fourth claimant was born in 2002.   They  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    lawfully on 9 October 2006 and have remained,  with  permission,  since
    then.

 3. On 2 August 2012 the first claimant applied for leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  under  the  points-
    based system and for a biometric residence  permit.   The  other  three
    claimants  made  similar  applications  as  dependants  of  the   first
    claimant.

 4. The application of the First Claimant was  refused  with  reference  to
    paragraph 322(1A) of HC 395.  This provides that applications for leave
    to remain or variation of leave to enter or remain are to be refused:

         "(1A)    Where  false  representations  have  been  made  or  false
         documents or  information  have  been  submitted  (whether  or  not
         material to the application, and whether or not to the  applicant's
         knowledge), or material facts had not been disclosed,  in  relation
         to the application, or  in  order  to  obtain  documents  from  the
         Secretary of State or a third party  required  in  support  of  the
         application."

 5. The reason given for this decision was clear.  The Decision and Reasons
    under the heading "General Grounds Reasons for Refusal" says:

         "In your application, you submitted two letters from Bank of Ceylon
         dated  9  July  2012,  the  first  relating  to   account   numbers
         70190253(F/D) and 73100510(F/D) held by Mr A  N  Liyanage  and  the
         second  relating  to  account  number  73249601(F/D)  held   by   S
         Jayawardana.

         I am satisfied that the documents were false because Bank of Ceylon
         have confirmed that they did not issue these letters, and that  the
         letters are not genuine."

 6. The Secretary of State in each case also made a  removal  decision  and
    both decisions were the subject of an appeal.  They  were  prepared  by
    solicitors and dated 27  June  2013.   Point  1  raises  five  specific
    grounds of appeal including that the decision  "is  not  in  accordance
    with the law"  and  that  the  "decision  is  unlawful  because  it  is
    incompatible with the claimants' rights under the  European  Convention
    on Human Rights."

 7. The grounds set out the claimants' immigration history and challenge in
    some detail the contention that the first claimant relied  on  a  false
    document.  Under the heading "4.  Statement of Additional Grounds"  the
    claimants develop their contention that the decision is contrary to the
    United Kingdom's obligations under the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights and stated:

         "The [claimants] seek to  be  allowed  to  remain  in  the  UK  and
         continue to exercise their family and private life here as a family
         unit as it will now prove extremely difficult to  relocate  in  Sri
         Lanka, having spent a significant number of years in the UK  having
         built a strong private and family life under Article 8 of the  ECHR
         with a positive stable future."

 8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that, although the burden of  proof
    in  immigration  appeals  was  generally  on  the  person  making   the
    application where, the Secretary of State chooses to rely on  deception
    under paragraph 322(1A), or at all,  then  she  must  prove  her  case.
    However, at paragraph 8 the judge said:

         "In order to establish such an allegation the [Secretary of  State]
         has to prove it to a high degree of probability."

 9. He then decided that the evidence could not prove the case to the  high
    degree of probability required by  law  and  purported  to  "allow  the
    appeals to the extent that they are  remitted  to  the  SSHD  for  full
    consideration under Paragraph 245DD".

10. The Secretary of State  sought  permission  to  appeal  this  decision.
    Firstly the Secretary of State complained that  the  judge  required  a
    "high degree of probability" and  secondly  that  the  judge  does  not
    explain in any event why the reasons were deficient."

11. I have no hesitation in saying that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    approach was wrong in several respects.  If the judge was not satisfied
    that the respondent had proved that the first claimant  had  relied  on
    false documents then he should resolve that point  in  his  favour  and
    decide the rest of the appeal.

12. The judge was clearly wrong to refer to a "high degree of probability".
     This was once thought to be the position.  It may be that it never was
    the true position.  It is sometimes said that all that was intended was
    that a decision  maker  remember  that  fraud  or  rank  dishonesty  is
    inherently less likely that  careless  error  and  the  decision  maker
    should reflect carefully before deciding that a dishonest act has  been
    established.

13. Be that as it may, I agree with the  Secretary  of  State  that  it  is
    absolutely clear from the decision of the House of Lords in Re B [2008]
    3  WLR  1  that  the  ordinary  civil  standard  of  the   balance   of
    probabilities is the guidance standard and should have been applied.

14. Ms Hashimi was well aware of the decision in Re B but  suggested  there
    was something distinctive about this case  that  required  a  different
    approach.  She had produced a UK Border  Agency  Guidance  Note  headed
    "General Grounds for Refusal" said to be valid from 21 March 2013.   It
    will be recalled that the decision complained of here was made in  June
    2013.  On page 9 of 55 under the heading  "Standard  of  Evidence"  the
    guidance says:

         "To refuse  under  paragraph  322(1A)  or  322(2),  you  must  have
         positive evidence to prove the applicant has lied  or  submitted  a
         false document.  The burden of proof is to a  "higher  standard  of
         probabilities", which means it must be more likely  than  not  that
         the applicant  has  made  false  representations  or  given  forged
         documents to get leave.  It is not appropriate to refuse a  current
         application under paragraph 322(1A)  simply  because  you  are  not
         satisfied that the applicant is telling the truth."

15. Ms Hashimi seized on the words "the burden of proof  is  to  a  'higher
    standard of probabilities'".  If that is all that the guidance  said  I
    would have found  it  very  difficult  to  understand  quite  what  the
    decision maker was supposed to do.  I think that  applicants,  broadly,
    are entitled to have their decisions made in accordance with  published
    guidance and it is perfectly open to the Secretary of State to  operate
    a regime more generous to applicants than the Rules  strictly  require.
    If the Secretary of State announces that she is going to  do  something
    then she must do as she said she was going to do or see  her  decisions
    challenged on the grounds that they are not in accordance with the law.

16. However I must also  remind  myself  that  guidance  is  just  what  it
    purports to be.  It is not to be construed as  if  it  had  regulatory,
    still less statutory, force.  As well as the phrase relied  on  by  the
    claimants the guidance says, as is set out  above,  that  the  decision
    maker "must have positive evidence to prove that the applicant had lied
    or submitted a false document" and the contentious phrase was explained
    so that "it must be more likely than not that the  applicant  has  made
    false representations or given forged documents to get leave".  That is
    a straightforward explanation of the balance of probabilities  standard
    and is wholly unobjectionable.  What the Secretary of State  is  saying
    in a rather clumsy way is that a decision maker  must  not  describe  a
    document as false just because the decision maker for some  unexplained
    reason is not satisfied that it is genuine.  I am quite satisfied  that
    the Secretary of State has not announced a policy that is more generous
    to applicants than the Rules require.  What has happened  is  that  the
    Guidance Note has been rather written rather badly and Ms  Hashimi,  as
    she is perfectly entitled to do, has endeavoured to use  the  Secretary
    of State's clumsiness to the advantage of the claimants.  She  has  not
    succeeded.

17. I am quite satisfied the First-tier Tribunal erred in law  and  I  must
    now decide how to advance the case.

18. The case was decided without hearing  oral  evidence  from  those  most
    directly concerned.  This is remarkable. The Rules do not  require  the
    first claimant to know that  he  relied  on  false  documents.   It  is
    possible  (this  is  not  a  finding,  merely  a  reflection   of   the
    requirements of the Rules) that he was unaware that his  backers  could
    not produce the evidence needed.

19. I will decide if the Secretary of State's assertion is made out.

20. The Secretary of State corresponded by email with an  official  at  the
    Bank of Ceylon.  According to the copy email in my bundle "the attached
    documents are in the name of two sponsors who hold bank account's  with
    your bank."  It is not  clear  from  the  bundle  what  documents  were
    attached.  It is probable that they were documents purporting  to  come
    from the Bank of Ceylon personal branch at the head office building  in
    Colombo.  I say that because there are copies of such documents  in  my
    bundle which comply with the description in the email to which  I  have
    referred.  However, it really would have been a whole lot better if the
    Secretary of State, who bears the burden of proof  in  this  case,  had
    organised things so that it was absolutely plain what had been  scanned
    and sent.

21. The letters relied upon by the claimants allegedly  from  the  Bank  of
    Ceylon are in exactly similar form and purported to be  signed,  or  at
    least initialled, by the manager, a Mrs S N  Gunarathna  and  a  second
    officer, a Mrs W P S P Rajapaksa.  They are each dated 9 July 2012  and
    are addressed to the Visa Officer, and purport to be the  "confirmation
    of balance in bank accounts".  One of them purports to refer to a Mr  S
    Jayawardana and identifies an account by its  account  number  and  the
    date opened and the other letter purports to refer to a Mr A N Liyanage
    and identifies two bank accounts by their  different  numbers  and  the
    dates on which they were  opened.   The  material  part  of  the  email
    states:

         "Mr A N Liyanage FD A/C's 70190253, 73100510 and Mr  S  Jayawardana
         FD A/C - 73249601 'We wish to inform you that our  Personal  Branch
         has  confirmed  that  they  have  not  issued  the   said   balance
         confirmation letter to the above customer.   Therefore  the  letter
         seems to be not genuine.

         Since customer's has not authorised to divulge the details and  the
         balance to other party, we regret that we are unable  to  give  the
         account balance'."

22. It will be noted that this refers to the letter in the singular  rather
    than letters and the customer in the singular rather than customers.

23. Nevertheless I think it extremely likely that the  enquiry  has  indeed
    been made of the Bank of Ceylon and the grammatical  difficulties  have
    to be read with the clear reference to the two accounts  attributed  to
    Mr Liyanage and the one account attributed to Mr Jayawardana.  The Bank
    of Ceylon is under no obligation to answer enquiries of this kind but I
    would expect it to take some care if it chose to answer and the  author
    of the email had some reasons for saying that the personal  branch  had
    confirmed that the letters were not issued as claimed.

24. I appreciate that the first claimant has put in evidence  against  this
    conclusion but it is in the form  essentially  of  statements  from  Mr
    Liyanage  and  Mr  Jayawardana.   I  realise  this   contains   hearsay
    assertions from the identified manager and/or second officer but it  is
    not very satisfactory when as person said  to  have  produced  a  false
    document produces a further, similar, letter saying that  the  disputed
    letter it is not a false document.

25. I find it entirely possible that the Bank of Ceylon could have  made  a
    silly mistake but that would be unlikely.  On  the  working  assumption
    that the Bank  of  Ceylon  is  a  serious  business  organisation  with
    reasonable standards it can be expected to keep copy correspondence  in
    electronic or paper form in  an  accessible  way  and  the  appropriate
    records would be checked before saying that disputed documents were not
    known.  If a silly mistake had happened then I would have expected  the
    manager or second officer who had sent the letter to have contacted the
    head office of the bank and explained the position.   I  cannot  attach
    any significant weight  to  the  documents  described  as  confirmation
    letters issued by this bank  dated  5  February  2014.   These  are  as
    inherently unreliable as the disputed letter.

26. It follows that although the Secretary of State has not made things  as
    easy as she might have done she has proved her case and I am  satisfied
    that  the  first  claimant  did  rely  on  false  documents  then   the
    application should have been refused as it was under paragraph  322(1A)
    of HC 395.

27. It follows that I have no hesitation dismissing the  appeal  under  the
    Rules.  The other claimants' appeals must  be  dismissed  because  they
    cannot rely on the first claimant to support their case.

28. The claimants also  rely  on  human  rights  grounds  and  particularly
    Article  8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.   I  must
    immediately recognise the position of the third and  fourth  claimants.
    The third claimant is now 17 years old and the fourth claimant  is  now
    13 years old.  They have both lived in the United Kingdom,  with  their
    parents, since 2006.  That is now more than eight years ago.

29. Although the claimants rely on human rights grounds, as far  as  I  can
    they made no attempt to substantiate their  cases.   The  grounds  make
    much of the disappointment to the claimants in  not  being  allowed  to
    remain in the United Kingdom and there is an assertion that it would be
    "extremely difficult to relocate  in  Sri  Lanka".   These  things  are
    wholly unexplained.

30. In the absence of contrary evidence I accept that it would  be  in  the
    best interests of the children to remain  with  their  parents  in  the
    United Kingdom.  That  would  have  the  advantages  of  certainty  and
    stability.  The  children  cannot  always  have  their  best  interests
    satisfied.  The first claimant cannot satisfy the requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules and, I  am  quite  satisfied,  has  relied  on  false
    documents.  Even if he did not know which documents  were  false  there
    must be a strong policy imperative in removing a person when  he  fails
    to satisfy the requirements of the Rules for permission to  remain  and
    relies on dishonest documentation to show that he can.

31. I have considered the Rules relating to  Article  8,  and  particularly
    EX.1 of Appendix FM.  In the case of the second claimant I cannot begin
    to see how there could be insurmountable obstacles to family life  with
    the husband continuing outside the  United  Kingdom.   The  implication
    clearly is that they would go back together.

32. I am more concerned about whether it would be reasonable to expect  the
    children to leave the United Kingdom.  On  reflection  I  have  decided
    that it would.  Family unity generally is important and although  I  am
    quite satisfied, because such things are to be expected and there is no
    contravening evidence, that they have established some sort of  private
    and family life in the United Kingdom I can  see  no  reason  why  they
    should not be expected reasonably to leave with their  parents.   There
    is nothing to suggest that they have a strong reason to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom beyond it familiar to them.

33. In the circumstances they are not going  to  be  able  to  satisfy  the
    Article 8 requirements of the Rules.  I do make the point that  I  have
    skimpy evidence in front of me.  It is for the claimants to prove their
    cases before the First-tier Tribunal and if they choose not to  produce
    their best evidence there they  can  make  an  application  to  produce
    better evidence later.  No such application  was  made  and  would  not
    necessarily have succeeded.

34. I must ask myself if there  is  any  point  in  considering  the  claim
    without reference to the Rules but I  cannot  see  that  there  is.   I
    appreciate the children have spent a lot of time in the United  Kingdom
    but their father has relied on cheating and that must not  normally  be
    seen as a successful route to settlement.

35. It follows therefore that although I set  aside  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal I substitute a decision dismissing all  grounds  of
    appeal by the claimants.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 11 February 2015               |


