
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/26737/2014
                                                               IA/26746/2014
                                                               IA/26741/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 6 May 2015                        |On 19 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                             MS ZENITA DILAVERI
                               KLEVIS DIAVERI
                             MS EMILIA DILAVERI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Neville, Counsel instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this  appeal  but
    in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in
    the First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State
    against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  D  J   Dickinson
    promulgated on 13 October 2014 which allowed the Appellant's appeal and
    held that it was disproportionate and unlawful under Article 8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights to remove them to Albania.

Background

 3. The first Appellant was born on 9 October 1983 and is the mother of the
    second and third Appellants who were  born  on  2  July  20120  and  26
    October 2007. They are all nationals of Albania.

 4. The first Appellant came to the United Kingdom in April  2006  to  join
    her husband. An application was made for leave to remain  on  28.2.2008
    and refused on 1.6.2008 with a limited right of  appeal.  A  notice  of
    liability to deportation was served. A further application for leave to
    remain was made on 10.7.2008 and refused on 19.2.2010 with a  right  of
    appeal.  The  Appellant  appealed  the  decision  and  her  appeal  was
    dismissed on  27.5.2010  and  permission  to  appeal  was  refused.  An
    application for leave to remain was made on 28.6.2013  and  refused  on
    22.7.2013 with no right of appeal. A Pre Action Protocol  was  received
    dated 30.7.2013 and  this  was  followed  by  additional  evidence  and
    submissions.

 5. On 5 June 204 the Secretary of State  maintained  the  refusal  of  the
    Appellants applications. The refusal letter took into account the  best
    interests of the children and gave a number of reasons:

    (a)    The first Appellant did not meet the requirements of Appendix FM
         as a parent as the children were not British Citizens.

    (b)    EX.1 did not apply as the children were not British citizens  or
         settled in the United Kingdom.

    (c)    The Appellants did not at the time of the application  meet  the
         requirements of paragraph 276ADE.

    (d)    There was no breach of Article 3.

    (e)    There were no exceptional circumstances that warranted  a  grant
         of leave outside the Rules.

The Judge's Decision

 6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Dickinson  ("the  Judge")  allowed  the   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision under Article 8. The Judge in his decision:

      a) Set out the relevant law both in relation to Article 8 but also  in
         relation to the best interests of the children(paragraphs 5-11)

      b) The Appellants could not it was conceded meet the  requirements  of
         Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE.

      c) It was appropriate to consider Article 8 and the Judge set out  the
         questions as in Razgar [2004] UKHL.

      d) The Judge answered the first four questions positively.

      e) In considering proportionality he took account of the fact that the
         best interests of the children were a primary consideration.

      f) The Judge set out those factors which  were  against  the  decision
         being proportionate and those in favour of it being proportionate.

      g) He set out the  reasons  why  it  would  be  unreasonable  for  the
         children to live in Albania by reference to the background material
         (paragraphs 22-25)

      h) In relation to those factors which were in favour of  the  decision
         being proportionate he set out the  need  to  maintain  immigration
         control; the precarious nature of the family life established at  a
         time when they had no leave to remain.

      i) Reminded himself that the children were not to be  blamed  for  the
         conduct of the parents.

      j) Concluded that the decision was disproportionate.

 7. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that the Judge :

      a) Had misdirected himself in considering Article 8 outside the Rules.

      b) The Judge had failed to have regard for s 117B of the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended in  the  proportionality
         assessment.

 8.  On 2 March 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew  gave  permission  to
    appeal in relation only to the failure to consider s 117B.

 9. At the hearing I heard submissions from Ms Johnstone on behalf  of  the
    Respondent that:

    (a)    The Judge had failed to take into account s117B (2) in  relation
         to the financial circumstances of the first Appellant.

    (b)    The Judge failed to take into account that little weight  should
         be given  to  private  life  established  while  their  status  was
         precarious.

    (c)    She relied on EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ
         874

10. On behalf of the Appellant Mr Neville submitted:

      a) There was a problem with materiality in the Respondent's  case.  In
         the light of the provisions of s 117 B(6)

      b) If the decision were to be set aside  the  second  Appellant  is  a
         'qualifying child' for the purpose  of  s  117B  (6).  The  factual
         findings of the Judge had not been challenged and at paragraph  22-
         25 the Judge had set out reasons why it was not reasonable for  the
         children to leave the United Kingdom there was  no  materiality  in
         any error of law.

      c) In fact the Judge did consider both self  sufficiency  in  that  he
         found that the Appellant was a credible  witness  and  her  witness
         statement was to the effect that she was financially  supported  by
         her brother in law and precariousness was specifically addressed in
         paragraph 27.

11. In response on behalf of the Respondent Ms Johnstone  stated  that  the
    Judge had to consider the burden on the public purse both  now  and  in
    the future.

Finding on Material Error

12. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

13. In this case the Appellant  and  her  two  children  were  appealing  a
    refusal of leave to remain in the United Kingdom. The first  Appellant,
    the mother, had lived in the United Kingdom  since  2006  and  the  two
    children, who were 4 years 2 months and 6 years 11 months old were both
    born in the United Kingdom.

14. It was the unchallenged  evidence  of  the  first  Appellant  that  her
    relationship with the children's father had broken down and  the  Judge
    found as a fact that the Appellant would face considerable problems  as
    a single woman in Albania both in relation  to  the  social  stigma  of
    divorce but also specifically from her husband's family who  blame  her
    for the breakdown of the relationship. He also found that there  was  a
    high probability that the first  Appellant  would  not  be  allowed  to
    retain custody  of  the  children  in  any  custody  dispute  with  her
    husband's family. The Judge found that both children spoke no  Albanian
    and were well integrated into United Kingdom society and  he  concluded
    it would be unreasonable for them to live In Albania.  It  was  against
    this background of findings that the Judge made  the  assessment  under
    Article 8.

15. I accept that the Judge did not specifically refer to  s  117B  of  the
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. However  I  remind  myself
    that in Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 00090  (IAC)  the  court  found
    that:

         "It is not an error  of  law  to  fail  to  refer  to  ss.117A-117D
         considerations if the judge has applied the  test  he  or  she  was
         supposed  to  apply  according  to  its  terms;  what  matters   is
         substance, not form."

16. I have therefore considered whether the Judge made findings or accepted
    evidence that addressed the public interest factors under s  117B  that
    he was required to do in assessing the issue of proportionality.  I  am
    satisfied that he did. The weight he gave to those factors was a matter
    for him particularly given what I consider to be  the  strong  findings
    that he made in relation to the risk to the children of  being  removed
    from their mother if returned to Albania.

17. The  only  maters  identified  by  Ms  Johnstone  that  the  Judge  had
    purportedly omitted were those set out in 117B (3) that  those  seeking
    to remain in the United Kingdom are financially independent  and117B(5)
    that little weight should be given to  private  life  established  when
    status is precarious. I am satisfied that  the  Judge  made  clear  and
    specific findings in relation to the Appellant's precarious  status  in
    paragraph 27. In relation to her financial circumstances the  Appellant
    states in the witness statement that was before the Judge at  paragraph
    7 that her and her children live in a flat paid for by her  brother  in
    law. That I accept only addresses her present  circumstances  and  does
    not address the potential future burden that the Appellant will present
    to the taxpayer.

18. However I am persuaded that even if I were to accept  that  failing  to
    assess the potential future burden of the Appellants  on  the  taxpayer
    this error was not material to the outcome of the decision.  If  I  set
    the decision aside to remake it I accept Mr Neville's argument  that  I
    would be obliged to account of s 117B (6):

         "(6)     In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom. "

19. If the decision were being remade now the second Appellant  would  meet
    the definition of 'qualifying child' in s117D(1)(b) because he has  now
    lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of 7 years.

20. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning. Any error in failing to factor  in  each
    and every aspect of the  Appellants  financial  circumstances  was  not
    material to the outcome of the decision.

CONCLUSION

21. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

22. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed      Date 14.5.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
