
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/26612/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 26 February 2016                       |On 7 April 2016                   |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between


                             MRS patricia nkire
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Singh of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  She was born on  20  May  1950.
    She  appealed  against  the  respondent's  decision   to   refuse   her
    application for leave to remain dated 11 June 2014.

 2. In a decision promulgated on 2  September  2015,  Judge  H  Clark  (the
    judge) allowed the appeal.  The judge found the appellant satisfied the
    Immigration Rules because it would be unduly harsh  to  expect  her  to
    return to Nigeria with or without her husband and without any family or
    social support.  Further, whilst there was a strong public interest  in
    the maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls,  the  judge  was
    satisfied that requiring the appellant to return to Nigeria would be  a
    disproportionate interference with her family life with  Mr  Nkire,  in
    circumstances  where  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to   them
    pursuing a family life together in Nigeria. See [12] below.

 3. The grounds claim the judge failed to give  adequate  reasons  for  her
    findings on material matters and  made  a  misdirection  of  law  on  a
    material matter. In  particular  the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for finding that it would cause very serious  hardship  to  the
    appellant to continue her family life in Nigeria.

 4. The judge found that the appellant had  a  lack  of  any  security  and
    support but failed to give a reason why the appellant's son who  worked
    as a doctor in Canada and the appellant's daughter who had received  an
    international posting from her employer to Switzerland (see [19] of the
    decision) would not provide financial report bearing in mind  that  she
    found at [24] of her decision that the two children could help her  out
    financially if she had to re-establish herself in Nigeria.   The  judge
    reported that the appellant's spouse would shortly be retiring  in  the
    United Kingdom.  There was no reason why the ability to  draw  down  on
    his pension or use rental income from their property  in  London  could
    not be accessed to support their living expenses in Nigeria.  See  [33]
    of the decision.

 5. In finding very serious hardship, the judge  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons in the light of the fact that the appellant's spouse was  able-
    bodied  and  sufficiently  well  to  maintain   employment   supporting
    vulnerable people here and would have access to his healthcare needs in
    Nigeria.  See [29] and [30] of the decision.

 6. The respondent relied upon Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ 440.  In  particular
    at [45] and [50].

 7. The grounds claimed that the judge erred by conflating  the  tests  for
    insurmountable obstacles under EX.1.(b) to  Appendix  FM  by  importing
    "reasonableness" from the jurisprudence at [32] of her decision and  so
    made a misdirection of law on a material matter. See Agyarko at [21].

 8. Judge P J G White granted permission  to  appeal  against  the  judge's
    decision on 7 January 2016.  He found the judge arguably erred for  the
    following reasons:

      a) The central issue in the  appeal  was  whether  the  appellant  met
         EX.1.(b).  See [10] of the decision.

      b) The judge was arguably  wrong  in  law  by  equating  the  test  of
         "reasonable to expect" to "insurmountable obstacles".  See [32]  of
         the decision.  Agyarko was authority for stating  that  the  phrase
         "insurmountable obstacles" was significantly more demanding than  a
         mere test of whether it would be reasonable to expect a  couple  to
         continue their family life outside the United Kingdom.

      c) It was arguable that having acknowledged that "no individual factor
         would amount to an obstacle which could not be overcome", the judge
         failed to give adequate reasons for  her  finding  that  "a  forced
         return would cause them both very serious hardship".  See  [34]  of
         the decision.

Submissions on Error of Law

 9. Mr Whitwell relied upon the grounds.  The judge erred because  she  had
    equated reasonableness with  insurmountable  obstacles.   The  test  of
    insurmountable obstacles was more stringent  than  reasonableness.   Mr
    Whitwell relied upon Agyarko.

10. Mr Singh relied upon his skeleton argument.  The  decision  had  to  be
    read as a whole.  The judge made it clear at [10] of her decision  that
    she knew the test was insurmountable obstacles.  She had  set  out  the
    relevant  Immigration  Rules.   The  judge  accepted  the   appellant's
    evidence that she had no close family members in Nigeria.  See [24]  of
    the decision.  The judge had said at [34] of her decision that although
    no individual factor would amount to an obstacle  which  could  not  be
    overcome, in light of both the appellant's and her husband's  ages  and
    stages in life and the lack of any security or support  in  Nigeria,  a
    forced return there would cause them very serious hardship.  The  judge
    went on to say that she  considered  it  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the
    appellant to return to Nigeria without  her  husband  and  without  any
    family or social support.

11. The judge made findings that supported her decision:

    (a)  At [24] the judge found the appellant would have nowhere  to  live
         in Nigeria and no means to purchase accommodation there.

    (b)  At [24] of the decision the judge found that whilst the  appellant
         had cultural ties to  Nigeria,  she  would  have  no  practical  or
         emotional support there.

    (c)  At [29] of the decision the judge found  the  appellant's  husband
         had a number of health issues, including diabetes and hypertension.
          He had suffered a partial stroke.

    (d)  At [30] of the decision the judge took into account  the  couple's
         age.  The appellant's husband was about to retire.

    (e)  At [30] of the decision the judge said that whilst the appellant's
         husband had been currently working, supporting people with  housing
         and other needs, he had worked as a computer  analyst  in  Nigeria.
         He changed his occupation due to health reasons.  She found he  was
         of an age where, close to retiring,  he  had  been  working  in  an
         occupation in which  he  had  never  worked  in  Nigeria  and  such
         employment was unlikely to be immediately replicable in Nigeria.

    (f)  At [31] of the decision, the judge found the  appellant's  husband
         had lived in the United Kingdom for the last  seventeen  years  and
         was head of the extended family here.

    (g)  At [33] of the decision the judge found that neither the appellant
         nor her husband had family in Nigeria or property there.

12. Read as a whole, the decision revealed no error of law.  If  there  was
    any error, it was not material.   It  was  clear  that  the  judge  had
    correctly interpreted  insurmountable  obstacles  as  very  significant
    difficulties which could not be overcome or very serious hardship.

Conclusion on Error of Law

Templates

13. Whilst not a material error, the judge:

          a) incorrectly recited at [2] of her decision that the respondent
             had directed the appellant's removal under Section 47  of  the
             2002 Act.  It is always worth  checking  the  decision  itself
             rather than relying upon a template as this was a  Section  10
             removal under the 1999 Act; the appellant was an overstayer.

          b) referred to Article 8, Razgar and s.117 at [11] - [13] none of
             which were applicable to this appeal as  the  judge  correctly
             said at [36] of her decision.

Error

14. I find the judge carried out an inadequate assessment  and  did  equate
    reasonableness with insurmountable obstacles.  It would  have  assisted
    her to consider the appellant's circumstances in terms of Agyarko.

15. At [45] of Agyarko, Sales LJ said:

         "The Upper Tribunal held that it could not be said that there  were
         insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  continuing   with   Mr
         Ijiekhuambhen in Nigeria, within the meaning of EX.1(b) of Appendix
         FM.  Judge  Craig  referred  to  the  letter  of  support  from  Mr
         Ijiekhuambhen and  observed,  'these  factors  could  not  possibly
         persuade  any  decision-maker  that   there   were   insurmountable
         obstacles to family life continuing in Nigeria."  ([8]). He went on
         at [9] as follows:

         "The fact that the applicant's partner would have to change jobs is
         not an insurmountable  obstacle  and  nor  is  the  suggestion,  as
         advanced, that there are fake drugs circulating  in  Nigeria  which
         the partner does not wish the applicant to  take.   Were  there  an
         Article 3 claim open to the applicant, no doubt it would  be  made.
         As I understand the argument now advanced, it is that the applicant
         is undergoing fertility treatment in this country which  she  wants
         to continue.   That is not an insurmountable obstacle to the couple
         going to Nigeria if they choose to do so.  It is a matter for them;
         nobody is making a British citizen leave this country but  if  this
         couple want to enjoy family life together in this country they  are
         only entitled to do so if they satisfy the requirements within  the
         Rules, which in this case they do not."

16. Sales LJ went on to say at [50]:

         "First, as regards the appeal in respect of  refusal  of  leave  to
         remain under the Rules, in view of the stringency of  the  test  in
         EX.1(b) (see above), I agree with Judge Craig's assessment that the
         factors relied upon by Mrs Ikuga could not  possibly  persuade  any
         decision-maker that there were insurmountable obstacles  to  family
         life continuing in Nigeria, within the meaning of that provision."

17. See also [21] of Agyarko:

         "The phrase 'insurmountable obstacles' as used in this paragraph of
         the Rules clearly imposes a  high  hurdle  to  be  overcome  by  an
         applicant for leave to  remain  under  the  Rules.    The  test  is
         significantly more demanding than a mere test of whether  it  would
         be reasonable to expect a couple  to  continue  their  family  life
         outside the United Kingdom."

18. The judge made various factual findings in her decision  which  are  of
    significance in terms of the claimed error of law:

      a) "The appellant clearly has cultural ties to Nigeria" [24].

      b) The appellant has spent "......her formative years and the majority
         of her adult life there" [25].

      c) "The appellant and her husband have  been  married  for  40  years,
         albeit they lived in  different  countries  for  nearly  ten  years
         between 1998 and 2007" [26].

      d) "Both the appellant and Mr Nkire must have been aware, given  their
         immigration histories, that either or both of them were  liable  to
         be removed to Nigeria in the years between 2007 and 2011 when  they
         re-established their family life" [27].

      e) "Her husband and two children could help  her  out  financially  to
         some extent if she had to re-establish herself in Nigeria" [24].

      f) "None of his health conditions are such  that  they  could  not  be
         managed and treated in Nigeria as  confirmed  by  the  respondent's
         Country of Origin Information Report dated 14 June 2013" [29].

      g) Mr Nkire "although  he  does  not  have  an  exemplary  immigration
         history, has indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom since
         2011" [31].

19. The judge went on to say at [34] of her decision that  in  drawing  the
    strands together, she would allow the appeal "......in  light  of  both
    the appellant's and Mr Nkire's ages and stages in life and lack of  any
    security or support in Nigeria, as  outlined  above,  a  forced  return
    there would cause them both very serious  hardship"  before  ostensibly
    allowing the appeal under EX.1.(b) of Appendix FM.

20.  Agyarko  sets  a  high  threshold.   I  do  find  the  judge   equated
    reasonableness with insurmountable obstacles and  erred  in  law  as  a
    result.  There were various significant issues which the judge  touched
    upon without adequate analysis, in particular, the fact that  she  said
    at [24] that the appellant's husband and two children  could  help  her
    out financially, but inconsistently said that the appellant would  have
    nowhere to live in Nigeria  and  no  means  to  purchase  accommodation
    there.  The evidence before the judge was that the  appellant  and  her
    husband had property in the United  Kingdom,  jointly  owned  by  their
    daughter who lived in Switzerland.  That was significant  in  terms  of
    funding the return of the appellant and/or Mr Nkire to Nigeria  whether
    in terms of a sale to  purchase  property  or  rental  income  to  fund
    accommodation there.

Decision

21. The judge made a material error of law in allowing the appeal.   I  set
    aside her decision which will be re-made in the First-tier following  a
    de novo hearing.

Anonymity direction not made.


Signed                              Date 10 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart



