

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Appeal Numbers: IA/26462/2014

                                                               IA/26463/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at:  Manchester                      |      Decision and Reasons        |
|                                           |Promulgated                       |
|On: 12th March 2015                        |       On: 20th July 2015         |
|                                           |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Ms Julie Wayilumba Phambala
                            Master Wathu Phambala
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr Singh, Greater Manchester Immigration Aid Unit

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondents are both nationals of Malawi. They are  respectively  a
    mother and her dependent son, aged 10. On the  22nd  October  2014  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Ransley)  allowed  their  linked  appeals
    against decisions to remove them from the United Kingdom under  s10  of
    the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. The Secretary  of  State  now  has
    permission[1] to appeal against that decision.


 2. On the 6th July 2012 the Respondents had made applications for leave to
    remain in the UK on Article 8 grounds 'outside of the Rules'.  At  that
    point Master Wayilumba was weeks away from his eighth birthday and  had
    been in the UK for a continuous period of over seven years.

 3. The Secretary of State refused the applications but  made  no  decision
    which would give rise to a right of appeal. The Respondents applied for
    permission to judicially review  the  failure  to  make  an  appealable
    decision and the matter was settled by consent on the 14th March  2014.
    The Secretary of State  thereafter  served  the  Respondents  with  s10
    notices[2] and an appeal was lodged with the  First-tier  Tribunal.   A
    fresh refusal letter, dated 11th June 2014, explained why the Secretary
    of State  did not consider that the applicants met the requirements  of
    any  of  the  provisions  set  out  in   Appendix   FM   or   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv), and why the Secretary of State did not find there to  be
    any exceptional circumstances.

 4. When the matter came before Judge Ransley she noted  the  date  of  the
    original  applications  and  in  accordance  with   the   decision   in
    Edgehill[3], found that the amendments made to the Immigration Rules on
    the 9th July 2012 had no application to these appeals. She proceeded to
    deal with the matter before her solely on  human  rights  grounds.   In
    doing so she had regard to  a  policy  document  entitled  "Immigration
    Rules on Family and Private Life (HC  194):  Grounds  of  Compatibility
    with Article 8 of the ECHR". This is  a  statement  made  by  the  Home
    Office on the 13th June 2012 prior to introduction of the  'new'  rules
    on the 9th July 2012.  It includes the following remark:


         "we consider that a period of seven continuous years spent  in  the
         UK as a child  will  generally  establish  a  sufficient  level  of
         integration for family and private life to exist such that  removal
         would normally not be in the best interest of the child".


 5. Judge Ransley accepted that the second appellant before her had been in
    the UK for a continuous period of over seven years. She found there  to
    be no countervailing factors such that his removal would be  necessary.
    She found that  in  his  nine  years  in  the  UK  he  had  integrated,
    particularly into the school system. She found that he could enjoy  the
    benefit of the policy that Mr Singh had referred her to, since  it  was
    in force at the date that he had made his application. She allowed  the
    appeals.


 6. The Secretary of State  now  appeals  on  the  following  grounds  (the
    grounds are listed (a)-(i) but are here summarised):

        i) The Judge  was  wrong  to  have  applied  Edgehill  because  the
           applications had been made 'outside of the  Rules'  and  so  the
           transitional provisions examined in that case did not apply;


       ii) It was not open to the Tribunal to rely on  a  policy  statement
           made in relation to the new rules if she was not applying  those
           Rules;

      iii)  The  Tribunal  should  have  considered  276ADE(1)(iv)  and  in
           particular the only matter in issue between the parties, whether
           it was "reasonable" to expect him to return to Malawi  with  his
           mother;

       iv) The seven years long residence should not have been  treated  as
           determinative;

        v) There were weighty public  interest  factors  in  removing  both
           mother and  child  since  she  they  had  entered  in  2005  and
           overstayed.






    My Findings

 7. There is an error of law in this determination in that we now know from
    the judgement in Singh and Khalid[4] that  a  decision  taken  in  June
    2014, as these were, should be considered under the  'new'  Rules.  The
    Rule in place at the date  of  decision  was  the  amended  version  of
    276ADE(1)(iv) which required Master Phambala to show that he:
         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
         UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of imprisonment)
         and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the
         UK; or
    [emphasis added]


 8. The Secretary of State is therefore quite correct in making points (i),
    (iii) and (iv), as they are set out above.


 9. That does not however mean that this decision must be set  aside.   The
    policy mentioned at (ii) was, it must now be agreed in light  of  Singh
    and Khalid, plainly relevant. That is one of a number of  clear  policy
    statements by the Secretary of State in respect of  this  provision.  I
    find the effect of those  policy  statements  to  be  such  that  Judge
    Ransley could only have allowed this appeal.


10. The origins of 276ADE(1)(iv) was the concession known as DP5/96.   That
    policy, and those which followed, created a  general,  but  rebuttable,
    presumption that enforcement action would  "not  normally"  proceed  in
    cases where a child was born here and had lived continuously to the age
    of 7 or over, or where, having come to the United Kingdom at  an  early
    age, 7 years or more of continuous residence had  been  accumulated[5].
     That has consistently been  the Secretary of State's position, and  as
    the  policy  cited  to  Judge  Ransley   indicates,   underpinned   the
    introduction of 276ADE(1)(iv) itself. In December  2012  the  rule  was
    amended to include the term "reasonable". The grounds of appeal suggest
    that this should be read to mean "proportionate" (at (f)). That this is
    not so is illustrated by the current  guidance  which  accompanies  the
    current version  of  the  Rules.  Immigration  Directorate  Instruction
    'Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family Life (as  a  Partner
    or Parent) and Private Life: 10-Year Routes'   ("the  IDI")  gives  the
    following guidance:
         11.2.4. Would it be unreasonable to expect a non-British Citizen
         child to leave the UK?
         The requirement that a non-British Citizen child has lived in the
         UK for a continuous period of at least the 7 years immediately
         preceding the date of application, recognises that over time
         children start to put down roots and integrate into life in the UK,
         to the extent that being required to leave the UK may be
         unreasonable. The longer the child has resided in the UK, the more
         the balance will begin to swing in terms of it being unreasonable
         to expect the child to leave the UK, and strong reasons will be
         required in order to refuse a case with continuous UK residence of
         more than 7 years.
         The decision maker must consider whether, in the specific
         circumstances of the case, it would be reasonable to expect the
         child to live in another country.
         The decision maker must consider the facts relating to each child
         in the UK in the family individually, and also consider all the
         facts relating to the family as a whole. The decision maker should
         also engage with any specific issues explicitly raised by the
         family, by each child or on behalf of each child.
11. As can be seen from this, the insertion of the  term  "reasonable"  was
    not meant to indicate that the Secretary of State had changed her  mind
    about where the best  interests  of  the  child  lay.  It  remains  the
    position that  where  a  child  has  accumulated  seven  years  "strong
    reasons" will be required in order to refuse leave to remain.  That  is
    because after a period of seven years that child's private life will be
    entrenched to the point that it would -  usually-  be  unreasonable  to
    interfere with it.  As it was put by Lord Wallace of Tankerness in  the
    debate in the House of Lords on the introduction of  section  117B  (6)
    NIAA 2002 (as amended by the Immigration Act 2014):


         "we have acknowledged that if a child has reached the age of seven,
         he or she will have moved beyond simply having his or her needs met
         by the parents. The child will be part of the education system  and
         may be  developing  social  networks  and  connections  beyond  the
         parents and home. However, a child who has not spent seven years in
         the United Kingdom either will be  relatively  young  and  able  to
         adapt, or if they are older, will be likely  to  have  spent  their
         earlier years in their country of origin or another  country.  When
         considering  the  best  interests  of  the  child,  the   fact   of
         citizenship is important but so is the  fact  that  the  child  has
         spent  a  large  part  of  his  or  her  childhood  in  the  United
         Kingdom"[6].

12. All of this guidance recognises that after  a  period  of  seven  years
    residence a child will have forged strong links  with  the  UK  to  the
    extent that he or she will have an established private life outside  of
    the immediate embrace of his parents and siblings. It is  that  private
    life which is the starting point of consideration under this Rule.  The
    relationships and understanding of life that a  child  develops  as  he
    grows older are matters which in themselves attract  weight.  The  fact
    that the child might be able to adapt to life elsewhere is  a  relevant
    factor but it cannot be determinative, since exclusive  focus  on  that
    question would obscure the fact that for such  a  child,  his  "private
    life" in the UK is everything he knows.   That is the  starting  point,
    and the task of the Tribunal is to then look to other factors to decide
    whether, on the particular  facts  of  this  case,  these  displace  or
    outweigh the presumption that interference with that private life  will
    normally be contrary to the child's best interests. Those  factors  are
    wide-ranging and varied. The IDI gives several examples including,  for
    instance, the child's health,  whether  his  parents  have  leave,  the
    extent of family connections to the country  of  proposed  return.  The
    assessment of what is "reasonable" will call for the Tribunal to  weigh
    all of  these  matters  into  the  balance  and  to  see  whether  they
    constitute "strong reasons" - the language of  the  current  IDI  -  to
    proceed with removal notwithstanding the established Article  8  rights
    of the child in the UK.   In this case Judge Ransley had regard to  the
    fact that the child's mother was an overstayer, but did not regard that
    as a countervailing factor of sufficient weight to render  his  removal
    reasonable.   In the absence of, for instance,  any  criminality  there
    were no strong reasons to remove this child after such a lengthy period
    of residence.





      Decisions

13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error
    of law and it is upheld.




                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              12th March
                                    2015
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher on the 20th
November 2014
[2] Decisions to remove pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act
1999 dated 16th June 2014
[3] Edgehill and Anor v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 402
[4] Khalid v SSHD; Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74
[5] For a detailed history of the rule and its development see Dyson LH in
Munir v SSHD [2012] UKSC 32 paras 9-13
[6] At column 1383, Hansard 5th March 2014

