
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Numbers:
IA/26571/2015

                                                    IA/26064/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                      |           Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 20 October 2017                    |           On 15 November 2017        |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                               Suleyman Kilinc
                                 Esen Kilinc

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr H Dieu, instructed by NLS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first and second appellants are husband  and  wife  who  were  born
    respectively on 26 January 1983 and 1  October  1984.   They  are  both
    Turkish nationals.

 2. The first appellant arrived in the United Kingdom as a Tier  4  Student
    in 2010 with leave valid until 24 November 2010.  On 23 November  2010,
    he applied for leave to remain in the UK  on  the  basis  that  he  had
    established  a  business  and  sought  leave  under  the   Turkish   EC
    Association Agreement ("ECAA").  His application was successful and  he
    was granted leave until 24 January 2012.  On 24 January 2012,  he  made
    application for further leave to remain  under  the  ECAA  and  he  was
    granted leave until 24 January 2015.  On 22  January  2015,  the  first
    appellant made an application for indefinite leave to remain under  the
    ECAA.  That application was refused on 26 June 2015 and a  decision  to
    remove him by way of directions under s.47 of the  Immigration,  Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006 was made.

 3. The second appellant entered the United Kingdom on  3  September  2013,
    with leave valid until 24 January 2015 as the first appellant's spouse.
     On 22 January 2015, the  second  appellant  made  an  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain as the spouse of the first  appellant  under
    the ECAA.  That application was refused on 26 June 2015 and a  decision
    taken to remove her by way of directions under s.47 of the Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 4. Both appellants appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  Suffield-
    Thompson dismissed each of their appeals.

 5. On 1 March 2017, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Bird) granted  each  of
    the appellants permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

The Judge's Decision

 6.  Before  Judge  Suffield-Thompson,  it  was  common  ground  that   the
    appellants' appeals were governed by the application of the Immigration
    Rules in force  on  1  January  1973,  namely  HC  510.   The  relevant
    paragraphs are paras 4 and 28 of HC 510.

 7. Paragraph 28 provides:

         "A person who is admitted in  the  first  instance  for  a  limited
         period, and who remains here for 4 years in approved employment  or
         as  a  businessman  or  a  self-employed  person  or  a  person  of
         independent means may have the  time  limit  on  his  stay  removed
         unless there are grounds  for  maintaining  it.   Applications  for
         removal of the time limit are to be considered in the light of  all
         the relevant circumstances, including those set out in paragraph 4.
          ...".

 8. Paragraph 4 of HC 510 provides:

         "In deciding these matters account  is  to  be  taken  of  all  the
         relevant facts; the fact that the applicant  satisfies  the  former
         requirements of these Rules for  stay,  or  further  stay,  in  the
         proposed capacity is not conclusive in his favour.   It  will,  for
         example, be relevant whether the person has observed the time limit
         and conditions subject to which he was  admitted;  whether  in  the
         light of his character, conduct or associations it  is  undesirable
         to permit him to remain; whether he represents a danger to national
         security; or whether, if allowed to remain for the period for which
         he would stay, he might not  be  returnable  to  another  country."
         (our emphasis)

 9. Before the judge, as in her decision, the  Secretary  of  State  relied
    upon the first appellant's conviction for "wounding/inflicting grievous
    bodily harm" on 22 March 2013 for which he  had  been  sentenced  to  a
    period of 24 weeks' imprisonment, suspended for twelve months.

10. In her decision, the judge set out the first  appellant's  offence  and
    then considered its relevance under the 1973 Rules as follows:

         "29. The Appellant was sentenced, at Swansea  Crown  Court,  on  23
             August 2013, of an offence  for  Grievous  Bodily  Harm  (sic)
             where he was sentenced to a custodial  sentence  of  24  weeks
             which was suspended for 12 months. The offence  occurred  when
             there was an altercation in the Keebab Shop owned by  the  1st
             Appellant. It  resulted  in  the  Appellant  head-butting  the
             victim and slapping him which caused him to fall to the  floor
             hitting his head. Although the  Appellant's  probation  report
             states he is at low risk of reoffending I find this is not the
             key factor here.  Firstly,  this  was  the  Appellant's  first
             offence but it was a violent offence of  extreme  seriousness,
             hence he received a custodial sentence. It  may  be  that  the
             Probation said he is at low risk of reoffending but due to the
             nature of the offence the risk of harm if he were to  reoffend
             is, I find, very high.

         30.  There is no legal definition of "conducive to the public good"
             so I am assisted  by  the  Sentencing  Threshold  as  the  1st
             Appellant falls into the group of those who were convinced  of
             an offence and sentenced to imprisonment for less  12  months,
             and seven years has not passed since the end of the sentence.

         31.  Although his Pre-Sentence reports says he is remorseful he was
             questioned about this by the Respondent's  representative  and
             he did not come across  as  remorseful  nor  did  he  seem  to
             comprehend  why  this  offence   would   have   such   serious
             consequences for his Immigration Application.

         32.  I find that the 1st Appellant has committed a very serious act
             of violence with no significant mitigating features. It was an
             offence serious enough for a Crown Court disposal and  he  was
             given the highest  penalty  possible  which  was  a  custodial
             sentence and I find he was fortunate to have appeared before a
             Judge minded to impose a suspended sentence  as  others  would
             have not been so lenient.

         33.  His representative argues that he has a  flourishing  business
             and has made his life in the UK. None of this, I find, has any
             relevance in relation to whether or not he is a person of good
             character. I find that he should not be allowed to  remain  in
             the UK as he has breached the Rules by  committing  a  serious
             offence here in the UK."

11. Having dismissed the first appellant's appeal under the 1973 Rules, the
    judge went on also to dismiss the second appellant's appeal  under  the
    Rules and both appellants' appeals under Art 8.

The Error of Law

12. Before us, Mr Richards did not seek to defend the judge's decision,  in
    particular her reasoning in para 32 of her determination.  He  was,  in
    our judgment, clearly right not to do so.

13. In our judgment, there are a number of errors in the judge's  reasoning
    in para 32.  First, the judge mischaracterises the nature of the  first
    appellant's offending.  It does not  appear  that  the  judge  had  any
    information before her other than the fact of conviction  and  sentence
    imposed by the Crown Court Judge.  The facts are recited by  the  judge
    at para 29.  This was undoubtedly a  serious  assault,  involving  head
    butting by the first appellant.  It would  appear,  though  it  is  not
    clear from the papers  and  was  not  clarified  before  us,  that  the
    appellant was convicted of the  offence  under  s.20  of  the  Offences
    against the Person Act  1861.   That  is  an  offence  with  a  maximum
    sentence  of  seven  years'  imprisonment.   Whether  there  were   any
    "significant mitigating factors" - which the judge states  there  were
    not - could not be known by the judge in  the  absence  of  supporting
    documentation relating to the conviction, for  example  the  sentencing
    judge's remarks.  These were not, so far as we are able to tell, before
    the judge.  Secondly, to describe the penalty imposed as  the  "highest
    penalty possible", flies in the face of the fact that the  penalty  was
    24 weeks' imprisonment and it was suspended for twelve months.  It  was
    of a relatively short duration and not an immediate custodial sentence.
     Thirdly, we are unable to fathom on what basis the judge commented  at
    the end of para 32 that it was "fortunate" that the first appellant had
    appeared before a judge who was minded to impose a  suspended  sentence
    when others might not have been so lenient.  We do not know  any  basis
    upon which the judge could assert that matter.  The  judge  was  in  no
    position to 'second guess' the sentence  imposed  by  the  Crown  Court
    Judge who would, undoubtedly, have had all the relevant material before
    him in considering that the appropriate sentence was one of  24  weeks'
    imprisonment but nevertheless that it should, in the  circumstances  of
    the first appellant, be suspended  for  two  years.   We  note  that  a
    suspended sentence was the recommendation by the Probation  Service  in
    the Pre-Sentence Report (PSR) dated 12 August 2013.  It is clear to  us
    that in para 32 the judge has failed properly to  consider  the  nature
    and circumstances of the  first  appellant's  offending  in  concluding
    that, and taking into account that, his "conduct" was such as  to  make
    it "undesirable to permit him to remain" in the UK.

14. We also have concerns about the judge's approach to the appeal in paras
    29 and 30 of her determination.  Dealing first with para 30, it is  not
    clear to us why the judge was concerned with the  legal  definition  of
    "conducive to the public good", a phrase relevant  in  the  context  of
    deportation and some  Immigration  Rules,  but  not  relevant  to  this
    appeal.

15. Further, in relation to para 29, whilst the judge accepts on the  basis
    of the PSR that the first appellant has a "low  risk  of  reoffending",
    the judge's characterisation of any "risk of harm" if he  did  reoffend
    as "very high", is difficult (if not impossible)  to  square  with  the
    only relevant evidence before her, namely the PSR,  which  stated  that
    the first appellant posed a "medium risk of serious harm" to the public
    if he reoffended.

16. For the reasons we have given, and which we indicated at  the  hearing,
    the judge materially erred in law and,  that  decision,  together  with
    that of the second appellant cannot stand.

Remaking the Decision

17. In remaking the decision, we take into account  the  first  appellant's
    established business in the UK since 2010.  It has never been suggested
    by the Secretary of State that he is not engaged in a genuine  business
    in the UK.  He has been in the UK on that basis, now, for almost  seven
    years.  Paragraph 28 of HC 510  states,  as  we  set  out  above,  that
    applications for the removal of a time limit (namely an application for
    ILR as in these appeals) must be considered in the  light  of  all  the
    relevant circumstances, including those set out in para 4 of HC 510.

18. The only matter taken against the first appellant by the  Secretary  of
    State in her decision is the first  appellant's  offence.   That  is  a
    single offence committed in 2013.  The sentence imposed  by  the  Crown
    Court Judge was very much at the lower end of the custodial  range  and
    was, in any  event,  suspended.   The  PSR  concludes  that  the  first
    appellant has a low risk of reoffending within a two year period.  That
    period has, of course, now passed.  We  have  carefully  read  the  PSR
    which is, in very many respects,  positive  in  respect  of  the  first
    appellant's future conduct and behaviour.  In a seven  year  period  in
    the UK as a businessman with leave under the ECAA, there is  only  this
    single offence (albeit one of  some  seriousness)  committed  in  March
    2013.  There has been no reoffending drawn to our attention.

19. In her determination, the judge referred  to  a  table  of  "sentencing
    thresholds"  contained  within  the  relevant  Home  Office   guidance,
    "Business applications under the Turkish EC Association Agreement"  (15
    October 2015) at pages 103-104.  These apply to a person  applying  for
    leave or  ILR  on  or  after  13  December  2012  and  state  that  the
    application "must" be refused, inter alia,  where  the  individual  has
    been: "convicted of an offence and sentenced to imprisonment  for  less
    than 12 months, and 7 years  has  not  passed  since  the  end  of  the
    sentence".

20. It is  not  necessary  for  us  to  consider  whether  this  apparently
    mandatory refusal provision falls foul of the standstill clause in  Art
    41 of the ECAA in imposing a more onerous requirement than  that  which
    existed on 1 January 1973.  Mr Richards accepted  before  us  that  the
    guidance was not binding upon the Tribunal in applying  para  4  of  HC
    510.

21. We see no basis upon which the first appellant's appeal should  not  be
    allowed under the 1973 Rules.  Taking account, therefore,  of  all  the
    circumstances we have set out above, including  the  first  appellant's
    offending,  we  are  satisfied  that  the  first  appellant   met   the
    requirements of HC 510 for the grant of indefinite leave to remain.

22. Likewise, Mr Richards did not suggest that the second appellant  should
    not succeed as the first appellant's spouse under HC  510.   The  basis
    upon which the Secretary of State refused her application was that  she
    had not been living with the first appellant as his spouse for a period
    of two years.  However, Mr Richards accepted that, on the evidence, she
    has now been living as his spouse in the UK for over 4  years  since  2
    September 2013.  Given the respondent's position, it is unnecessary for
    us to explore the issue of what is the point in time at  which  the  4-
    year period must be established.

23. We are, consequently, satisfied that the  second  appellant  meets  the
    requirements of HC 510 for the grant of ILR as the spouse of the  first
    appellant.

Decision

24. Thus, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the first  and
    second appellants' appeals involved the making of an error of  law  and
    is set aside.

25. We remake the decision allowing both the first and  second  appellants'
    appeals on the basis that they meet the requirements of HC 510 for  the
    grant of indefinite leave to remain.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                            15 November 2017

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As we have allowed both appeals, we consider it appropriate to  make  a  fee
award in respect of any fee paid or payable by either appellant.




                                                                      Signed


                                                                       [pic]

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                            15 November 2017



