
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/26750/2014
                                                               IA/26748/2014
                                                               IA/26751/2014
                                                               IA/26752/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham|                 Decision & Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 15th September 2015                |                 On 1st October 2015  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH

                                   Between

                            zg (first appellant)
                            ig (second appellant)
                            fg (third appellant)
                            mg (fourth appellant)
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss L Mair instructed by Malik Legal
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Rule 14(1) Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

 1. I order that the disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead
    members of the public to identify any of the Appellants is  prohibited.
    Any breach of this order may lead to proceedings for contempt of court.



Decision and Reasons

 2. The Appellants are from Mauritius.  They are a  couple  and  two  minor
    children  born  respectively  in  2005  and  2008.   They  appeal  with
    permission against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Broe,
    promulgated on 20th November 2014, to  dismiss  their  appeals  against
    removal.  ZG had applied on 5th July 2012 for leave to  remain  on  the
    basis of Article 8 ECHR, with her husband and the two children  as  her
    dependants.  On 23rd  July  2012  the  Appellants  requested  that  the
    application be varied to be considered  under  the  amendments  to  the
    Immigration Rules introduced on 12th July 2012.  It was said  that  the
    third Appellant was under 18 and had spent a continuous period of seven
    years in the United Kingdom  and  therefore  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(iv).  The application was not  finally  decided  until
    13th  June  2014  and  was  considered  under  the  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules in force as at the date of decision.

 3. In his decision upon the appeal Judge Broe considered that the  correct
    version of the Immigration Rules had been applied by the Respondent and
    he dismissed the appeals both with reference to  the  Rules  and  under
    Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules.

 4. In the grounds seeking  permission  to  appeal  (now  standing  as  the
    Grounds of Appeal) it  was  contended  that  the  judge  had  erred  in
    applying paragraph 276ADE(iv) of the Immigration Rules as they  applied
    at the date of decision rather than as at the date of application.   It
    was said that an unreported decision of the Upper Tribunal  Suthar  and
    Others  (IA/02579/2013)  UKUT  had  been  before  the  judge  and   its
    consideration  had  not  been  opposed  or  precluded.  That   decision
    indicated that in the particular circumstances prevailing  it  was  the
    earlier version of paragraph 276ADE(iv) that should have been  applied.
    It was said that by HC760 some aspects of the Rules were  amended  with
    effect  from  13th  December  2012  but  specifically   excluded   were
    applications to be decided under paragraph 276ADE(iv) made before  12th
    December,  which  indicated  that  the  third  Appellant  should   have
    succeeded outright under the Rules.  That proposition was supported  by
    Suthar.  It was also said that  the  judge  had  erred  in  considering
    whether it was reasonable for the children to be removed  from  the  UK
    and had failed to refer to established principles, namely those set out
    in LD (Article 8 - best interests of child) Zimbabwe [2010] UKUT 278, E-
    A (Article 8 - best interests of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT  315  (IAC)
    and Azimi-Moayed and  Others  (decisions  affecting  children);  onward
    appeals [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC).  Compelling reasons to the  contrary  or
    weighty reasons would be required to justify removal.  Finally  it  was
    said that the judge had erred in his approach to the best interests  of
    the children. He had only considered those interests in the context  of
    the parents leaving the country and without reference to the children's
    social, cultural and educational ties and their own wishes.

 5. Permission was granted on 23rd January 2015 noting that the judge might
    have applied the  wrong  version  of  paragraph  276ADE  and  erred  in
    considering the best interests of the children.  In  a  response  under
    Upper Tribunal Procedure Rule 24  the  Respondent  contended  that  the
    grounds were misconceived as HC 760 had been amended  by  Statement  of
    Changes HC 820.  That had made amendments  to  paragraph  276ADE  which
    applied to all applications decided on or  after  13th  December  2012.
    The judge had applied the correct version of the Rules.   It  was  also
    said that he had had  proper  regard  to  the  best  interests  of  the
    children and had asked himself the correct  questions.   Reference  was
    made to EV Philippines v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874.  It  was  said  that
    the  judge  had  also  considered  Section  117  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 6. At the commencement of the hearing before me Mr Smart for the Secretary
    of  State  produced  extracts  from  the  Statements  of   Changes   in
    Immigration Rules HC 760 and HC 820.  He said that the latter statement
    had made it clear that the amended  version  of  paragraph  276ADE  was
    applicable to decisions made after 12th December  2012  notwithstanding
    when the applications were made.  Miss Mair for her part said that  she
    understood that the case of Suthar which was relevant had  been  before
    the judge at the original hearing.  There had been no reference in  the
    decision to that case.  She said  that  even  if  the  new  version  of
    paragraph 276ADE(iv) was applicable the Appellant should have succeeded
    on the facts.  There was a great deal of case law on the reasonableness
    of requiring a child to leave this country.  Mr Smart had not  had  the
    opportunity to read the case of Suthar and I put the matter back for  a
    short time to enable him to do so and for Miss Mair to read the extract
    from the Statement of Changes HC 820 which had been produced.  Mr Smart
    mentioned that in any event he had doubts as to  whether  the  required
    certificate under the Procedure Rules had been before  the  judge  with
    regard to Suthar.

 7. The point in issue with regard to the version of the  Rules  applicable
    was that under the version introduced by HC 194 which takes  effect  to
    applications made on or after 9th July 2012 sub-section (iv) reads  "is
    under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the UK  for  at
    least seven years (discounting any period of  imprisonment);  or  ...".
    By HC 760 the words "and it would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    applicant to leave the UK"  were  added  "(discounting  any  period  of
    imprisonment)".  It was a moot point therefore as to which  version  of
    the Rules was applicable to the decision under appeal.

 8. When the hearing resumed Miss Mair stated that it did appear clear that
    the unreported Upper Tribunal case of Suthar had been before the First-
    tier Tribunal.  It had been in the bundle and was referred  to  in  the
    skeleton argument.  She said that  the  changes  in  HC  760  had  been
    brought in on 22nd November 2012, four months after the new  Rules  had
    initially been introduced in July of that year.  HC 760 made  it  clear
    that the provisions of paragraph 276 of the Immigration Rules were  not
    affected and under HC 194 the decision should have been decided on  the
    Rules as incorporated in that Statement of Changes.  She accepted  that
    the introduction of HC 820 might "muddy the waters" but  she  submitted
    that the changes were poorly worded and their impact was not clear.  It
    was difficult to see how they could be read coherently.   She  accepted
    that HC 820 had not been referred to in Suthar.  However she  submitted
    that the changes incorporated in HC 820 did not override what was  said
    in HC 760 and did not explain how they could be read in tandem.

 9. She  continued  that  her  other  two  grounds  were  unaffected.   The
    reasonableness of removal for a child was well covered in existing case
    law.  The term "reasonable" was  not  defined  in  the  Rules  and  she
    submitted that the test of reasonableness was a  much  lower  one  than
    tests such as "insurmountable obstacles" or "no ties".  LD set out that
    weighty reasons were required to separate a child from  its  community.
    EA Nigeria said that weighty reasons were  needed  where  there  was  a
    substantial length of  residence.  A period after the age  of  4  years
    would have greater impact.  After the incorporation of  the  new  Rules
    the  case  of  Azimi-Moayed  was  promulgated.    Seven  years  was   a
    significant period for a child under Home Office policy and  the  judge
    should  have  considered  whether  there  were  compelling  reasons  to
    separate the older child from the ambient background.   The  Respondent
    herself in Immigration Directorate Instructions accepted that it  might
    be difficult to justify removal when there was  long  residence.   Miss
    Mair submitted that there was a material error  by  the  judge  in  his
    consideration of the issue of reasonableness.

10. Finally, and dovetailing with her earlier submission, she said that  an
    assessment of reasonableness had  to  include  the  best  interests  of
    children.  She submitted that the judge's findings were fatally flawed.
     The best interests were only referred to in his findings at  paragraph
    34 and very little was said.  Such an assessment had  to  be  more  far
    reaching.  With regard to the case of Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 she
    said that even if a child was not a British citizen the same principles
    applied.  That was clear from ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC  4.   As
    to EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 the  children
    in that case had been raised in the Philippines and had  only  been  in
    the UK for three years at the date of decision.   The  essence  of  the
    criticism was on the comparative quality of education which is  not  an
    argument she was raising.  There were no other factors present in EV in
    the current case.  In ZH even the wrongdoing by the parents  could  not
    outweigh the interests of the child.  The current case had no  negative
    factors.  The other argument was that the best interests of  the  child
    had only been decided after  it  was  decided  the  parents  should  be
    removed.  In a sense  the  argument  was  circular  and  came  back  to
    reasonableness.  The fact that the rest of the family had no  right  to
    remain was not the end of the matter.  But finally she said there was a
    paucity of reasoning where a child was able  to  express  itself.   The
    judge had before him at page 47 of the bundle a letter from  the  older
    child stating why she wished to remain in the United Kingdom and weight
    should have been placed upon it.  It sent out her view.

11. In response Mr Smart said that the judge had not been  referred  to  HC
    820 in Suthar.  HC 820  clearly  implemented  changes  as  to  the  way
    applications should be treated and was quite clear.  With regard to the
    other arguments the judge had considered  the  best  interests  of  the
    child and had referred to  cases  such  as  Zoumbas.   The  matters  he
    referred to were more recent cases than those mentioned in the  Grounds
    of Appeal and he did not depart from the guidance given.   He  appeared
    to have had regard to the decision in EV Philippines.  His decision  at
    paragraphs 34 and 35 dealt with the guidance factors.  He also properly
    considered the issues at  Section  117  of  the  2002  Act.   Mr  Smart
    submitted that the judge could not be  criticised  for  the  manner  in
    which he reached his conclusions.  It was not  the  order  in  which  a
    decision was reached which mattered but the matter viewed as  a  whole.
    He submitted that there was no material error.

12. Finally Miss Mair in reply said that the more recently cited cases were
    on different points.  The cases she had referred to  were  directly  on
    the issue of reasonableness and long residence.  The failure  to  apply
    those principles amounted to a material error of law in her submission.



13. Having heard those various arguments I reserved my decision which I now
    give.  The first issue is whether the judge applied the correct version
    of paragraph 276ADE(iv).  It was clear that he had before him a copy of
    HC 760 and the point was  argued  that  the  earlier  version  of  that
    paragraph of  the  Immigration  Rules  was  applicable.   That  earlier
    version appears to be absolute in indicating that residence of a  child
    who had been in this country for seven years would entitle the child to
    a right to remain on private life grounds.  It is correct that  HC  760
    preserves the earlier version of paragraph 276ADE.  However there was a
    reference in the Response under Procedure Rule 24 to the provisions  of
    HC 820 and Mr Smart helpfully provided a  copy  of  that  Statement  of
    Changes.  In HC 760 the changes to paragraph 276ADE  are  mentioned  in
    paragraph 201 of that statement.  The relevant part of HC 820 reads  as
    follows:

         "1.  In the Implementation section of the Statement of  Changes  in
             Immigration Rules HC 760, the changes in paragraphs 201,  202,
             224, 226 to 228, 242, 243, 276, 339 to 341, 345 to 353, 358 to
             361, 370 to 388, 392 to 394, and 399 to 441 of that  Statement
             shall apply to all  applications  decided  on  or  after  13th
             December 2012, regardless of  the  date  the  application  was
             made."

    In the annexed explanatory  memorandum  to  HC  820  it  is  stated  at
    paragraph 2.1 in explanation of the purpose of the changes:

         "To apply most of the changes to the Immigration  Rules  on  family
         and  private  life  contained  in  the  Statement  of  Changes   in
         Immigration Rules  laid  on  22  November  2012  (HC  760)  to  all
         applications decided on or after 13th December  2012,  rather  than
         only to applications made on or after that date.  This will provide
         greater clarity for applicants and for UK Border Agency caseworkers
         as to the requirements  in  respect  of  family  and  private  life
         applicable to all applications decided from 13th December 2012."

14. The amendments brought into force by  HC  820  with  effect  from  13th
    December 2012  appear  to  me  to  be  perfectly  clear.   The  earlier
    provision preserving the earlier form of paragraph 276ADE in respect of
    applications made before 13th December 2012 has been  revoked  and  the
    usual approach that an application should be decided in accordance with
    the Immigration Rules in force as at the  date  of  decision  therefore
    obtains.

15. Although Judge Broe gave no explanation as to why he found that the new
    form of paragraph  276ADE  was  applicable  he  was  clearly  right  in
    following that course.  Suthar appears to have been decided without any
    reference being made to HC 820 and I do not find in these circumstances
    that it is reliable guidance to be followed.  Thus  the  first  of  the
    Grounds of Appeal falls away.  The two  other  grounds  relate  to  the
    manner  in  which  the  judge  approached  the  reasonableness  of  the
    children, and in particular the older child, being removed to Mauritius
    and also their best interests.  Miss Mair helpfully stated that the two
    issues were "dovetailed".

16. In considering whether the judge dealt adequately with these  connected
    issues or whether in doing so he fell into legal error it is  necessary
    to look in more detail as to what he actually considered  and  decided.
    At paragraph 21 of his decision the judge stated that he had considered
    the documents and the evidence and submissions made.  At  paragraph  24
    he recited that the best interests  of  the  children  were  a  primary
    although not a determinative issue.  His substantive findings  were  as
    follows:

         "31. I am satisfied that the Appellant and her husband  are  unable
             to meet the requirements of the Rules for the reasons set  out
             in paragraph 10 above.  The position of the children is not so
             straightforward and it is the Appellant's  case  that  if  the
             children are to be allowed to remain in this country then  she
             and her husband should be allowed to stay with them.

         32.  The third and fourth Appellants [F] and [M] were born in  this
             country on 2nd March 2005 and  5th  March  2008  respectively.
             [F] has therefore been in this country for nine years and  [M]
             for six.  I accept that they have been in education and see no
             reason to doubt that they will have formed  the  social  lives
             that one would expect given their ages.  They cannot meet  the
             requirements of the Rules for leave to be granted on the basis
             of family life because of their parents' circumstances.

         33.  I have nonetheless given careful consideration to  the  matter
             of their private  lives  under  the  provisions  of  paragraph
             276ADE.  It  is  the  Appellant's  case  that  [F]  meets  the
             requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(iv)  which  are  that   an
             applicant is under the age of 18 and has lived continuously in
             the United Kingdom for at least seven years and it  would  not
             be reasonable to expect her to leave the United Kingdom.  This
             is the crux of the appeal.  [M] cannot satisfy the seven  year
             requirements.  Neither her parents nor her siblings  have  any
             independent right to remain in this country.

         34.  There is no dispute that [F] has been in  this  country  since
             her birth and so has lived continuously in the United  Kingdom
             for at least seven years.   I  have  therefore  given  careful
             consideration to whether it would be reasonable to expect  her
             to leave this country.   I  have  noted  the  content  of  the
             Appellant's  bundle and accept  that  [F]  is  doing  well  at
             school.  I note that if she leaves it will be with  the  other
             members of her immediate family.  I am satisfied that it would
             be in her best  interests  to  remain  with  her  parents  and
             siblings.  She will be going to live in  the  country  of  her
             nationality with her parents who  have  spent  most  of  their
             lives there and will be familiar with life  in  Mauritius.   I
             note that her grandparents live there.  Her father's  evidence
             was that she did not speak the 'language of Mauritius'  but  I
             note that she is described as fluent in English, the  language
             in use there.  I accept that she may have  formed  friendships
             appropriate to her age but find that these may  be  maintained
             using modern methods of communication.

         35.  Against that background  I  am  satisfied  that  it  would  be
             reasonable to expect her to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   It
             follows that none  of  the  Appellants  were  entitled  to  be
             granted leave to remain under the Rules."

    He then went on to consider matters outside the  Rules  but  the  issue
    again turned on reasonableness.

17. I have had regard to all of the case law to which I was  referred.   On
    the basis of the face of the decision I do regard the judge  as  having
    taken account of the views and wishes of the older  child.   He  stated
    that he had considered all  of  the  documents.   He  referred  to  her
    progress at school.  He referred to her school friends.  He  was  aware
    that her best interests were a primary consideration.  He took  account
    of her separation from her friends but found that  her  best  interests
    lay with continuing life with her parents who themselves had  no  right
    to remain in this country.  This is not a case of one parent having the
    right to remain and intending to remain and  the  other  not.   As  was
    pointed out to me in E-A the Tribunal stated that absent other  factors
    a substantial period of residence as  a  child  may  become  a  weighty
    consideration in the balance of competing interests although  during  a
    child's very early years he or she will be primarily  focused  on  self
    and the caring parents or guardians.  Long residence once the child  is
    likely to have formed ties outside the family is likely to have greater
    impact on his or her wellbeing.  The case goes on to  note  that  those
    who have their families with them during a period of study  in  the  UK
    must do so in the light of the expectation of return.

18.  In Azimi-Moayed, which was promulgated after the new Rules  came  into
    force, the principles concerning the determination of appeals  relating
    to children were summarised at paragraph 13.  Again it was stated  that
    as a starting point it was in the best interests of children to be with
    both parents and if both parents were being removed then  the  starting
    point suggested so should dependent children.  It was generally in  the
    interests of children to have both stability and continuity  of  social
    and educational provision and the benefit of growing up in the cultural
    norms of the society to which they  belong.   Lengthy  residence  in  a
    country other than the state of origin could  lead  to  development  of
    social, cultural and educational ties that it would be inappropriate to
    disrupt and the absence of compelling reason  to  the  contrary.   What
    amounted to lengthy residence was not clear cut but  past  and  present
    policies identified seven years as a relevant period.  Apart  from  the
    terms of published policies and Rules the  Tribunal  noted  that  seven
    years from age 4 was likely to be more significant to a child than  the
    first seven years of life.  Very young children were focused  on  their
    parents rather than their peers and were adaptable.

19. In the current case the older child was aged approximately 9� years  as
    at the date of hearing before the judge and  had  thus  spent  in  this
    country five and a half years, somewhat less than seven years following
    the age of 4, the ages referred to for  the  purposes  of  guidance  in
    Azimi-Moayed.  The parents have been in the country with leave for most
    of their period of residence and have no criminal record but they  have
    no continuing lawful right to remain here and were  always  here  on  a
    temporary basis.  Although the facts of both Zoumbas and EV Philippines
    are substantially different the principle referred to in both of  those
    cases decided by Higher Courts is that it is legitimate to look  as  to
    whether the parents of children are to be removed  in  considering  the
    interests of the children.  In the current case removal directions  had
    been made against both parents.  The judge gave reasons as  to  why  he
    regarded the best interests of both children to be to remain with their
    parents. There was no evidence that in Mauritius the children would not
    be adequately maintained or not able to access education.  None  was  a
    British citizen. On the evidence before  him  the  judge's  conclusions
    were not irrational or perverse and,  although  they  could  have  been
    expressed more fully, were adequately reasoned.  I perceive no material
    error on a point of law  which  would  justify  setting  his  decisions
    aside.

Notice of Decision

There was no material error of  law  in  the  original  decision  and  these
appeals therefore stand dismissed.

I have made the order for anonymity set out above.





Signed                              Date 29 September 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French






