
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: ia/26136/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On    10.01.2017                          |On 11.01.2017                    |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN
Between:
                             Mike Femi AYENITAJU
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Mr Olu Ogunnowo, solicitor, Allison, Chelmsford
For the respondent: Miss Julie Isherwood

                            DECISION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Jessica Pacey), sitting at Birmingham on 21 June  2016,
    to  an EEA residence card appeal by a citizen of Nigeria, born in 1970.
    The appellant had had a card from 2010  as  the  husband  of  a  French
    citizen,  but  they  had  been  divorced  on  4  April  2014,  and  his
    application for a permanent residence card on the basis of his retained
    right of residence was refused, and the current one revoked.

 2. The point on which the judge dismissed the appeal was that she was  not
    satisfied that the appellant's wife had been a  'qualified  person'  at
    the date of their divorce, the relevant  date  following  Samsam  (EEA:
    revocation and retained rights) Syria  [2011]  UKUT  00165  (IAC),  re-
    affirmed in Ahmed (Amos; Zambrano; reg 15A(3)(c) 2006 EEA Regs)  [2013]
    UKUT 00089 (IAC). The judge had before her payslips or  other  evidence
    showing the appellant's wife had been in work, apparently up  to  April
    2013, the date claimed at section 7 of his application  form;  but  she
    did not have such evidence to cover the date of the divorce.

 3. At paragraph 6 the judge noted the appellant's evidence  that  she  had
    been obstructive; but at paragraph 10  she  declined  to  accept  that,
    because the appellant had nevertheless been able to provide  copies  of
    bank statements for his wife going up to 26 August 2014, so after their
    divorce. The judge took the view that this showed they were on amicable
    enough terms for the appellant's wife to be prepared to co-operate with
    him. For whatever reason, though, there was no relevant evidence before
    the judge covering the date of the divorce.

 4. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal rely first on what is  said
    to have been a mistake of fact by the judge, since the  appellant  only
    had the bank statements because Royal Mail had delivered  them  to  the
    former matrimonial home. Whether that is right or wrong,  however,  the
    appellant still needed, following  Samsam,  to  provide  the  necessary
    evidence as of the date of the divorce.

 5. So I turn to the second ground of  appeal,  which  is  that  the  judge
    should  have  required  the  Home  Office  to  investigate  the  wife's
    employment situation through Revenue or other sources themselves. While
    that is contrary to the general principle in Samsam  that the appellant
    needed to provide the necessary evidence  himself,  I  am  prepared  to
    treat that principle as modified to the extent  of  the  relevant  Home
    Office guidance, set out in 'Family members of ...  EEA  nationals  who
    have retained the right of residence'  (7  April  2015),  on  which  Mr
    Ogunnowo relied.

 6. At p 31 that guidance recognizes the difficulties faced  by  applicants
    where their relationship with an EEA sponsor has broken down. It  gives
    two examples,  first  where  there  has  been  domestic  violence,  not
    relevant in this case; and second, "Where the applicant's  relationship
    has ended acrimoniously, but they have provided evidence to  show  that
    they have made every effort to provide  the  required  documents  ...".
    There had been no such evidence before the  decision-maker  here;  but,
    even if there had been, their resulting duties were  limited  to  those
    set out at the top of p 32: the instructions to them were to

         . consider each case on its merits; and

         . if you are satisfied  the  applicant  cannot  get  the  evidence
           themselves, make enquiries on their behalf where possible ...

 7. In this case, as Mr Ogunnowo conceded, there had been no request by the
    appellant to the Home Office to make those enquiries. I asked  him  how
    then they could have been satisfied that he could not get the  evidence
    himself. Since the appellant's grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal contained nothing about any difficulties he might have had  in
    providing the necessary evidence, Mr Ogunnowo was reduced to suggesting
    that the points made in the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal put
    the Home Office under the duty set out in the guidance.

 8. While that might possibly have been  the  case,  if  I  had  found  any
    material error of law in the judge's decision such as to lead to my re-
    making it, the question before me now is  whether  there  was  such  an
    error. However, without any request from  the  appellant  to  the  Home
    Office to make enquiries of their own from the  Revenue,  it  does  not
    seem to me that the judge was wrong  to  deal  with  the  case  on  the
    evidence before her.

 9. It follows that, whether the judge was  right  or  wrong  to  make  the
    inference she did about continuing co-operation between  the  appellant
    and his wife, she was unarguably entitled, on the rest of her  findings
    of fact, to dismiss the appeal.

Appeal
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
