
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26364/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 April 2014                              |On 2nd May 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Miss Joy Kokogho
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Secretary of State:     Ms A Holmes
For the Respondent:    Unrepresented


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of the Secretary of  State  but  for  convenience  I
    will refer to the original appellant, a citizen of Nigeria  born  on  5
    February 1987, as the appellant herein.

2.   On 4 April 2013 the Secretary of State refused to issue  the  appellant
    with an EEA residence card as confirmation of a right of  residence  in
    the United Kingdom as an extended family  member  of  an  EEA  national
    exercising the right of free movement under the Treaty  of  Rome.   The
    Secretary of State referred to Regulation 8 of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 and was not satisfied that the appellant had  provided
    sufficient evidence to prove that she was an  extended  family  member.
    She had not shown she had been dependent  on  the  EEA  sponsor  -  her
    sister Jessica.

3.   Refusal was on a number of grounds.  However,  the  appellant  appealed
    against the decision and at the hearing before the First-tier Judge  on
    19 December 2013 the parties were able to agree a number of issues.  It
    was indeed accepted that the  appellant  and  her  sister  had  resided
    together in Nigeria from 2002  until  2007  and  that  they  had  lived
    together in the United Kingdom and  that  the  appellant's  sister  was
    exercising treaty rights as a  student  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    appellant herself had arrived  in  the  UK  as  a  student.   The  only
    remaining issue was the principle of dependency.

4.   The First-tier Judge heard oral evidence from  the  appellant  and  her
    sister.

5.   The judge  concluded  that  the  appellant  had  produced  satisfactory
    evidence to confirm that she was  an  extended  family  member  of  the
    sponsor.  There was credible evidence that the appellant and her sister
    had lived together since her sister's arrival in the UK in  2011.   The
    appellant's sister had both a German ID  card  and  a  German  passport
    since at least 2010.  In paragraph 47 of her determination she stated:

         "I find that the appellant has lived in the same household with her
         EEA national sponsor for many years, in Nigeria from 2002-2007  and
         in the UK since 2011 and that she has provided  for  her  including
         paying for her university fees."

6.   Accordingly the judge allowed  the  appeal  being  satisfied  that  the
    appellant was an extended family  member  of  an  EEA  national  -  her
    sister.

7.   The Secretary of State appealed on the point that the judge  had  erred
    in finding that the appellant  had  established  past  dependency.   By
    reference to Moneke  [2011]  UKUT  00341  (IAC)  it  was  necessary  to
    establish dependency or membership of the household on a person who was
    an EEA national at the material time.  The sponsor had  become  an  EEA
    citizen in 2010 and any dependency while the appellant was  in  Nigeria
    and while the sponsor was not an EEA national  did  not  establish  the
    appellant's case that Regulation 8 was met.  The appellant had  entered
    the United Kingdom as a student in 2010 and any dependency acquired  in
    the  United  Kingdom,  even  if  the  EEA  national  was  not  resident
    themselves in the United  Kingdom  at  that  time,  could  not  assist.
    Reference was made to Aladeselu v Secretary of State  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    144.

8.   On 17 March 2014 Designated Judge McClure granted permission to  appeal
    on the basis that the grounds were arguable.

9.   In a very well-prepared  bundle  the  appellant  prepared  a  response.
    While she accepted that her sister had obtained German  nationality  in
    December 2010 she had been dependent on her sister and had lived in her
    household between 7 May 2011 and 11 June 2011.  Her sister had obtained
    EU citizenship before her arrival in the United  Kingdom  in  September
    2011.  The appellant referred to her sister's evidence before the First-
    tier Tribunal confirming the support that  her  sister  had  given  the
    appellant during that period and additional evidence to show  that  the
    appellant had been part of her sister's household in Nigeria during the
    relevant time.  A schedule  was  prepared  showing  how  and  when  the
    photographs were taken.

10.  Unfortunately the bundle had not reached Ms Holmes and so  I  put  back
    the case to enable her to consider the material.

11.  When the hearing resumed Ms Holmes  acknowledged  that  it  did  appear
    that the appellant had always been dependent on  the  sponsor  and  the
    statement before the  First-tier  Tribunal  confirmed  funding  by  the
    sponsor.  Ms Holmes referred to paragraph 40 of Moneke and the need  to
    show prior qualification.

12.  She could not say much in support of the Secretary  of  State's  appeal
    given the very helpful bundle.  She pointed out that the grounds  would
    have been prepared without the benefit of the material before the First-
    tier Tribunal which included a bundle approaching 400 pages.

13.  While the appellant and her sister  were  present  and  ready  to  give
    evidence she did not consider there was  anything  doubtful  about  the
    evidence and did not need to ask them any questions.  It  appeared  the
    judge had accepted  the  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  her
    sponsor.  The one issue had been resolved.

14.  I indicated at the hearing that I would be allowing the appeal  in  the
    circumstances.  It is clear that the First-tier Judge accepted all  the
    evidence that she heard, the appellant's sister was  cross-examined  as
    the appellant points out in her  representations  in  response  to  the
    Secretary of State's grounds of appeal at paragraph 10.  The  appellant
    and her sister were willing to give further evidence in support of  the
    case but Ms Holmes quite properly  conceded  that  the  only  remaining
    issue had been addressed.

15.  In the light of the fact that Ms Holmes  does  not  wish  to  argue  in
    support of her appeal the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed. The
    decision of the First-tier Judge allowing the appeal of  the  appellant
    stands.

Signed                                  Date 30 April 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Warr
