
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/26120/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal    |Decision Promulgated |
|on 18 January 2017                         |on 20 January 2017   |




                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                               MUHAMMAD IMRAN
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Lane instructed by Heritage Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Frankish (the Judge) promulgated on the  7  March  2016  in  which  the
    appellant's appeal against the refusal to issue a  Residence  Card,  on
    the basis of his claim to be a spouse of an EEA national with  retained
    rights following the breakdown of marriage, was dismissed.


Error of law

 2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on the 25 May 1977. It  is
    not disputed that he married an EEA national, Mrs Lung an Estonian, on
    3 August 2009. It is not disputed that the appellant issued  a  divorce
    petition on 6 September 2012 nor that the Decree Absolute  was  granted
    on 13 November 2015. It is also accepted that Mrs Lung left the  UK  in
    September 2013.
 3. At paragraphs 16 and 17 the Judge finds:

         "16.     Thus, in principle, the sponsor's departure  is  fatal  to
         the appellant's claim for a retained right of residence.   However,
         he now tries to have his cake and eat it.  He has had  the  benefit
         of Diatta in answering the question  "when  does  a  marriage  stop
         being a marriage" with the answer thereto: "Not until  there  is  a
         divorce". Putting that aside he now says that he had a  divorce  by
         virtue of proceedings issued on 6 September 2013, i.e. just  before
         his wife left the  country  around  the  time  of  her  P45  on  22
         September 2013.  Will this argument wash? Nobody can say  for  sure
         because the point is subject to another referral  to  the  European
         Court, widely expected to clarify the meaning of "at  the  time  of
         their divorce", this time, in NA-v- SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 995.


         17.      If the appellant has to rely on his  decree  absolute,  he
         has missed the boat by over two years (ex-wife's  departure  around
         22.9.13,  decree  absolute  13.11.15).  In  my  judgement   it   is
         contradictory for him to say that he is married because he  is  not
         divorced per Ditta but, on the other hand, he  is  divorced  before
         the sponsor leaves the country because he had issued proceedings on
         6 September 2012.  My conclusion is that he therefore falls foul of
         the ruling in Singh and  that  the  permanent  residence  card  was
         rightly refused.  In light  of  this  finding  I  do  not  find  it
         necessary to consider which, if  either  of  them,  was  exercising
         treaty rights before and after the time of application."

 4. Directive 2004/38/EC, Article  13,  is  incorporated  into  UK  law  in
    Regulation 10 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulation
    2006. The grounds of challenge assert that Regulation  10(5)  does  not
    accurately transpose Article 13(2).
 5. Article 13 states:

                                 Article 13


             Retention of the right of residence by family members  in  the
             event of divorce, annulment  of  marriage  or  termination  of
             registered partnership


             1. Without prejudice  to  the  second  subparagraph,  divorce,
             annulment of the Union citizen's marriage  or  termination  of
             his/her registered partnership, as referred to in  point  2(b)
             of Article 2 shall  not  affect  the  right  of  residence  of
             his/her family members who are nationals of a Member State.


             Before acquiring the right of permanent residence, the persons
             concerned must meet the conditions laid down  in  points  (a),
             (b), (c) or (d) of Article 7(1).


             2. Without prejudice  to  the  second  subparagraph,  divorce,
             annulment  of  marriage  or  termination  of  the   registered
             partnership referred to in point 2(b) of Article 2  shall  not
             entail loss of the right of residence  of  a  Union  citizen's
             family members who are not nationals of a Member State where:


             (a)  prior  to  initiation  of  the   divorce   or   annulment
             proceedings  or  termination  of  the  registered  partnership
             referred to in point  2(b)  of  Article  2,  the  marriage  or
             registered  partnership  has  lasted  at  least  three  years,
             including one year in the host Member State; or


             (b) by agreement between the spouses or the partners  referred
             to in point 2(b) of Article 2 or by court order, the spouse or
             partner who is not a national of a Member State has custody of
             the Union citizen's children; or


             (c) this is warranted by particularly difficult circumstances,
             such as having been a victim of domestic  violence  while  the
             marriage or registered partnership was subsisting; or


             (d) by agreement between the spouses or partners  referred  to
             in point 2(b) of Article 2 or by court order,  the  spouse  or
             partner who is not a national of a Member State has the  right
             of access to a minor child, provided that the court has  ruled
             that such access must be in the host Member State, and for  as
             long as is required


             Before acquiring the right of permanent residence,  the  right
             of residence of the persons concerned shall remain subject  to
             the requirement that they are  able  to  show  that  they  are
             workers or self-employed persons or that they have  sufficient
             resources for themselves  and  their  family  members  not  to
             become a burden on the social assistance system  of  the  host
             Member  State  during  their  period  of  residence  and  have
             comprehensive sickness insurance  cover  in  the  host  Member
             State, or  that  they  are  members  of  the  family,  already
             constituted in the host Member State, of a  person  satisfying
             these requirements. "Sufficient resources" shall be as defined
             in Article 8(4).


             Such family members shall  retain  their  right  of  residence
             exclusively on personal basis.





 6. Regulation 10(5) states:

             (5) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-


             (a) he ceased to be a family member of a qualified person or
             of an EEA national with a permanent right of residence on the
             termination of the marriage or civil partnership of that
             person;


             (b) he was residing in the United Kingdom in accordance with
             these Regulations at the date of the termination;


             (c) he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and


             (d) either-


                  (i)  prior to the initiation of the proceedings for the
                  termination of the marriage or the civil partnership the
                  marriage or civil partnership had lasted for at least
                  three years and the parties to the marriage or civil
                  partnership had resided in the United Kingdom for at least
                  one year during its duration;


                  (ii) the former spouse or civil partner of the qualified
                  person has custody of a child of the qualified person or
                  the EEA national with a permanent right of residence;


                  (iii)      the former spouse or civil partner of the
                  qualified person or the EEA national with a permanent
                  right of residence has the right of access to a child of
                  the qualified person or the EEA national with a permanent
                  right of residence, where the child is under the age of 18
                  and where a court has ordered that such access must take
                  place in the United Kingdom; or


                  (iv) the continued right of residence in the United
                  Kingdom of the person is warranted by particularly
                  difficult circumstances, such as he or another family
                  member having been a victim of domestic violence while the
                  marriage or civil partnership was subsisting.

 7. The appellants contention in the appeal was always that he received the
    retained right of residence at the point the divorce  proceedings  were
    commenced and not when the divorce was finalised,  not  as  appears  to
    have been the Judge's understanding of the case.
 8. It is not disputed that the appellant and his former  wife  were  in  a
    marriage that lasted for more than three years and that the parties had
    lived in the UK during this time and that the ex-wife left the UK after
    the divorce proceedings had been initiated.
 9. The Judge refers to the decision of the European Court  of  Justice  in
    Singh and others v Minster for Justice and Equality  (C-218/14)  handed
    down on 16 July 2015 but appears to misunderstand the  Courts  position
    which is set out at [70] of the judgment in the following terms:

         "Having regard to the above considerations, the answer to  Question
         1 is that Article 13(2) of Directive 2004/38 must be interpreted as
         meaning that  a  third-country  national,  divorced  from  a  Union
         citizen, whose marriage lasted for at least three years before  the
         commencement of divorce proceedings, including at least one year in
         the host Member State, cannot retain a right of residence  in  that
         Member State on the basis of that provision where the  commencement
         of the divorce proceedings is preceded by the departure  from  that
         Member State of the spouse who is a Union citizen."

10. In the interim the question posed by the Court of Appeal in NA has been
    answered by the CJEU in a judgment handed down on the 30 June 2016  (C-
    115/15) in the following terms:

         "In light of the foregoing, the answer to  the  first  question  is
         that Article 13(2)(c) of Directive 2004/38 must be  interpreted  as
         meaning that a third country national, who is divorced from a Union
         citizen at whose hands she has been the victim of domestic violence
         during the marriage, cannot rely on the retention of her  right  of
         residence in the host Member State on the basis of that  provision,
         where  the  commencement  of  divorce  proceedings  post-dates  the
         departure of the Union citizen spouse from that Member state."

11. It was accepted by Mrs Aboni that the impact of the  judgment  is  that
    the relevant time at which the matters should be assessed in this  case
    is the date of issue of the divorce petition and not the  date  of  the
    decree absolute. To give effect  to  Regulation  10(5)  the  Judge  was
    required to interpret the provision in this way so as to give effect to
    Article 13(2)(a).  The  appellant asserts  domestic  violence  in  the
    relationship.
12. I find in light of the above that the Judge erred in law in relation to
    the assessment of the correct point in time at which he was required to
    assess the relevant issues set out in regulation 10(5). It is noted  by
    Mr Lane that the respondent conceded that the appellant and his  former
    wife were working or self-sufficient to the time set out at [6], but  a
    full and proper assessment of these aspects are required, which to date
    has not been undertaken by the First-tier Tribunal.
13. For these reasons it was agreed the matter be remitted  to  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  to  enable  that  Tribunal  to   undertake   a   proper
    consideration  of  the  relevant  elements  of  the  case  against  the
    background of the preserved findings of fact as to  the  chronology  of
    the relationship. I set the decision aside and remit the  case  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal sitting at Birmingham accordingly.

Decision

14. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set aside  the
    decision of the original Judge.  This appeal is remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal sitting at Birmingham for further consideration.


  Anonymity.


15. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  I  make
    no such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 19 January 2017
