
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26003/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 14th April 2015                       |On 22nd May 2015                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               azulfiqar aziz
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Janjua, Janua & Associates


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Bagral made following a hearing at Bradford on 24th October 2014.



Background

 2. The claimant is a national of Pakistan born on 1st  January  1987.   He
    entered the UK as a student on 7th May 2011 valid to 27th  August  2012
    and was subsequently granted  further  leave  to  remain  in  the  same
    capacity until 6th April 2014.  On 18th  December  2013  he  married  a
    British citizen and applied for further leave to remain as a spouse.

 3. The application was refused on 18th June 2014 because the Secretary  of
    State concluded that  the  claimant  failed  to  meet  the  suitability
    requirements of  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  namely  S-
    LTR.2.2(a), since she was satisfied  that  he  had  obtained  leave  to
    remain by  deception.   He  had  submitted  an  English  language  test
    certificate purporting to verify the results of a test  taken  on  17th
    July 2012 which had been deemed to be obtained through deception by the
    Educational Testing Service.  It is the Secretary of State's case  that
    the information provided by ETS shows that the claimant's speaking test
    had been taken by a proxy test taker.

 4. The claimant denies using  a  proxy.  He  confirmed  that  he  had  not
    committed deception at the time of his Tier 4 extension application and
    he undertook the English language test himself.  At no time had he been
    informed by the institution of his studies that  his  English  language
    certificate was not accepted.  Nor had he been informed in  writing  by
    ETS or interviewed by them or by the police.

 5. In a detailed and thoughtful determination the judge concluded that the
    Secretary of State had  failed  to  discharge  the  onus  upon  her  to
    establish that the claimant had perpetrated a deception.

 6. She wrote as follows:

         "After much consideration I am not satisfied that the  evidence  as
         presented is sufficient in probative  value  and  has  the  cogency
         required in order to discharge the onerous burden on the respondent
         to prove fraud.  I have reached this conclusion for the reasons set
         out below:

          i) I am not satisfied that a  set  of  redacted  email  exchanges
             between  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  and   various
             officials of the Home Office is sufficient to substantiate  an
             allegation of fraud.

         ii) The content of the emails consists of stated conclusions  that
             the test results have been found to be invalid but no evidence
             has been adduced to substantiate the conclusions reached.  The
             extract from  the  ETS  look  up  tool  simplify  records  the
             Appellant's name and his invalid status results. No  data  has
             been adduced to show how those invalid results were reached.

        iii) There is no evidence from ETS or  the  college  substantiating
             the allegation against this Appellant.

         iv) No voice recordings have been produced. No reasons  have  been
             given as to why they have not been made available and there is
             no evidence of the  analysis  under  taken  specific  to  this
             Appellant and by whom."

 7. The judge concluded that the  claimant  met  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules for leave as a spouse but, should she be wrong  about
    that, it was not reasonable and not  proportionate  to  expect  him  to
    return to Pakistan solely for the purpose of making an entry  clearance
    application.  She allowed the appeal  under  the  Rules  and  on  human
    rights grounds.

The Grounds of Application

 8. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal which was granted by
    Judge Bird on 2nd February 2015.

 9. First, she argued that the judge had failed to provide adequate reasons
    for her decision and had disregarded documents provided in  support  of
    the deception allegation including witness  statements  from  Mr  Peter
    Milligan, a witness statement from Miss Rebecca Collins and an ETS look
    up tool document which  showed  that  the   claimant's  test  had  been
    categorised as invalid.

10. Second, she had materially misdirected herself in law  in  applying  an
    impermissibly high standard of proof in determining the deception issue
    and failed to properly reason why the documents did not  discharge  the
    requisite standard of proof.

11. Third, she had misdirected herself in the consideration  of  Article  8
    not identifying any unjustifiably harsh consequences for  the  claimant
    as per the decision in Nagre v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720  which  established
    that  the  consideration  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  exceptional
    circumstances together provide full coverage of an individual's  rights
    under Article 8.

Submissions

12. Mrs Pettersen relied on her grounds. The judge had wrongly  stated  the
    law in concluding that the Secretary of State had an  "onerous"  burden
    upon her, and had failed to look at all of the evidence taken together,
    including the witness statements, which was sufficient to discharge the
    burden of proof.  There was nothing exceptional  about  the  claimant's
    circumstances and he had not demonstrated  why  he  could  reapply  for
    entry clearance.

13. Mr Janjua submitted that there was no error of law  in  this  decision.
    The claimant had not been provided with  any details  of  how  the  ETS
    decided that he had committed fraud, which he strenuously  denied.   No
    detailed original report had been provided. It was not possible to know
    the qualifications  which  the  decision  maker  had;  ETS  had  merely
    indulged in speculation. He had not been given  any  opportunity  of  a
    retest.

Consideration of whether There is an Error of Law

14. The evidence before the judge was as follows.

15. First, there is an extract from the Home Office Guidance in relation to
    the handling of ETS  applications.   It  says  that  ETS  undertook  an
    analysis of speaking tests to identify whether tests were  taken  by  a
    substitute or proxy test taker. The analysed results  were  split  into
    two areas.  Invalid, where voice analysis showed that cheating  in  the
    test took place,  and  questionable,  where  analysis  had  not  proved
    cheating but where concerns were deemed sufficient to withdraw the test
    result.

16. She  also  provided  two  witness  statements,  the  first  from  Peter
    Milligan, Assistant Director at the Home  Office  responsible  for  the
    unit which processed  in-country  Tier  4  student  applications.    He
    records that in February  2014  BBC  Panorama  broadcast  a  television
    programme which revealed widespread abuse within UK test centres  which
    administered the TOEIC, including  the  use  of  proxies  to  undertake
    speaking and listening tests on behalf of candidates and the  provision
    of correct answers for those sitting written tests.

17. The Home Office requested that ETS investigate the validity of  results
    across UK testing centres, as a consequence of  which  ETS  provided  a
    list of candidates whose test results showed  substantial  evidence  of
    invalidity.

18. The ETS employs voice biometric technology to analyse test  data  which
    extracts biometric features from an individual's speech to  generate  a
    voice print which is run  against  samples  to  establish  whether  the
    sample is likely to be a recording of the same person who had generated
    the voice print, or a different person. The technology was used to flag
    comparisons where  the  result  was  suspicious  but,  because  it  was
    acknowledged that the technology used was imperfect, and samples  could
    be incorrectly  shown  as  false  positives,  each  flagged  match  was
    subjected to a further human verification process.  Each  was  verified
    by two analysts working entirely separately who  would  listen  to  the
    samples and confirm whether in their opinion  it  was  the  same  or  a
    different person  speaking.  Only  where  both  analysts  independently
    concluded that samples were of  the same  person  would  that  case  be
    treated as a match.  It was ensured  that  at  least  one  analyst  was
    experienced.

19. Peter Milligan said that he was confident that two independent analysts
    would be able to effectively identify matches and, over 33,000 possible
    matches by the system, 80% were confirmed after human verification. The
    process mitigated significantly against the risk of a false positive.

20. He said that where a match had not been  identified  and  verified,  an
    individual's test result might still be invalidated  on  the  basis  of
    test administration irregularity, including the fact  that  their  test
    was taken at a UK testing centre where numerous other results had  been
    invalidated on the basis of a match.  In  those  cases  the  individual
    would usually be invited to  take  a  free  retest.  Those  cases  were
    clearly distinguished by ETS in its spreadsheets provided to  the  Home
    Office from tests where there was a substantial evidence of invalidity.

21. Rebecca Collins is a grade 6 civil servant. She also provided a witness
    statement detailing the background to the  decisions  taken,  where  an
    invalid  result  had  been   identified,  in  relation  to  Section  10
    removals.

22. So far as this particular claimant is concerned, the Presenting Officer
    provided an extract from the look up tool identifying the  claimant  by
    his name and his date of birth and showing his test results as invalid.



23. I am satisfied that the judge erred in law.

24. First, as alleged in the grounds, it does appear that  she  applied  an
    impermissibly high standard of  proof  in  referring  to  the  "onerous
    burden "on the Secretary of State".  There is  no  higher  standard  of
    proof required to provide deception  other  than  the  civil  standard,
    namely the balance of probabilities.

25. Second, there is no  reference  in  the  paragraph  which  records  the
    evidence which she  considered,  to  the  witness  statements  from  Mr
    Milligan and Miss Collins which set out in detail the process which was
    applied by ETS to identify fraud.

26. Third, the Article 8 conclusions are clearly infected by  the  positive
    findings made that the claimant fulfilled the suitability  requirements
    for leave to remain as a spouse.

27. The decision is set aside.

Remaking the Decision

28. I heard brief oral evidence from the claimant who confirmed that he had
    not been  guilty of practising any deception. He said that he had  only
    found out about the allegation after he made the visa  application  for
    leave to remain as a spouse.  He was  asked  whether,  after  receiving
    notification whether he went to his previous college or to ETS  to  ask
    them for more details about his test result.  He said that he  had  not
    approached his college because it was closed, nor ETS, but he had asked
    his solicitor to take the matter up.

29. Mrs Pettersen submitted that the claimant's appeal should be dismissed.
     It could be inferred from the fact that he was not invited to  take  a
    retest that his test result was invalidated on the basis of  individual
    investigation and not simply because he was part of a batch of  invalid
    results.  Moreover anyone who claimed to  have  validly  taken  a  test
    would have attempted to clear their name and this claimant had taken no
    steps himself to challenge ETS.

30. Mr Janjua submitted that the evidence against the claimant was unclear,
    confusing and not transparent.  No details of the names of the  centres
    had been  produced and effectively ETS and the Home Office could   pick
    and choose whom to designate as having taken an invalid test. The  Home
    Office were relying for their evidence  on  the  third  party  who  had
    permitted abuse. It was unclear as to who would be  invited  to  retake
    the test. There was no clear evidence of deception. He reminded me that
    the consequences of the allegation being maintained  were  serious  for
    the claimant.  He faced a ban from the UK for ten years.  His wife  was
    pregnant and would be put under extreme pressure if  the  claimant  was
    required to leave.





Findings and Conclusions

31. I am satisfied that the Secretary of State has discharged the burden of
    proof upon her to show, on  the  balance  of  probabilities,  that  the
    claimant does not meet the suitability requirements of Appendix FM   as
    set out in S-LTR.2.2(a).

32. First, the Secretary of State is plainly  entitled  to  rely  upon  the
    evidence provided out her  from  ETS,  which  is  the  world's  largest
    private non-profit educational  testing  and  assessment  organisation,
    administering approximately 50,000,000 tests per annum in  25,000  test
    centres in 192 countries.   Details  of  how  that  evidence  has  been
    obtained are in the witness statement of Peter Milligan. It appears  to
    be robust, with not only voice biometric technology being deployed  but
    also an independent check by two analysts, one of whom is  experienced,
    working separately.  She is not obliged to provide  the  names  of  the
    centres concerned, nor the details  of  the  equipment  used,  nor  the
    qualifications of  the  analysts  concerned.   The  standard  of  proof
    required is the civil standard and not a  higher one.

33. In this particular case there is clear evidence from the  ETS  look  up
    tool that the claimant  himself has been   individually  identified  as
    having an invalid test result. The fact that he  was  not  offered  the
    chance of a re-test indicates that the conclusion reached  was  on  the
    basis of an analysis of his test rather than the fact that  he  took  a
    test  at a centre where there was large scale abuse.

34. It is significant that the claimant  did  not  seek  to  challenge  the
    allegation of deception directly with ETS.  If he had  genuinely  taken
    the test as he claims it would be expected that   an  approach  to  ETS
    would have been  made.

35. Mr Janjua's vague and unsubstantiated assertions that  there  could  be
    collusion between the Home Office  and  ETS  to  allege  deception  are
    without any foundation.

36. I appreciate that the claimant's wife is now  pregnant  and  that  this
    decision has harsh consequences for them as a couple.   No  submissions
    were made in relation to the discretionary nature of Sections S-LTR.2.2
    and no evidence was taken. Although the application would  normally  be
    refused, it is not mandatory. Accordingly the appeal is  remitted  back
    to Judge Bagral to remake the decision in the light of the findings  in
    this determination.

Decision

37. The judge erred in law and  her  decision  has  been  set  aside.   The
    following decision is substituted.  The claimant's appeal  is  remitted
    back to the first tier judge to remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date



Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
