

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/26927/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Promulgated on               |
|3 October 2014                                |20 November 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                                     PW
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss N M Hashmi, instructed by Immigration
Practitioners Service
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Uganda.  He appealed to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of  the  respondent  on  6  August  2013,
    refusing him leave to remain.  The appellant came to the United Kingdom
    lawfully but the relationship upon which his admission  was  based  has
    since broken up.  It is now accepted on his behalf,  as  we  understand
    it, that he cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  but
    his claim is based on a same sex relationship in which it  is  said  he
    has been engaged since March 2012.

 2. In the First-tier  Tribunal,  Judge  Trevaskis  examined  the  evidence
    produced to him, said to support the existence of that relationship and
    concluded that he was not persuaded that it existed and that being  the
    only basis upon which realistically the appellant could succeed in  his
    appeal.  He dismissed it.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was refused by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal but granted by Judge  Perkins  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    application was made essentially on two bases.  The first was that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had placed undue weight on a report made by a Chief
    Immigration Officer who had visited the claimed joint residence of  the
    appellant and his partner.  The second ground is essentially  dependent
    upon the establishment of a relationship between them, but  is  to  the
    effect  that  on  the  basis  of  such   relationship   it   would   be
    disproportionate to expect the appellant to leave the  Untied  Kingdom.
    Judge Perkins' grant of permission contains the following passage:

         "Arguably the evidence of what people told  the  Chief  Immigration
         Officer  should  not  have  been  received  as  evidence   of   the
         truthfulness of what they said.  It is clearly  hearsay  and,  save
         where statute says otherwise is not evidence of the truthfulness of
         what was said.  The  Chief  Immigration  Officer  might  have  been
         talking to people who bore a grudge against the appellant,  or  who
         lied because they did not trust the officer or who were  not  in  a
         position to know who lived in the house.  Arguably  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge should not have found such evidence  to  be  "highly
         damaging"."

 4. That, as is readily accepted by Miss Hashmi, who appears before  us  on
    behalf of the appellant, is a ground which it is difficult to  sustain;
    the position is that the strict rules of evidence, including  the  rule
    against the admission of hearsay, do not apply to the  evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, and although she referred us to s.  4  of  the
    Civil Evidence Act 1995 giving guidance for  the  approach  to  hearsay
    evidence, that too, does not apply to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   (It
    applies, as the definition section of the Act shows, only to  Tribunals
    which are bound by the strict rules of evidence).

 5. Nevertheless, as Miss  Hashmi  submitted  in  her  concise  but  direct
    submissions, the question how much  weight  should  be  attached  to  a
    statement containing hearsay is a matter which ought to be the  subject
    of consideration by a judge taking such  evidence  into  account.   She
    pointed out to us that the report  of  the  Chief  Immigration  Officer
    contains two errors in the address which is said to have been  visited;
    it is given as Whitewell Road instead of Whitehall Road and  the  final
    two characters of  the  post  code  are  reversed.   Further  down  the
    statement, what is indicated is that one of those interviewed  at  that
    address said that post for  the  appellant  sometimes  arrived  at  the
    house, and the other said that it didn't.  Those characteristics of the
    evidence, submitted Miss Hashmi, were  such  as  to  indicate  that  it
    should not have been given the credence that the judge gave  it.   Miss
    Hashmi  also  pointed  out  that  there  is  evidence  dating  from   a
    considerable period between early 2012 and late  2013,  indicating  the
    appellant and his partner living in each case at the  same  address  at
    two separate addresses; one of them  being  the  address  which  it  is
    thought the Chief Immigration Officer meant to visit.

 6. So far as the first of those factors is concerned, that is to  say  the
    weight to be placed on  the  Chief  Immigration  Officer's  report,  Mr
    Richards submits that it is clear that whatever errors there  may  have
    been in the address recorded in the report,  the  officer  visited  the
    correct address.  Indeed that is confirmed by oral  evidence  that  was
    given at the First-tier Tribunal by the appellant,  who  made  comments
    about the comparative lack of knowledge of  the  interviewee  who  said
    that he had not seen any post for the appellant.  In  that  context  it
    does appear clear to us that the Chief Immigration Officer's  recording
    of the address and post code simply contained two mistakes, whereas his
    visit was to the correct address.

 7. The evidence relating to the sharing of an address by the appellant and
    his partner was characterised by the judge as not independent.   Indeed
    it is not independent: in each case what is shown is that  the  address
    was given by the person in question for the purposes of correspondence,
    and of course any friend may use any other friend's post box  for  that
    purpose.  The use of the same address for official  purposes  does  not
    establish a relationship between the parties of  the  sort  that  would
    engage Article 8.  The mere fact that  two  people  live  at  the  same
    house, even if they subsequently lived, the two  of  them,  at  another
    house does not of itself establish a relationship of that sort  either.
    As the judge emphasised, there is no outside evidence pointing to  this
    relationship.  The parties are said to have met at a bar in Bristol and
    there was, for example, no evidence from any of  their  friends  saying
    that they are known as a couple or anything like that.

 8. The Chief Immigration Officer's  report  also  shows  that  the  people
    interviewed, who live in the house that the appellant and  his  partner
    are said also to live in, did not know the appellant.  That, it appears
    to us, is a matter which needed to be taken very clearly into  account.
    This is not a large block of flats where people  would  not  know  each
    other, it was an ordinary house, shared by  a  number  of  people,  and
    indeed all the people sharing the same bathroom and kitchen.  In  those
    circumstances, evidence that the appellant was not known by any one  of
    the people also living in the house was,  as  the  judge  said,  highly
    damaging.

 9. In addition, the judge noted the evidence from the  appellant  and  his
    claimed partner about their relationship and the sort  of  things  that
    they  do  together,  and  as  he  concluded,  that  that  evidence  was
    inconsistent and indeed patchy, generalised and lacking  in  persuasive
    detail.

10. It is, in our judgment, fair to say, as Miss Hashmi has said, that more
    could have been made by the judge of the details of the evidence before
    him: but in total it does not appear to us that the judge's approach to
    the evidence was unfair, insufficient or unlawful.   What  he  had  was
    evidence  from  the  two  people  who  mattered  most  in  the  claimed
    relationship, which did not begin to show him that the relationship was
    a genuine one; and other evidence which helped to confirm him  in  that
    view.

11. Looking at the matter as a whole, there really is no conceivable  basis
    upon  which  he  could  properly  have  concluded  that   the   claimed
    relationship really existed, and in the circumstances, any  error  that
    he might conceivably have made in setting out his consideration of  the
    evidence,  is,  in  our  judgement,  entirely  immaterial.   For  those
    reasons, we decline to find an error of law, but in any event would not
    have  set  aside  the  determination,  and  the  appeal  is   therefore
    dismissed.




                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 17 November 2014
