
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/26943/2013
                                                               IA/26946/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 July 2014                               |On 18th Aug 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Mrs Maryjane Pamittan Buquel
               Miss Zieth Alexandra Mckhylla Manangan Managan

                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr M Iqbal, Counsel instructed by Farani Javid
Taylor Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal brought by the respondent  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge K S H Miller, whose decision promulgated on 4
    April 2014 allowed the appeal of the  appellants  who  maintained  that
    they should be granted further leave to remain as Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)
    Migrants.

 2. By the time that the hearing came before me the issue  in  dispute  was
    very narrow.  It was accepted  for  the  respondent  that  the  initial
    reason for refusal in the respondent's decision dated 20 June 2013  had
    fallen away as the respondent had treated the application as if it  had
    been made with third party funding and this  was  not  the  case.   The
    point was conceded for the  respondent  at  the  hearing  before  Judge
    Miller; see [9] of the determination of the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The issue before me arose from paragraph [10] of the decision of  Judge
    Miller.  He found there that the document contained at page 24  of  the
    appellants' bundle was sufficient  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules as it was a letter from a legal representative  which
    was in line with the requirements of paragraph 41-SD(b)(ii) of Appendix
    A of the Immigration Rules.

 4. Mr Iqbal was present at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  and
    what he told me about the submissions made to Judge  Miller  concerning
    the legal representative's  letter  was  confirmed  by  the  Record  of
    Proceedings. The question of whether the  letter  at  page  24  of  the
    appellants' bundle was sufficient  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules was clearly litigated before the First-tier Tribunal.
     Mr Iqbal submitted to Judge Miller that the document at page 24 was  a
    copy of an original letter sent  to  the  respondent  as  part  of  the
    appellants' original documentation with the  application.   The  letter
    was not required to be on headed paper, a point conceded before  me  by
    Ms Everett. The original copy sent to the respondent  had  contained  a
    date and, so it was submitted for the appellants, met  the  documentary
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 5. As above, the materials before me confirmed the submission made  by  Mr
    Iqbal that an original, dated document was before the respondent at the
    time  of  the  decision,  having  been  submitted  with  the   original
    application. Ms Everett conceded that she was  not  in  a  position  to
    dispute the point.  It therefore appeared to me that it  could  not  be
    said that Judge Miller erred at [10] of his decision  in  finding  that
    the letter was sufficient to meet the requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 6. As this was the only head of challenge brought by the respondent before
    me I therefore did not find that it had been shown that  there  was  an
    error on a point of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and
    I dismiss the appeal.

Decision

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.


Signed:[pic]                            Date: 18 August 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

