
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Appeal Number: IA/26112/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 21 October 2016                            |On 25 October 2016           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                                   Between

                             SALAH UD DIN HAMMAD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P. Saini, counsel instructed by Hanson Young & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                                  DECISION

   1. The  appellant,  who  is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan,  appealed  against
      decisions of the respondent, made on 5 June 2014, to  refuse  to  vary
      his leave by way of the grant of further leave as a student  and  that
      he should be removed from the United Kingdom pursuant  to  section  47
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


   2. Several  reasons  were  given  by  the  respondent  for  refusing  the
      application. First, the respondent  had  been  unable  to  verify  the
      English language test certificate scores relied upon by the  appellant
      which meant  that  no  points  were  awarded  for  a  Confirmation  of
      Acceptance for Studies (para 245ZX(c)). Second,  the  application  was
      refused under 245ZX(a),  read  together  with  para  322(1A),  because
      enquiries of the issuing bank had established that  a  bank  statement
      relied upon by the appellant  was  a  false  one.  This  meant,  as  a
      consequence, that the application  was  also  refused  under  245ZX(d)
      because, the bank statement being regarded as  a  false  document,  no
      points were awarded for maintenance (funds).



   3. The position with regard to the English language test certificate  may
      be summarised as follows. The appellant chose to take  his  test  with
      Pearsons, who are approved by the respondent  for  that  purpose.  The
      requirement of para 245ZX(c) is that the appellant must have a minimum
      of 30  points  under  paragraphs  113-120  of  Appendix  A,  which  is
      concerned with "Attributes". Paragraphs  113-120  of  Appendix  A  are
      concerned with Attributes  for  Tier  4  Students.  Paragraph  118  of
      Appendix A provides that,  for  a  person  in  the  position  of  this
      appellant,  no  points  will  be  awarded  for  the  Confirmation   of
      Acceptance for Studies unless he provides:


            "the specified documents from an English language test provider
           approved by the Secretary of State for these purposes as  listed
           in Appendix O..."


      Appendix O is a table  of  approved  test  providers.  In  respect  of
      Pearsons, it is made clear that what is required is:


           "Printout of online score report


           Scores must also be sent to the Home Office online"

   4. Unfortunately, Although the appellant was able to log on to  Pearson's
      web site in order to print out a copy of the test results to send with
      his application, Pearsons did not "assign" those scores  to  the  Home
      Office so that, as it was explained in the refusal decision:


           "The Pearson's website was checked on  5  June  2014,  but  your
           Pearson  Test  score(s)  could  not  be  verified  through   the
           Pearson's website  at  the  time  of  consideration.  Therefore,
           although you have provided an English language Test  certificate
           from an approved English language test provider,  as  UKV&I  has
           been unable to verify your  English  language  test  score  your
           document cannot be accepted as evidence of your English Language
           ability."


   5. The appellant had submitted two documents said to  be  issued  by  his
      father's bank in Pakistan in  order  to  demonstrate  that  sufficient
      funds were available to meet the requirements of the rules. These were
      a bank statement and a letter from the  bank  confirming  the  closing
      balance shown on that statement and that the  appellant's  father  "is
      maintaining his account with us to our entire satisfaction".


   6. The respondent made an enquiry of that bank, asking  for  confirmation
      that the documents had indeed been issued by the bank. This  generated
      a response by email that:


           "It is to be informed that the document is fake as per our
           record."

   7. An earlier decision of the First-tier Tribunal having  been  found  to
      disclose legal error such as to require that  it  be  set  aside,  the
      appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ievens  on  14  January
      2016. At paragraph 8 of his decision, the judge said:


           "The issues in this appeal are whether the respondent can  show,
           the  standard  being  the  higher  end   of   the   balance   of
           probabilities, that the bank statement was  false,  and  whether
           the appellant can show, to the balance  of  probabilities,  that
           the  English   language   test   certificate   and   maintenance
           requirements were satisfied."


   8. The judge, having directed himself correctly as to standard and burden
      of proof, reproduced paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules:

           Grounds on which leave to remain and variation of leave to enter
           or remain in the United Kingdom are to be refused




              1) ...


           (1A)  where  false  representations  have  been  made  or  false
           documents or information
             have  been  submitted  (whether  or  not   material   to   the
           application, and whether or not to the  applicant's  knowledge),
           or material facts have not been disclosed, in  relation  to  the
           application, or in order to obtain documents from the  Secretary
           of  State  or  a  third  party  required  in  support   of   the
           application.


      The judge then summarised the evidence offered  by  the  appellant  in
      support of his insistence that the bank  documents  were  genuine.  He
      said that his father had spoken to his bank and they had denied having
      received any verification enquiry or giving  any  information  to  the
      respondent.


   9. The judge gave two reasons for reaching the conclusion that  he  could
      not regard the response from the bank as sufficient to establish  that
      the bank documents were false. The identity of the  author  of  emails
      from the bank had been redacted and the reference number given in  the
      header of the email from the bank was not  the  same  as  the  account
      number, which led the judge to say:


           "I do not know what it refers to. I simply cannot trace from the
           evidence before me where the Home Office got  their  information
           from that this specific bank statement was false and accordingly
           I conclude that the respondent has failed to satisfy me, on  the
           balance of probabilities, that  the  requirements  of  paragraph
           322(1A) are met."


  10. Addressing next the issue of  the  language  test  result,  the  judge
      appears to have accepted the appellant's evidence to the  effect  that
      the printout he himself created correctly represented  his  successful
      test results but found that the respondent was correct to  refuse  the
      application under  the  immigration  rules.  This  was  because  those
      results could not be accepted unless validated online and as  Pearsons
      had not assigned the results so that they  could  be  checked  by  the
      respondent that could not be done. He noted that, having received  the
      refusal,  the  appellant  spoke  with  Pearsons  who  "put  it  right"
      immediately.  The  judge   recognised   that   the   result   of   the
      uncompromising requirement of the rules "might be thought to be harsh"
      but that was what was required and the appellant had,  in  any  event,
      not produced any evidence from Pearsons to confirm that  circumstances
      were as the appellant had described.


  11. There was also before the judge an argument advanced that there  would
      be an impermissible infringement of rights protected by article  8  of
      the ECHR if leave were not granted which he  rejected.  Realistically,
      Mr Saini did not pursue that challenge in his submissions  before  the
      Upper Tribunal.


  12. The judge, therefore, allowed  the  appeal  "on  immigration  grounds"
      under paragraphs 322(1A) and 245ZX(d) on the basis that the respondent
      had not discharged the burden facing  her  in  establishing  that  the
      appellant  had  submitted  a  false  document  and  therefore  he  had
      satisfied the maintenance (funds) requirement, but  he  dismissed  the
      appeal under paragraph 245ZX(c) because the language test requirements
      had not been met and he dismissed the  appeal  also  on  human  rights
      grounds.


  13. Both parties sought and were granted permission to appeal by  separate
      judges of the First-tier Tribunal.


   Discussion:


  14. It is convenient to deal first with the matter of the bank  documents.
      That is because, if the judge was wrong  to  reject  the  respondent's
      case then the appellant cannot succeed even if he establishes that the
      respondent should have accepted his language test scores.


  15. That is because the rules required that the test scores be capable  of
      being validated by the respondent's online check. That  had  not  been
      possible because Pearsons, for whatever reason, had not  assigned  the
      results to the Home Office. In his submissions, Mr Saini  focussed  on
      the respondent's own evidential flexibility policy,  framed  in  terms
      that in some respects are more generous that the provisions concerning
      evidential flexibility in the rules themselves. The point is  said  to
      be that once the appellant had become aware of the failure of Pearsons
      to assign those results to the Home Office he contacted  Pearson  who,
      he said, had put matters right and then contacted the Home Office who,
      had they re-checked, would then have found  that  he  had  the  scores
      claimed. Mr Saini  submits  that  the  evidential  flexibility  policy
      demanded that the respondent look again at the test results, once  she
      was assured by the appellant that Pearson's error in not assigning the
      test scores had  been  rectified.  But,  the  respondent's  policy  or
      guidance   on   evidential   flexibility   for   points-based   system
      applications includes this:


           "You must refuse the application if it would  fall  for  refusal
           even if the missing information was  provided,  or  if  a  minor
           error  was  corrected.  You  must  not   request   any   missing
           information if it cannot change the decision on the case."


  16. Therefore, if the judge was wrong to reject the respondent's  case  in
      respect of the bank documents, so that  the  application  fell  to  be
      refused  under  paragraph  322(1A)  and   245ZX(a),   the   evidential
      flexibility policy is, effectively, not engaged and the decision taken
      on 5 June 2014 must be  accepted  to  be  correctly  taken  under  the
      applicable rules.


  17. It is plain that the reasoning that led the  judge  to  find  that  he
      could not rely upon the e-mail from the bank as establishing that  the
      statement  was  a  false  document  was  based  upon   a   fundamental
      misunderstanding of the facts and of the evidence before him.  He  was
      concerned that the reference number quoted by the bank when responding
      to the respondent's enquiry was not  the  same  as  the  bank  account
      number in question. He said that he did not know what it  referred  to
      and this led him to doubt the reliability of the information  provided
      by the bank. However, the reference  number  quoted  by  the  bank  in
      responding was the same as the reference  number  given  by  the  Home
      Office when making the  enquiry  and,  unsurprisingly,  the  reference
      number in the Home Office enquiry was precisely that, the Home  Office
      reference number allocated to the appellant's application, as  can  be
      seen from the refusal decision. It is wholly  uncontroversial  that  a
      bank providing a response to an enquiry should quote in  the  response
      the reference given by the enquirer and so that is  no  basis  at  all
      upon which to doubt the reliability of the information  given  in  the
      response.


  18. There can be no doubt or ambiguity  that  the  bank  was  providing  a
      response to the original enquiry, that is made clear by the fact  that
      the response quotes the Home Office reference number that  could  have
      been taken only from the enquiry made. That enquiry itself  identifies
      the name and address of the branch where the account  was  maintained,
      the full name of the account holder, the appellant's father, Mr  Salah
      ud Din Ansar, and the bank account number. As it is beyond doubt  that
      the author of the response provided by the bank  to  the  Home  Office
      enquiry had those details to hand, as is evidenced by the  quoting  of
      the respondent's own reference number, there is simply no  real  scope
      to doubt that the answer delivered related to the account  with  which
      we are concerned.


  19. Put another way, on the evidence it was simply not reasonably open  to
      the judge to reach the conclusion he did and  that  is  sufficient  to
      establish that he has, therefore, made a material error of  law.  That
      error is reinforced by the fact that something he  thought  undermined
      the reliability of the bank's e-mail in fact added cogency to it. This
      conclusion, that the judge had made a material error of  law  so  that
      the decision on the appellant's appeal would be remade  by  the  Upper
      Tribunal, was communicated to the parties at the hearing on 21 October
      2016 who were then  invited  to  advance  submissions  to  inform  the
      remaking of the decision by the Upper Tribunal.


  20. In his submissions Mr Saini sought to identify  other  concerns  about
      the response from the bank. As the identity of  the  author  has  been
      redacted we do not know who that person is or from where the  response
      was sent. That, submits Mr Saini, is significant because  in  Pakistan
      there are no central records and so it would only be someone  actually
      based in the particular branch where the account was  maintained  that
      could speak authoritatively about it. Secondly, because  the  identity
      of the author of the bank e-mail has been redacted, we cannot see  who
      that person is and so no judgment can be made as to the reliability of
      the information provided. Further, two documents were provided to  the
      bank, the statement and a bank letter. However, the  response  in  the
      email is expressed to be in respect of  "the  document"  and  so  this
      raises doubt, in Mr Saini's submission, as to whether this response in
      fact relates to an enquiry as to the authenticity  of  two  documents.
      Finally, the original enquiry made of the bank  was  on  a  form  that
      provided space or fields for information in addition to that  actually
      provided, such as the title of the account; the account opening  date;
      the CNIC number and so on. As those fields  were  not  addressed,  the
      response is incomplete and unreliable.


  21. In my judgment none  of  those  submissions  provides  any  reason  to
      undermine the evidential weight of the confirmation by the  bank  that
      the documents were false. It is plain that the email  is  sent  by  an
      officer of the bank tasked to provide  a  response  and  there  is  no
      reason at all to  suppose  that  the  author  was  not  authorised  or
      properly able and resourced to do so. It is impossible  to  understand
      why an officer of the bank should certify as false a statement that he
      was not placed to verify. The fact  that  the  identity  of  the  bank
      official has been redacted does not deprive the communication  of  its
      authority as it can be seen that the communication was  sent  from  an
      email account of "bankalfalah.com". There is no reason to  regard  the
      communication as undermined because of the reference in  the  singular
      to "the document". It is notable that in his decision the  judge  also
      referred to the bank statement rather than that document and the  bank
      letter as an inseparable duet of documents. Finally, as the  documents
      are confirmed to be false by the bank, it is impossible to see how the
      reliability of that confirmation can be considered to be undermined by
      a failure to provide confirmation of  characteristics  that  would  be
      ascertained had the account been genuine.


  22. For all of these reasons it is unambiguously clear that the respondent
      was correct to regard this as evidence  sufficient  to  discharge  the
      burden of establishing  that  the  appellant  had  submitted  a  false
      document. Paragraph 322(1A) is expressed in  mandatory  terms  and  so
      this was an application that was bound to be refused.


  23. It follows from this that the appeal falls to be  dismissed.  For  the
      reasons given above, once it is established that a false document  had
      been submitted, refusal under 245ZX(d) follows also, as the  appellant
      has failed to establish the availability of the funds required and the
      evidential flexibility policy falls away as the outcome could  not  be
      any different even if the respondent were to revisit the validation of
      the test results.


  24. Although not pursued in oral submissions at the hearing,  the  grounds
      for seeking permission to appeal complained also that the judge  erred
      in failing adequately  to  consider  the  position  of  the  appellant
      outside the Immigration Rules. He has made a significant investment in
      his education in the United Kingdom. At paragraph 11 of  his  decision
      the judge observed:


           "Because three of the colleges where the appellant had  obtained
           admission had had their Tier 4  Sponsor  licences  revoked,  one
           after the other, the appellant had lost a lot of  money  and  he
           raised Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention in  its  private
           life aspect."


      However, the judge  dismissed  the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds
      because he found that the public interest in  maintaining  immigration
      control in accordance  with  the  Immigration  Rules  meant  that  any
      interference in the private life of the appellant,  as  manifested  in
      his ambition to complete his education  in  the  United  Kingdom,  was
      entirely proportionate to the legitimate aim being refused in refusing
      an application for the reasons given and making  a  decision  for  the
      appellant's removal from the United Kingdom. That conclusion is simply
      unassailable and I reach the same conclusion. This  is  an  article  8
      claim that on no legitimate view could succeed, especially  given  the
      reliance upon a false document.

Summary of decision:

  25. First-tier Tribunal Judge Ievins made a material error of law error of
      law and his decision, promulgated on 4 February  2016,  shall  be  set
      aside.

  26.  I substitute a fresh decision to dismiss the  appeal  both  on  human
      rights grounds and under the immigration rules.
                               Signed        [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 24 October 2016

