
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
         IA/26562/2014
         IA/46565/2014




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On  17 December 2015                       |On 10 March 2016               |


                                   Before
                    Mr C. M. G. Ockelton , Vice President
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    R I  K
                                     O K
                                                                 Respondents

                                  ANONYMITY


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) we make an Anonymity  Order.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or
Court orders otherwise,  no  report  of  any  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant. This prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.


Representation

Appellant:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Respondent:   Mr O Manley, of Counsel, instructed by Rees Wood Terry
             Solicitors




                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Secretary of State for the Home Department is  the  Appellant.  The
    Respondents ("Claimants" hereinafter), are  a  wife  and  husband,  and
    their children are dependents in their appeal.

 2. The Claimants are all Nigerians. The wife entered the UK with leave  as
    a student in October 2010; she was joined by her dependent  husband  in
    2011. They have two children born  here.  The  first  was  born  on  10
    January 2013 and the second on 1 January 2015. By way of  extension  to
    the student leave, and then by a grant of post-study  work  leave,  the
    wife had leave to remain until 10 August 2014. Since his  arrival,  the
    husband has had leave in line with his wife's. The couple  intended  to
    return to Nigeria at the end of the post-study work  period  in  August
    2014. The wife had obtained her qualifications including a law  degree,
    and had succeeded in obtaining a job in Nigeria working for a  Nigerian
    human rights NGO. They received medical advice not to go because of the
    ill health of their older son who suffers from the worst case of sickle
    cell anaemia that the specialist consultant here had  seen.  The  older
    son applied for leave to remain on health grounds. At the same time  an
    application was made by the parents for leave to remain  in  line  with
    the older son, and with the younger son as dependent on their claim.

 3. The Secretary of State, on 4 November 2014,  refused  the  older  son's
    application, and, because he had not obtained leave to remain following
    his birth in the UK, he was not afforded a right of appeal.  There  has
    been no challenge to that position. On 5 November 2014 the Secretary of
    State refused the parents' applications, which, having been made before
    the expiry of their leave attracted a right of appeal. It  is  in  that
    context that the parties agreed that the appeal turned on  the  dispute
    about the older son's Article 3 health claim, resulting in  the  rather
    unsatisfactory position of these Appellants being dependent on a  claim
    of a child who is not himself an Appellant in the proceedings.

 4. The Appellants' ensuing appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  (the  "FtT")
    succeeded. The appeal was allowed on both Article 3 and 8 ECHR grounds.



This Appeal

Article 3
 5.  The  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  to  this  Tribunal  recognises
    arguability in the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal, which can be
    summarised as applying too low a  threshold  to  the  Article  3  test:
    departing  from  the  "death  bed  principle"  when  finding  that  the
    exceptional threshold was met, and giving undue weight to the  fact  of
    the minority of the child. In so doing, it is asserted that the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge (the "FtTJ")  unlawfully  extended  the  Article  3
    paradigm.

 6. At the hearing before us Mr Richards argued that the FtTJ had reached a
    conclusion which was not open to her. The fact that care  available  in
    Nigeria was not optimal, and the relevant dependent was a  child  of  2
    years old, was an inadequate basis for finding that the high  threshold
    was met.

 7. We deal with this briefly because a detailed reading of  the  long  and
    carefully reasoned decision makes clear that there  was  sufficient  in
    the evidence before the judge, including  the  specialist  consultant's
    evidence, for  the  judge  to  conclude  without  perversity  that  the
    threshold set out in D v UK (Application 30240/96) and N v SSHD  [2005]
    2 AC 296 was met.

 8. The judge reached her  conclusions  on  the  basis  of  expert  medical
    evidence from the specialist consultant that the child  had  the  worst
    and most severe case of sickle cell anaemia that he had ever seen,  and
    that his life could end as soon as two months after return,  given  the
    probability of the inability of the medical facilities  in  Nigeria  to
    provide the treatment necessary, in his particular case, to prevent  an
    inevitable catastrophic event  leading,  again  inevitably,  to  death.
    Whilst there is reference to  the  need  for  optimal  care,  it  is  a
    mischaracterisation of the evidence to  assert  that  the  position  on
    return amounted to little more than suffering health care which was not
    optimal, a circumstance which  plainly  is  incapable  of  meeting  the
    threshold. Here, the evidence was of an almost immediate exposure to an
    inevitable death.

 9. Contrary to the grounds this was not an  extension  of  the  Article  3
    health care paradigm but a case that the judge found  came  within  it.
    The self direction was  correct  and  the  decision  is  not  perverse.
    Minority was a matter taken into account, necessarily so  in  our  view
    because that was the fact of it, but it is not  "used"  to  provide  an
    exception or an extension.

10.  Mr Richards was unable to persuade us that  the  conclusion,  even  if
    generous, was not open to the judge.

11. The grounds directed to the  alternative  findings  on  Article  8  are
    otiose absent an error in  the  Article  3  position,  and  we  do  not
    consider them.

DECISION

12. We dismiss the appeal of the Secretary of State and affirm the decision
    of the FtT.





                                                                   E Davidge
                                                 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


                                                     Dated: 18 December 2015
