
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Numbers:
IA266522015

               IA266532015 and IA266562015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons          |
|                                       |Promulgated                 |
|On 15 June 2016                        |On 16 June 2016             |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between

                               (1) ADEWOLA [O]
                                  (2) [A O]
                                  (3) [O O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms C Hulse, Counsel
      (instructed by Rotherham & Co Ltd)
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS









      Introduction


      1.    The Appellants appealed with permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal  Judge  Gillespie  on   11   May   2016   against   the
           determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lodge  who   had
           dismissed the Appellants' linked appeals seeking  settlement  on
           Article  8  ECHR  grounds.   The  decision   and   reasons   was
           promulgated on 10 February 2016.


      2.    The Appellants are nationals of Nigeria,  mother  and  dependant
           children.   At time of the application for leave to remain,  the
           children's parents were separated, but they were reunited by the
           date of the hearing as the judge noted at [27] of his  decision.
           Neither parent had ever proved any form of  leave  to  enter  or
           remain in the United Kingdom.  The children  were  born  in  the
           United Kingdom.  The judge found that it was reasonable for both
           children to leave the United Kingdom with their parents  and  to
           travel with them to Nigeria where they would be  protected  from
           danger.  The children were both young.  Their parents would help
           them to adapt.  There was no issue as  to  parental  competence.
           Hence the appeals were dismissed.


      3.    Permission to appeal  was  granted  because  it  was  considered
           arguable that the judge had cited no  relevant  authorities  and
           that the decision was without proper findings  as  to  the  best
           interests of the children.  It was  ruled  arguable  that  undue
           weight had been given to the adverse immigration history of  the
           parents.


      4.    Standard directions were made  by  the  tribunal.    A  rule  24
           notice  opposing  the  appeal  was  filed  by  the   Respondent,
           indicating reliance on EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.


      Submissions


      5.    Ms Hulse for the Appellants relied on  the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal and grant.  In summary she sought to argue that the judge
           omitted to apply ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC  4.   The  children's
           best interests had not been considered at all.  It  was  not  in
           the best interest of the children to leave  the  United  Kingdom
           because it would disrupt their lives and their  education.   The
           focus had wrongly been on the parents' immigration  history.  PD
           and Others (Article 8  -  conjoined  family  claims)  Sri  Lanka
           [2016] UKUT  00108  (IAC)  was  supportive  of  the  Appellants'
           appeal.


      6.    Mr Norton for  the  Respondent,  having  noted  the  interchange
           between the tribunal and Ms Hulse during submissions, wished  to
           rely on the rule 24 notice and wished to add nothing further.




      No material error of law finding


      7.    In the tribunal's view the grant of permission to appeal was far
           too generous, and was not based on a fair reading of  a  careful
           decision.  It was not necessary for the judge to have cited  any
           authorities, although it is sometimes sensible to do so  in  the
           hope of reducing meritless applications to appeal  such  as  the
           present ones, which clog the tribunal's lists and  waste  public
           money.


      8.    It was quite wrong to suggest that the judge had not  considered
           the  best  interests  of  the  two  children  concerned.   Their
           position received extensive  attention.   Their  best  interests
           were found to be to live with both their parents.   The  judge's
           finding that  the  children's  father  would  leave  the  United
           Kingdom at the same time as their mother was crucial: see  again
           [27].  There was no expert evidence for the judge  to  consider.
           The judge considered the FGM risk claim lately raised and  found
           it to be in effect a fabrication: see [32]. It is plain that the
           judge correctly applied the  principles  of  relevant  decisions
           such as EV (Philippines) (above), which build on the foundations
           of ZH (Tanzania) (above).


      9.    It is similarly wrong to  suggest  that  the  judge  gave  undue
           weight to the immigration history  of  the  children's  parents.
           There was no suggestion that the children were  in  any  way  to
           blame for the faults of their parents.   There  was  no  dispute
           that the parents were present in the  United  Kingdom  illegally
           and were facing lawful removal.  The only real relevance of  the
           parents' history  was  its  impact  on  the  assessment  of  the
           veracity of their evidence generally.


      10.   The judge applied the correct legal  framework:  see  [26].   Ms
           Hulse's "disruption" argument  concerning  the  children's  best
           interests was simply a repetition of points which the judge  had
           sufficiently considered and answered:  see, e.g., [27].


      11.   PD and Others (above) merely illustrates the variety of  Article
           8 ECHR appeals involving  children.   No  significant  point  of
           principle is established.  The facts are very  different  indeed
           from the present appeals, both  with  respect  to  the  parental
           immigration history and with respect to the age of the child (14
           at  the  date  of  the  decision).   PD  and  Others  is  of  no
           assistance.


      12.   The tribunal finds that these appeals have no substance and that
           there was no material error of law in the decision challenged.


      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  a
material error on a point of law.  The decision stands unchanged.

      Signed                                  Dated 16th June 2016




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




