
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26757/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 September 2017                   |On 01 November 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       MR SANDUN KAUSHALIYA MUNASINGHE
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr H Kannangara, Counsel
For the Respondent: Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant before me was the respondent in  the  proceedings  before
    the First-Tier Tribunal. For ease of reference I  shall  refer  to  the
    parties as they were known below.

 2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born in 1986. He entered  the
    United Kingdom in October 2009 as a Tier 4 general student migrant. His
    leave was variously extended until 16 August 2014. On 2 May  2013,  his
    leave was curtailed to 1 July 2013, and a few days before  he  made  an
    application to extend as a Tier 4 general student migrant. On  10  July
    2015, the application was refused on the  basis  that  to  support  his
    application the appellant submitted a false TOIEC certificate from ETS.
    The respondent relied on evidence from ETS confirming  that  there  was
    significant evidence to conclude the use of a  proxy  test  taker.  ETS
    declared his test result to be invalid.

 3. The appellant appealed and in a judgement  promulgated  on  2  December
    2016 judge Hussain allowed his appeal finding:

      a) the appellant's English-language  qualifications  obtained  in  Sri
         Lanka showed that he had no reason to hire the services of a  proxy
         taker because he was able to undertake test himself

      b) the appellant's ability to give evidence fluently in English before
         the judge adds credibility to his claim

      c) the individualised spreadsheet was unreliable stating that the test
         was taken on 21 March 2012 whereas the certificate  shows  that  it
         was taken on 23 March 2012 and no explanation had been offered  for
         the discrepancy

      d) the appellant's score in the listening paper taken on 23 March 2012
         was low so that he resat the test on 13 June 2012, when he scored a
         much higher result. The judge found it inconsistent that if he  had
         used a proxy taker on 23 March 2012 he  had  failed  the  listening
         test. Particularly as it was not alleged that he had used  a  proxy
         taker on 13 June 2012.

 4. The judge found the respondent's  evidence  insufficient  to  meet  the
    burden on the respondent of showing the appellant had used deception.

 5. The respondent was granted permission to appeal on the basis  that  the
    judge had failed to give adequate reasons for his findings  and  failed
    to assess properly the burden of proof following the case law of SM and
    Qadir (ETS - evidence - burden of proof); U.T. IAC 21 April 2016.

The hearing at the Upper Tribunal

 6. There is no application to adduce  additional  evidence  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 7. Mr Kotas relied on the grounds concerning the failure to give  reasons.
    The judge placed significant weight on the appellant's English-language
    abilities at the hearing. In addition as the case  law  of  MA  (ETS  -
    TOEIC testing) Nigeria [2016] UKUT  450  identifies  many  reasons  for
    fraud including convenience, and finds motive speculative  rather  than
    determinative. The case of SM  and  Qadir,  cautions  against  such  an
    approach given that there  had  been  a  significant  passage  of  time
    between the certificates of 2012 and the hearing of 2016,  and  reminds
    judges should be cautious of  making  such  an  assessment  themselves,
    absent expert evidence.

 8. Mr Kannangaran addressed me to persuade me that the judge had correctly
    identified the relevant evidence and reached  sustainable  conclusions.
    The judge's references to the test results for the  21st  and  23rd  of
    March were  a  typographical  error.  He  realised  that  the  relevant
    evidence was that for the 21 March.

 9. The judge correctly self-directed. He correctly identified  the  burden
    at [14]. The judge identified the specific evidence of the  spreadsheet
    relating to the test on 21 March 2012. That was the relevant  evidence.
    The judge found that the burden shifted to the appellant and recognised
    that  his  task  was  to  consider  whether  or  not  the   appellant's
    explanation  was  adequate.  The   judge   accurately   describes   the
    appellant's explanation, and finds it sufficient. That was exactly what
    he had to do. The appellant was cross-examined as to why he  chose  the
    test place where and how he  travelled  and  provided  the  information
    about the test that he'd taken on different dates  and  the  test  that
    he'd taken in Sri Lanka.  The  judge  had  not  relied  purely  on  the
    appellant's ability to speak English, and there was nothing in the case
    law which prevented proficiency in English to constitute  part  of  the
    explanations and reasons. The case of MA could be distinguished because
    in MA the respondent produced  the  actual  voice  recordings  and  the
    appellant accepted that it was not him speaking so that  he  was  faced
    with the position of having to explain how it was that somebody  else's
    voice had been used. In  that  case  there  was  a  lot  more  specific
    evidence and there had been here when really what had been relied  upon
    was generic. The judge's findings were  entirely  consistent  with  the
    guidance of SM and Qadir.

10. I find it is self-evident from the  judge's  conclusions  that  he  has
    failed to understand the respondent's evidence in respect of  the  test
    taking system, and plainly misreads the  evidence  in  respect  of  the
    tests.  The  bundle  contains  2  certificates  from  March  2012.  One
    certificate is for a test for speaking and writing taken  on  21  March
    2012. The 2nd is a certificate for a  test  of  listening  and  reading
    taken on 23rd  of  March  2012.  Accordingly,  the  documents  are  not
    inconsistent as the Judge thought. The spreadsheet  is  the  evidential
    basis for the assertion of the appellant's use of a proxy taker at  the
    speaking test taken on 21 March 2012 at  European  College  for  Higher
    Education. Further the evidence of  the  respondent  relates  to  voice
    recognition software which  is  plainly  only  applicable  to  speaking
    tests, to the point that it provides no  evidence  in  respect  of  the
    other tests. In particular the judge fails to appreciate that  the  use
    of a proxy in respect of the speaking test is not relevant to the score
    in respect of the listening test, and that the success fire a proxy  in
    the speaking test on 21  March  2012,  is  not  inconsistent  with  the
    appellant's failure of a listening  test  on  23  March  2012.  Further
    contrary to the judge's consideration, it was  never  the  respondent's
    case that the appellant was using a proxy on 23 March 2012 when he took
    the listening test. The judge's conclusion that  it  was  unlikely  the
    appellant would be using a proxy in the listening test in March,  given
    that he was able to pass it in June, is flawed in terms of its  factual
    matrix, but also misdirected at the issue as  to  whether  or  not  the
    appellant in fact used a proxy in the speaking test on 21 March 2012.

11. I am satisfied that the judge has given inadequate reasons for  finding
    that the appellant's explanation was sufficient to discharge the burden
    upon him. I set the decision aside. The muddle that the judge  made  of
    the evidence means that none of the factual findings can be  preserved.
    Having  considered  the  senior  President's  practice  statements   at
    paragraph 7, I decided that it was appropriate to remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal to be heard again. This is because the nature of the fact-
    finding required, means that it is more appropriate for the  appeal  to
    be decided at the First-Tier Tribunal, than the Upper  Tribunal,  which
    is not primarily a fact-finding tribunal.

Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal is vitiated
    by legal error and is set aside. The appeal is remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for rehearing by a judge other than Judge Hussain.





Signed            E. Davidge            Date 26 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


