
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26561/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th December 2017                          |On 15th January 2018          |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             redwanur rah sumon
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tom Wilding, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department and  to
    avoid confusion, I propose to refer to her as being "the claimant".

2.   The respondent is a 28 year old Bangladeshi man who was  born  on  22nd
    October 1988, and who arrived in the United Kingdom on 1st March  2011,
    with Tier 4 student leave valid until 2nd October 2012.

3.   In preparation for an  extension  of  his  leave,  the  respondent  was
    required to take an English Language test at London College  of  Social
    Studies on 18th April 2012, following which he  was  twice  granted  an
    extension of leave, first to 22nd April 2013 and  then  to  28th  March
    2015.

4.   On 10th January 2015 the  respondent  married  Leila  Miah,  a  British
    citizen  born  on  28th  January  1976.   On  30th  January  2105,  the
    respondent applied for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  her
    spouse.

5.   On 8th July 2015, the claimant  refused  the  respondent's  application
    for leave to remain as a spouse on the sole ground that, as a result of
    the test which the respondent had taken on 18th  April  2012  had  been
    shown to be invalid.  The  respondent  was  deemed  to  have  used  the
    services of a proxy taker and, therefore, to have used deception  in  a
    previous application and, therefore, failed to satisfy the  suitability
    requirements under Appendix FM of HC 395 (as amended).

6.   It was accepted that his wife had two British children, an 18 year  old
    and a 9 year old from her previous marriage, and that the  respondent's
    relationship with his wife was genuine and subsisting, but the claimant
    believed that it was not unreasonable  for  him  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom in order to reapply.  He  did  not  have  children  himself  to
    enable him to qualify under the parent route and did  not  satisfy  the
    private life requirement under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

7.    The  claimant  was  satisfied   that   there   were   no   exceptional
    circumstances  relating  to  the  respondent,   which   warranted   her
    considering the grant of leave outside the Immigration Rules.

8.   The respondent gave Notice of Appeal and his appeal came before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge M R Oliver on 6th February 2017, sitting at  Hatton
    Cross.  The judge heard oral evidence from the respondent and from  the
    respondent's wife.  He considered evidence submitted  by  the  claimant
    and found that the claimant had satisfied the evidential burden to show
    a prima facie case of deception, but he then went on to find  that  the
    respondent had satisfied the burden on him.

9.   The judge purported to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

10.  Addressing me, Mr Wilding submitted  that  the  judge  had  failed,  in
    paragraph 12 of the determination,  to  give  adequate  reasoning.   He
    submitted that the evidence had not properly been analysed or reasoned.
     Having found that the Secretary of State had discharged the evidential
    burden to show a prima facie case of deception, the judge had failed to
    engage with the question as to whether or not the  respondent  obtained
    the test result as a result of deception.  He said that the evidence in
    respect of him personally has not been particularised  in  detail.   He
    accepted the evidence of  the  respondent  that  he  scored  well  when
    required to sit his IELTS test in Bangladesh, having been taught  there
    in English.  He accepted that the respondent's familiarity with English
    could only improve during his time in the United Kingdom.

11.  The judge appears to have made his own assessment of  the  respondent's
    ability to speak and understand English, because he said  in  paragraph
    12  that  he  was  able  to  see  the  immediacy  of  the  respondent's
    understanding of all questions asked of him during the hearing  and  to
    reflect on his high degree of ability to express  himself.   The  judge
    concluded by saying that the respondent properly made  the  point  more
    than once that he would have had no reason to use a proxy, since he had
    confidence that he would pass the test  himself.   However,  the  judge
    appears to have ignored the point that the issue is, whether or not the
    respondent sat the test or used a proxy to take it in  his  place,  not
    whether he can speak and understand English  now.   He  may  very  well
    speak and understand English now, he may very well have  been  able  to
    speak and understand English at the time he was supposed to have  taken
    the test, but the issue before the judge was that it was asserted  that
    the respondent had not personally taken the test, but had used a proxy,



12.  I reserved my decision.

13.  SM and Qadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT  229  (IAC)
    makes it clear that the Secretary of State's generic evidence  combined
    with evidence particular to an appellant did  in  fact  discharged  the
    evidential burden of proving that a TOEIC certificate had been procured
    by  dishonesty.   The  two  witness   statements   and   the   specific
    confirmation  of  the  appellant's  identity,  provided  both  a  clear
    explanation for the method used to detect the  fraud,  and  documentary
    evidence of the [respondent's]  test  result  had  been  identified  as
    invalid by use of this method.  The test is whether on the  balance  of
    probabilities the respondent employed deception.  At  paragraph  22  of
    the Secretary of State for the Home Department v  Shehzad  and  Another
    [2016] EWCA Civ 615 Beatson LJ said:-

         "As I have stated, the question in these appeals only concerns  the
         initial stage and whether, with the evidence of Mr  Millington  and
         Ms Collings, the evidential burden on the  Secretary  of  State  is
         satisfied.  If it is, then it is incumbent on the individual  whose
         leave has been curtailed to provide evidence in response raising an
         innocent explanation."


    In this case the  evidence  provided  to  the  judge  showed  that  the
    respondent's English Language test had  been  invalidated,  because  of
    evidence of fraud in the  test  taken  by  him.   The  claimant  having
    discharged the evidential burden of proof in respect of the  deception,
    the burden then shifts to the respondent as detailed at paragraph 68 of
    SM and Qadir to "raise an innocent explanation".  If the judge  accepts
    the explanation, then the burden shifts back to the claimant  in  order
    to address the legal burden.


14.  In the present appeal at paragraph 12 the judge said this::-

         "The [claimant]  relied  on  the  familiar  statements  of  Rebecca
         Collings, Peter Millington and Professor French, particularised  to
         the [respondent] to the usual limited extent by  the  statement  of
         Lesley Singh.  I have considered the evidence  and  find  that  the
         [claimant],  from  the  "invalid"  finding,   has   satisfied   the
         evidential burden to show a prima facie case of  deception,  but  I
         equally find that the [respondent] has satisfied the burden on him.
           The  evidence  in  respect  of  him  personally  has   not   been
         particularised in detail.  It is idle to speculate on  reasons  why
         the college may have used the result of a competent  proxy  without
         his knowledge, if that is what they did.  I accept the evidence  of
         the [respondent] that he scored well when  he  acquired  his  IELTS
         test in Bangladesh, having  been  taught  there  in  English.   His
         familiarity in English can only have improved during his time here.
          His latest results  show  competence.   I  was  able  to  see  the
         immediacy of his understanding of all of the questions asked of him
         during the hearing and to reflect on his high degree of ability  to
         express himself.  He properly made the point more than once that he
         would have had no reason to use a proxy, since  he  had  confidence
         that he would pass the test himself."


    It was on that basis that the judge purported to allow the appeal under
    the Immigration Rules.

15.  I find that the judge has erred in law.  I find that he has  failed  to
    give adequate reasoning for finding an innocent explanation.  The judge
    appears to have relied  on  his  own  assessment  of  the  respondent's
    ability to understand English.  As such, he found that  the  respondent
    had met the evidential burden.  He placed weight on the fact  that  the
    respondent was able to recall details of the examination  process,  but
    this does not mean that the respondent personally took the test.  There
    may be reasons why a person  who  is  able  to  speak  English  to  the
    required level would nonetheless cause or permit a proxy  candidate  to
    undertake an ILETS test on their behalf, or otherwise  to  cheat.   The
    judge appears to have ignored this possibility.

16.  The Secretary of State satisfied  the  evidential  burden  on  her  and
    there was, therefore, an evidential burden on the respondent  to  offer
    an innocent explanation.  It is clear from the determination  that  the
    judge failed to appreciate that the evidential burden was met.  Had  he
    properly considered the evidence of deception he  may  very  well  have
    reached a different conclusion.  The judge's findings at  paragraph  12
    are inadequately reasoned.  This has led to an error of  law  which  is
    capable of being material.

Notice of Decision

17.  I have concluded that I must set aside the determination of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge M R Oliver.  I  believe,  given  the  delays  which  are
    likely to occur were I to retain this appeal for a hearing before me in
    the Upper Tribunal, that the interest of justice require that  I  remit
    it for hearing afresh by a judge of the First-tier Tribunal other  than
    Judge M R Oliver.  Two hours should be allowed for the hearing  of  the
    appeal.  No interpreter is required.

                                                     Date: 12th January 2018

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

