
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26676/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15th January 2015                  |On 11th February 2015                |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                      deputy upper Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                              MR FAHAD MAQBOOL
                          (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Williams, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on the 19th January
    1987. From the opening sentence of  his  decision,  however,  it  would
    appear that First-tier Tribunal Judge Wilson doubted the correctness of
    even these facts. Hence, in a determination  promulgated  on  the  23rd
    September 2014, he begins: "Claiming to be a citizen of  Pakistan  born
    on the 19th January  1987,  the  appellant  appealed  ...  against  the
    respondent's decision, made on the 5th  June  2014,  to  refuse  him  a
    residence card under  regulation  8(5)  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006". The appellant has  now  been  granted
    permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  from  Judge  Wilson's
    dismissal of his appeal against that refusal.

Background

 2. The following facts are uncontroversial.

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on the 5th  April  2010,  with
    limited leave to remain for the purpose of study. On  the  16th  August
    2012, he married Ms Nicoletta Balogova (hereafter, "the sponsor").  The
    sponsor is a Slovakian national. The appellant's first application  for
    an EEA Residence Card was refused on the 23rd November  2012,  and  his
    appeal against that refusal was dismissed by Judge Levin in a  decision
    promulgated  on  the  4th  December  2013.  The  basis  of   both   the
    respondent's decision to refuse the appellant's first  application  and
    Judge Levin's dismissal of his appeal against that  decision  was  that
    the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  had  entered  into  a  marriage   of
    convenience. This was also the  basis  upon  which  the  decision-maker
    refused the appellant's renewed application that was the subject of the
    instant appeal.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. At paragraph 8 of  his  determination,  Judge  Wilson  noted  that  the
    decision of Judge Levin was not  binding  upon  him  but  that  it  was
    nevertheless the  starting  point  for  consideration  of  the  instant
    appeal. At paragraph 9, he stated that Judge  Levin  had  given  "clear
    reasons" for his finding that  the  respondent  was  justified  in  his
    "suspicion that the marriage was one of convenience". He stated that it
    was unnecessary in these circumstances for him to repeat Judge  Levin's
    reasons for reaching that conclusion; a conclusion which he  considered
    was "amply justified". He nevertheless  re-visited  those  reasons.  In
    particular, at paragraph 10, he considered the explanations  that  were
    given by the appellant  and  the  sponsor  concerning  their  allegedly
    discrepant replies when they were interviewed on the 2nd April 2013. At
    paragraph  11,  Judge  Wilson  found  that  "both   of   the   parties'
    explanations lack credibility". He concluded paragraph  11  by  stating
    as follows -

         I have carefully considered Judge Levin's determination and  remind
         myself that it is not my role to  consider  arguments  intended  to
         emasculate it. However I have  also  carefully  considered  whether
         there might be relevant considerations arising after it but I  find
         that the evidence clearly points to both the  appellant's  and  the
         sponsor's extremely poor credibility in this and other  matters  to
         which I will later refer. I regard Judge Levin's assessment of  the
         matters before the appeal hearing as  wholly  correct  and  soundly
         reasoned. I find that this was a marriage of convenience.

    Only then did Judge Wilson turn his attention to what was on any view a
    significant development that had arisen after Judge Levin had made  his
    findings; namely, the birth of the sponsor's twins, in respect of  whom
    it was accepted the appellant was the father.

 5. At paragraph 11, the judge noted Mr William's submission that the birth
    of the children undermined Judge Levin's conclusion  that  the  parties
    had entered into a sham marriage. The judge rejected  that  submission.
    He  found  that  whilst  children  born  of  a  union  "can   in   some
    circumstances be an indication of mutual commitment to a relationship",
    it did not follow from this "that a  marriage  cannot  therefore  be  a
    sham". He said that it was clear "from the facts and the oral  evidence
    that the children were conceived after the respondent's first  decision
    and the rejection of the appeal". In paragraph 13, the judge noted that
    the appellant had said that the sponsor's pregnancy was not planned and
    that whilst the sponsor had also stated that this was  the  case,  when
    the judge had sought clarification of this reply, she had  subsequently
    stated that they had planned to start a family. He began  paragraph  14
    of his decision as follows -

         I can find no grounds whatsoever for concluding that the  birth  of
         the  appellant's  and  the  sponsor's  children  was   a   relevant
         consideration to the issue of the propriety  of  the  marriage,  or
         that this event in any way  undermines  the  respondent's  repeated
         conclusion and Judge Levin's finding that this was  a  marriage  of
         convenience.

    The judge thereafter noted what he regarded as the discrepant  evidence
    of the appellant and the sponsor concerning  who  had  accompanied  the
    appellant upon his post-natal visits to the sponsor  in  hospital,  who
    had accompanied him when he had brought the sponsor home, and  who  had
    first visited them thereafter. At paragraph 16, he repeated that he did
    not find the appellant and the sponsor "to be the least bit  credible".
    He found that, "the children are not children of a genuine relationship
    between the appellant and sponsor". He also regarded it as  significant
    that he had not  been  provided  with  evidence  from  members  of  the
    sponsor's family who were said to be supporting her. He found that this
    was all the more remarkable, having regard to what he found to be  "the
    overwhelming evidence that this was a marriage of convenience, a matter
    that was the subject of two respondent decisions and the clear  finding
    of a judge on appeal".

The rival arguments

 6. The first three grounds of appeal are in fact  variants  of  the  claim
    that the judge's  findings  were  "at  best  irrational  and  at  worst
    perverse". It is said  that  the  judge  gave  inadequate  reasons  for
    finding that the birth of the  appellant's  children  did  not  provide
    sufficient evidence that he had not entered into a sham  marriage.  The
    fourth ground of appeal, which argues that the judge conducted a flawed
    analysis of the appellant's right to respect  for  private  and  family
    life (by allegedly failing to treat the best interests of his  children
    as a primary consideration) was abandoned by Mr Williams at the hearing
    before me.

 7. The core of the Secretary of State's written response to the Notice  of
    Appeal is to be found in the statement that is contained  in  paragraph
    3: "It is far  from  inconceivable  that  a  party  to  a  marriage  of
    convenience, with all that that implies,  would  be  prepared  to  give
    birth to a child to support an application". It is argued, at paragraph
    5, that "it was clearly open to the judge  to  find  that  he  was  not
    persuaded by the DNA evidence as overtaking the previous findings".

 8. At the hearing, Mr Diwnycz adopted the arguments  in  the  respondent's
    written response. He also drew attention to what he argued were matters
    of concern arising from the DNA report, wherein  the  author  concluded
    that the appellant was the father of the sponsor's children.

Analysis

 9. I have concluded that there a number of legal errors in the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination of this appeal, and that the cumulative effect
    of these is to render it unsafe and to require it to be set aside.

10. Firstly, there is confusion as to the basis upon which  the  respondent
    refused the appellant's second application for an EEA  Residence  Card.
    The 'Reasons for Refusal Letter', dated the 6th April 2013, states that
    the decision-maker concluded that the  appellant  had  entered  into  a
    marriage of  convenience.  However,  he  later  referred  to  unmarried
    partners being 'extended family members', and to  the  consequent  need
    for the appellant to prove that he was in a "durable" relationship with
    the sponsor. The  decision-maker  thereafter  refused  the  application
    under the Regulation that governs  the  position  for  extended  family
    members [Regulation 8 of the 2006 Regulations].  This confusion appears
    to have infected the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  This  is
    apparent from the opening sentence of the decision, which  I  cited  at
    paragraph 1 (above). It will  be  recalled  that  this  referred  to  a
    regulation that is relevant only to extended family members who are  in
    a durable relationship with (rather than married to)  an  EEA  national
    exercising Community Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

11. Secondly, Judge Wilson's statement concerning the burden of  proof,  at
    paragraph 7 of his determination, was incorrect.  He  stated  that  the
    burden of proof in immigration appeals is upon the appellant  and  that
    the standard of proof is a balance of  probabilities.  Although  not  a
    point that was originally taken in the grounds  of  appeal,  Designated
    Immigration Judge French  pointed  out,  when  granting  permission  to
    appeal, that this  general  proposition  is  not  applicable  to  'sham
    marriage' cases. In such cases, it is for the respondent to  show  that
    there are reasonable grounds for believing that the marriage may be one
    of convenience. Only if that evidential burden had been discharged does
    the legal burden of proving that the marriage is not one of convenience
    pass to the appellant.

12. Thirdly, Judge Wilson's approach to the principles in Devaseelan [2002]
    UKIAT 000702 was flawed. The decision of Judge Levin was  the  starting
    point for considering the issue of whether the  appellant  had  entered
    into a marriage of convenience. It was therefore unnecessary for  Judge
    Wilson to revisit or even to rehearse the reasons that Judge Levin  had
    given for his conclusion. It was also unnecessary for Judge  Wilson  to
    express his agreement with those reasons. As he  himself  pointed  out,
    Judge Wilson's role was not to hear an  appeal  from  the  decision  of
    Judge Levin. Moreover, on one reading of  his  decision,  Judge  Wilson
    appears to have treated Judge Levin's decision  as  the  end-point  for
    consideration of the central issue in the appeal.  Thus,  following  an
    exhaustive consideration of evidence upon which Judge Levin had already
    made his findings, but before undertaking  any  analysis  of  what  was
    potentially critical evidence concerning the birth of  the  appellant's
    children, Judge Wilson made the unequivocal finding that, "this  was  a
    marriage of convenience" [see the final sentence of paragraph 11, cited
    at paragraph 3 above]. That was clearly the wrong approach and was  not
    saved by the fact that the judge had earlier made  a  somewhat  cryptic
    reference to matters that "might  have  been  relevant  considerations"
    arising after Judge Levin had determined the earlier appeal. The entire
    structure of his decision is thus capable of leaving  the  reader  with
    the impression that the judge  had  already  closed  his  mind  to  the
    possibility that this  was  not  a  'sham'  marriage  before  prior  to
    considering all the evidence.

13. Fourthly, to find that there were "no grounds" for concluding that  the
    birth of the parties' children was "relevant ... to the  issue  of  the
    propriety of the marriage" was simply wrong in principle. The  apparent
    fulfilment of what is generally regarded as the primary  purpose  of  a
    genuine marriage - namely, the procreation of children - is necessarily
    relevant to a fair assessment of whether a marriage  was  entered  into
    for some other purpose, and to suggest otherwise is irrational.

Future conduct of the appeal

14. I have concluded that this is an appropriate case for remittal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for the matter to be  determined  afresh.  This  is
    partly because I  am  satisfied  that  none  of  the  original  factual
    findings should be preserved. However, there is  an  additional  reason
    for remittal in this case. Mr Dimwniycz raised a number  of  legitimate
    questions relating to the integrity the DNA testing process which  were
    capable of calling into question the hitherto undisputed claim that the
    appellant is the father of the  sponsor's  children.  This  potentially
    opens up an entirely new front  in  what  is  sadly  proving  to  be  a
    somewhat protracted battle over the  issue  of  the  propriety  of  the
    appellant's marriage. It is one that is in my view  most  appropriately
    determined within the arena of the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

15. The appeal is allowed, and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appeal against refusal of the appellant's  application  for
    an EEA Residence Card is set aside.

16. The appeal is now remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard
    afresh before a judge (excepting Judge Wilson) to be nominated  by  the
    Resident Judge at Bradford.



Signed        Date 11th February 2015

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

