
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26838/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th April 2016                             |On 17 May 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                             Mr Sajjad Ali Shah
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Muhammad, instructed by International Immigration
                    Advisory Services (Levenshulme)
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant appeals, with permission granted on a renewed application
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan, against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge J S Law dismissing the  appeal  under  Appendix  FM  and
    Paragraph 276ADE.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  1st  January  1962  and
    entered the UK on 8th February 2007 on a  visit  visa  limited  to  six
    months.  On 23rd June 2010  the  appellant  submitted  a  human  rights
    Article 8 application which was refused on 7th June 2011 with no  right
    of appeal.  On 6th June 2011 a Member of Parliament wrote on behalf  of
    the appellant to the Secretary of  State  and  on  4th  June  2014  the
    appellant's human rights application was considered,  specifically  his
    application under Article 8 claiming family life with his partner Julie
    Bannister and that  application  was  refused  under  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

 3. Between paragraphs 8 to 12 the judge recorded the oral  evidence  given
    by the witnesses on behalf of the appellant and at  [13]  set  out  the
    reasons for refusal by the respondent.  The appellant did not fall foul
    of the suitability requirements for the  purposes  of  Appendix  FM  or
    Paragraph 276ADE.  The judge  at  paragraphs  19  to  20  set  out  the
    submissions made on behalf of the appellant and the respondent.

 4. In the application for permission to appeal  it  was  stated  that  the
    application was made long before the new Rules came into  force  but  I
    note that the decision was made on 4th June 2014.  Further to  Singh  v
    SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74 , it was open  to  the  respondent  to  make  a
    decision on that basis.  There is no error of law in  the  decision  of
    the judge to consider the matter with reference to Appendix FM and  not
    under the 'old rules'.

 5. A second ground of appeal  was  that  the  judge's  findings  were  not
    sufficiently reasoned  and  this  has  some  merit,  particularly  when
    considering the grant of permission to appeal which stated that it  was
    arguable that in finding that  the  appellant  and  his  partner  could
    continue their family life in  Pakistan  inadequate  consideration  was
    given to the impact that this was likely to  have  on  the  appellant's
    partner, who would be separated from close family members  including  a
    minor child in the UK.  I return to this ground below.

 6. It was also stated that the judge had failed  to  consider  an  obvious
    point of law in relation to whether in  the  alternative  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the appellant to return to Pakistan to  apply  for
    entry clearance, Chikwamba v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2008] UKHL 40.  As the grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    however, specifically state, the appellant would be ineligible to apply
    for entry clearance under the new Rules having been unable  to  satisfy
    the financial criteria I can find  no  obvious  error  in  the  judge's
    treatment of the Rules in this regard because  the  appellant  had  not
    fulfilled the requirements of the Rules such that  return  to  make  an
    entry clearance application was merely a formality.

 7. With respect to the ground that  the  findings  were  not  sufficiently
    reasoned, as I pointed out to Ms Johnstone, the judge made a series  of
    recorded facts  but  his  reasoning  appears  to  be  confined  to  one
    paragraph, that at paragraph 25.

 8. The appellant has sought to remain on the basis that he has now entered
    into an Islamic marriage  and  has  been  in  a  relationship  with  Ms
    Bannister for some four years.   The judge does state at  paragraph  22
    that the respondent had correctly examined the appellant's  claims  and
    found that there was a reason to dismiss  the  appellant's  application
    under the suitability test but he made no attempt to grapple  with  the
    question  of  whether,  further  to  EX.1,  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life with that partner continuing outside the UK.

 9. Caselaw has confirmed that it is the degree of  difficulty  the  couple
    face rather than the 'surmountability' of  the  obstacle  that  is  the
    focus of judicial assessment  Indeed MF (Nigeria) v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 1192  confirms that insurmountable obstacles  do  not  specifically
    mean obstacles which are impossible to overcome. Particularly confusing
    was the judge's decision that the appellant had established  no  family
    or private life either under the Immigration  Rules  or  Article  8  to
    allow him to remain.  That, however, may have been inelegant  phrasing.
    Specifically what did  not  appear  to  have  been  considered  by  the
    respondent (but that is not surprising as the evidence was  not  before
    the respondent when making the decision) was that the  partner  of  the
    appellant had previously stated to  the  Home  Office  that  she  would
    return to Pakistan but by the time  of  the  hearing  stated  that  she
    wished to remain in the United Kingdom where  she  had  been  born  and
    brought up and where her children and grandchildren lived.   The  judge
    made no specific finding on that.

10. Indeed in the respondent's refusal letter there was no evidence of  the
    partner's child's existence, this it was submitted, was because none of
    the letters referred to her.

11. The evidence given by the appellant's partner at the hearing before  me
    was that her mother had subsequently passed away and that her  daughter
    continued to live with her father.

12. I am not persuaded that the appellant has shown on  the  evidence  that
    there  are  insurmountable   obstacles   or   even   very   significant
    difficulties in the appellant's partner relocating  to  Pakistan.   The
    partner had previously indicated that she  was  content  to  remove  to
    Pakistan and I can find nothing which has substantially altered in  the
    appellant or his partner's circumstances.

13. Even if I am incorrect about that and I take into  account  Section  55
    because there  is  reference  to  children  the  appellant's  partner's
    daughter is now 17 but the daughter continues to live with  her  father
    and had always lived with her father.  Her best interests are such that
    she remain  at  school  where  she  is  at  present  and  in  a  stable
    environment.  I can accept that she wished to continue to have  contact
    with her mother but her interests are a primary consideration but not a
    paramount consideration.  There was no  statement  from  the  partner's
    child expressing concern that her  mother  and  her  partner  would  be
    leaving.

14. I have also taken  into  account  the  evidence  that  the  appellant's
    partner has been born and brought up in the UK where her  children  and
    grandchildren live and that she has lived here all her life  and  is  a
    British citizen.  There is very limited evidence  in  relation  to  the
    grandchildren (although some photographs of younger  children)  and  no
    doubt they also have their own carers.  In her original  statement  the
    appellant's partner stated that she would be prepared  to  relocate  to
    Pakistan but she has now changed her mind.  Events have now altered  to
    the effect that sadly her mother has passed away. That,  however,  will
    lessen her ties with the United Kingdom.  Although a  British  citizen,
    the partner made a declaration that she would be prepared to leave  the
    United Kingdom when her daughter was only 14 years old rather than  the
    17 years  she  is  now  and  she  continued  to  live  apart  from  the
    appellant's  partner.  In  other  words  when  she  was   younger   the
    appellant's partner was prepared to leave her. The appellant's  partner
    disclosed no matters of ill health and although I accept  that  she  is
    currently working I am not persuaded that she would be unable  to  work
    in Pakistan albeit that the language and culture is different.  She was
    working previously when she made the statement that she could remove to
    Pakistan. The appellant himself, however, has five children in Pakistan
    who are presently deprived of his company.

15. The letter of his friend Mr Faial Aziz added little to the overall case
    merely confirming that the appellant was a courteous and generous  man.
    This would indicate that the couple would be able to reform friendships
    abroad.

16. I take into account the appellant's immigration history  such  that  he
    has continued to stay beyond what he claims was  his  six  month  visit
    visa.  I can accept that the appellant and his partner are genuinely in
    a relationship and that the appellant's partner has  limited  knowledge
    of the culture and tradition in Pakistan although she  has  lived  with
    the appellant for some years.  I  note  she  would  find  it  difficult
    having had a extended family in the UK but this does not  preclude  her
    from making visits back to the  United  Kingdom.   Although  there  are
    security issues in Pakistan her husband has lived there for many  years
    and can speak the language and there are  many  many  people  who  live
    there as do the appellant's five children.  There is not a  requirement
    that the partner should remove herself from the UK, merely that that is
    an option for her.  She has been aware of the appellant's status  since
    the onset of their relationship and as the daughter  of  the  appellant
    matures I find it less of a significant obstacle as they can visit each
    other and keep in contact by modern methods.

17. I have taken into account Section 117 of  the  Nationality  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 and note that the  appellant  is  not  a  financial
    burden on the community as his wife works.  I accept that  he  must  be
    able to speak some English  and  therefore  could  integrate  into  the
    community.  I am enjoined by Section 117 to place little weight on  the
    relationship, which has  been  established  and  developed  whilst  the
    appellant has a precarious immigration status.  There was  no  evidence
    that he had developed a  parental  relationship  for  the  purposes  of
    Section 117 with his partner's child.

18. The appellant was said to have diabetes.  There was no indication  that
    the appellant's health would be a barrier to his removal to Pakistan or
    evidence produced that his condition was significant or that healthcare
    was not available in Pakistan.

19. As the judge found at paragraph 17, which I preserve, the appellant was
    invited to substantiate his claim that he could not return to  Pakistan
    because his relatives  had  stolen  his  property,  kidnapped  and  ill
    treated his children and he would have to face the same on return,  but
    no communication had been made by the appellant  with  regard  to  this
    aspect of claim in relation to Article 3.  He  was  thus  not  accepted
    that he could not  return  because  he  would  face  threats  from  his
    relatives.  The appellant had failed to register an asylum claim and no
    further element would be considered in relation  to  that.   I  am  not
    persuaded that there are any relevant 'protection'  grounds  such  that
    the appellant, and thus his partner, would be at risk on return.

20. I am not persuaded that the appellant has lost ties with Pakistan where
    he has family  and  contacts  and  that  his  establishment  of  a  new
    relationship would prevent  the  development  of  those  contacts.   In
    essence, I find that the appellant can return to Pakistan and there are
    no significant obstacles to his partner returning with  him.   In  this
    day of texting, skype and air travel the partner does not have to sever
    her connections with her family.  She would be removing to Pakistan but
    will be removing with her husband who has worked in Pakistan, knows the
    language and has his own family there and who can  support  her  should
    she wish.

21. Overall, I find that there are no compelling reasons  as  to  why  this
    matter should be considered  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the
    appellant has failed  to  show  he  can  comply  with  Appendix  FM  or
    Paragraph 276ADE.  Even if that were not the case, and the matter  fell
    for consideration on  human  rights  grounds  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules, because there were factors, such  as  the  partner's  change  of
    heart I am not persuaded that the  decision  is  disproportionate  when
    considering the evidence overall.   I  bear  in  mind  the  immigration
    status of the appellant: he entered as a  visitor  and  has  overstayed
    since 2007 and at no  time  has  had  anything  other  than  precarious
    status.  He did not attempt to regularise his position until some three
    years later in 2010.  The couple forged their relationship in the  full
    knowledge that the appellant had not right  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

22. I have also taken into account the factor raised in respect  of  delay.
    The appellant was told in June 2011 that  his  claim  was  rejected  on
    human rights grounds following the forging of his relationship with his
    partner in 2010.  I can accept that there has been some delay since his
    MP wrote to the Home Office requesting reconsideration but  bearing  in
    mind  his  application  had   previously   been   refused,   that   the
    circumstances have appeared to have changed little and  the  number  of
    applications that the Secretary of State  must  deal  with,  I  am  not
    persuaded that the delay has shown to be the result of a  dysfunctional
    system or that weight accorded to the respondent's position  should  be
    reduced. Further to Huang v SSHD  [2007]  UKHL  11,  I  find  that  the
    decision is proportionate.

23. I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Law for  lack  of
    reasoning and substantiate the decision herein which also dismisses the
    appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The Judge erred materially for the reasons  identified.   I  set  aside  the
decision  pursuant  to  Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals   Courts   and
Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007) and remake the decision under section  12(2)
(b) (ii) of the TCE 2007

The appellant's appeal is dismissed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  on
Human Rights grounds.






Signed                                  Date 9th May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                                  Date 9th May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

