
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/26396/2014
                                                               IA/26400/2014
                                                               IA/26407/2014
                                                               IA/29093/2014
                                                               IA/26404/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th October 2015                 |On 9th November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                                Nazrul Islam
                               Jamila Qureshi
                                 Nabid Anjum
                                 Nabil Anjum
                             Nasif Nahiyan Anjum
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Abu Reza, MQ Hassan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants appeal with permission  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, Judge Callender Smith, promulgated on 31st March  2015.   The
    judge found that this family which consists of the parents, adult child
    (18 years old) and two minor children born on 29th March 2000 (16 years
    old), and born on 20th March 2008 (7 years old) had no  entitlement  to
    remain under the Rules, specifically that it is  reasonable  to  expect
    the two youngest children to return with their parents  to  Bangladesh,
    and  that  to  remove  the  family  unit  was  not  a  disproportionate
    interference with their right to enjoy private and family life.

 2. The grounds challenged the judge's decision on Private Life grounds  in
    respect  of  the  two  youngest  children,  and  argue  that   properly
    considered their appeals should have been allowed, and in the light  of
    those decisions positive decision  for  the  parents  and  older  child
    should have followed.

 3. The test under the Private Life Rules, at HC 395 as  amended  paragraph
    276 ADE (iv), is seven years residence and a finding as to  whether  it
    would be reasonable to expect the child concerned to leave the UK.

 4. The grounds assert that in reaching his conclusion the judge failed  to
    give due regard to the length  of  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Nabil entered the United Kingdom in 2006 when he was 10 years  old  and
    as at the date of hearing had been in the United  Kingdom  continuously
    since 2006 i.e. eight years, and the younger child Nasif was born  here
    on 20th March 2008, and had remained here continuously i.e. seven years
    as at the date of hearing.

 5. Before me Mr Reza submitted that the judge failed  to  have  regard  to
    Section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009.
    Section 55 duties on the Secretary of State  were  twofold,  namely  to
    consider the best interests and to follow Home Office guidance in doing
    so, which included the need to take  into  account  the  views  of  the
    children.  The reasons for refusal letter made no mention of Section 55
    to the point that it was not established that the  Secretary  of  State
    had considered the duty, and in particular there was  no  reference  to
    the views of the  children.  The  judge  should  have  found  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law for failure to  follow  the
    policy, and remitted the case for reconsideration by the  Secretary  of
    State.

 6. In the alternative the judge's  own  consideration  of  the  issue  was
    flawed. In that context the judge wrongly framed  the  question  as  to
    whether or not it was reasonable for the children  to  accompany  their
    parents. The question was whether it was reasonable to expect  them  to
    leave. Insufficient weight had been given to their life  and  education
    in the United Kingdom, independent of  their  relationship  with  their
    parents.  A child who spent a significant part of  their  childhood  in
    the United Kingdom and been in full-time education  and  is  completely
    integrated with life here, should not be expected to leave the country.
     Further the judge did not treat the best interests of the children  as
    a primary consideration and failed to make findings as  to  their  best
    interests.  The Appellants rely on MK (Best interests of  child)  India
    [2011] UKUT 00475 (IAC) and MK (Section 55 - Tribunal  options)  Sierra
    Leone [2015] UKUT 00223 (IAC).

 7. Mr Reza argued that given the flawed assessment of the position of  the
    children the consideration of Article 8 was infected by error.

 8. I deal with the position under the Rules.  The MK [2015] decision makes
    clear that where, as here, the Respondent has included a best interests
    consideration in the reasons for refusal letter, and  in  this  context
    there is no requirement to make a reference to the Respondent's  policy
    or Section 55 of the Act, it  is  open  to  the  judge  to  proceed  to
    determine the dispute as to the conclusion.  That happened here because
    it expressly stated in the Reasons for Refusal Letter:   paragraph  49;
    "it is considered it is in the best interests of Master Nabil Anjum  to
    remain with your client and her spouse in their  family  unit,  and  in
    terms of Nasif at paragraph  59,  in  similar  terms.  The  judge  self
    directs by reference to the Immigration Rules  in  respect  of  Private
    life, s55 Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009  as  well  as
    Article 8 ECHR at paragraph 34.  In the judge's findings and  reasoning
    set out at paragraph 33 onwards it is quite clear that  other  than  an
    issue as to the length of time  the  father  had  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom in the context of his own private life  Grounds  of  Appeal,  a
    matter which was decided against the father, the judge's  only  concern
    is the position of the children. I find no error in the approach of the
    judge in this regard.

 9. In terms of the dispute before the judge it is argued that  it  is  not
    reasonable to expect the children to leave the country  because  it  is
    not in their best interests to do so. Whether it was reasonable  to  go
    to Bangladesh because their parents  were  going  was  not  a  relevant
    consideration.   It  is  important  to  note  that,  just  as  in   the
    application before me, the basis upon which it was argued that  it  was
    not reasonable for the children to  leave  arose  from  the  length  of
    residence here and a broad assertion that the 16 year old  having  been
    in full-time education since his arrival in the United Kingdom  at  the
    age of 10 in 2006, and the younger having been  here  both  were  fully
    integrated into the United Kingdom.  That was the position  which  does
    not seem  to  have  been  significantly  disputed.    The  grounds  are
    artificial when insisting that without more explicit reference to  best
    interests the decision is  flawed  for  inadequate  self  direction  or
    reasoning.

10. The framing of the discussion by the judge at  [36]  sets  out  clearly
    that the issue he had to decide is how to treat those best interests:

         "The first case sets out the balancing exercise that  needs  to  be
         conducted in terms of the treatment of the best  interests  of  the
         children"

11. The judge notes the cases of EV (Philippines) v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    874 and Osawemwenze [2014] EWHC 1564 (Admin).  The judge  discusses  at
    [37] how in the case of EV (Phillipines) best interests to remain  were
    outweighed by the fact that the children would  be  accompanying  their
    parents. At [38] the  judge  reminds  himself  that  holding  the  best
    interests of the children as a primary consideration is not to make  it
    a paramount one and that in assessing  reasonableness  of  expecting  a
    child to leave the UK the position in the  home  country  needs  to  be
    factored in.

12.  The  judge  took  into  account  the  circumstances  which  the  minor
    Appellants could expect to find themselves in Bangladesh,  notably  the
    existence of a family home where the eldest lived until he was 10 years
    old, the ability of the parents to  live  and  work  in  Bangladesh  as
    teachers, as they did before they came  to  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    judge bore in mind that the children would be able to enjoy educational
    facilities and opportunities in  Bangladesh  which,  whilst  not  of  a
    standard and quality enjoyed in the United Kingdom, did not  of  itself
    give rise to any determinative issue in respect of their position.  The
    judge noted that the family in Bangladesh could continue to receive the
    financial support that they had received from  family  members  in  the
    United Kingdom if required.

13. There is no basis to  assert,  as  Mr.  Reza  argued,  that  the  terms
    reasonableness of the  child  leaving  is  inevitably  limited  to  the
    consideration of factors relating to the child.

14. Reading the decision in  the  round  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge
    correctly self-directed and that these grounds rely on matters of  form
    rather than substance. On the evidence there is simply  no  basis  upon
    which it could properly be found that it was not reasonable  to  expect
    all the children to leave the United Kingdom with their  parents.   The
    rule is expressed in similar terms to S117 (6) of the 2002 Act  in  the
    context of an  assessment  of  Article  8  proportionality.   Case  law
    instructs that where the test is the same there is no need  to  revisit
    the consideration.  In that context it is incoherent to suggest that it
    being reasonable for the children to leave the UK nonetheless there was
    an arguable basis for the Appellants to  be  allowed  to  remain  as  a
    family unit outside of the Rules in the context of Article 8.

15. For all the reasons above I am satisfied that the decision of the judge
    revealed no material error of law requiring it to be set aside and  the
    decision stands.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

