
                                                                   [pic]
Upper Tribunal    Appeal Number: IA/26776/2012
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Determined at Field House                     |Notice sent                  |
|On: 19th June 2013                            |On : 19th June 2013          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                             MS RUKAYAT OLASUPO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                          NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL AND
                   REASONS FOR THE TRIBUNAL GIVING CONSENT
Representation:

For the Appellant :    Mr S Walker (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent :   Mr O Adisa (TW Solicitors )


 1. The Appellant before the First-tier Tribunal is  a  citizen  Nigeria  of
    born 27th December 1986. She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against
    a decision of the Secretary of State of 12th November 2012, refusing  to
    vary her leave to remain. The First-tier Tribunal allowed her appeal  in
    a determination promulgated on 8th April 2013. I granted the  Respondent
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 2.  At  the  hearing  on  19th  June  Mr  Walker  representative  requested
    permission  to  withdraw  the  appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.  Ms
    Olasupo's representative agreed,

 3. Consent of the Upper Tribunal is required for a party  to  withdraw  its
    case.  Having  heard  Mr  Walker  accepting  that  the  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal lacked





    force in light of the evidence on file (not before  the  author  of  the
    grounds), I give consent to the Appellant to withdraw her case.

 4. Accordingly with my consent, and pursuant to rule 17(5) of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  this  appeal  is  recorded  as
    "Withdrawn with the consent of the Upper Tribunal".  This  is  a  Notice
    pursuant to rule 17(5) to inform the parties that the  Appellant's  case
    is withdrawn.

 5. The effect of the  Appellant's  case  being  withdrawn  from  the  Upper
    Tribunal is that the proceedings before the Upper  Tribunal  are  at  an
    end. There is no appeal before the Upper  Tribunal  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision shall stand.


Signed:


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

Date: 19th June 2013











































