
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA262562014
     IA262792014
                                                                 IA262852014
                                                                 IA262882014
                                                                 IA262892014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 May 2016                                 |On 24 May 2016                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     EB
                                     ASG
                                     ASG
                                     TG
                                     CS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                 Respondents

Representation

For the Appellants:    Mr A Joseph, Counsel instructed by Quality
Solicitors Orion
For the Respondents:   Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellants.
This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to
comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of court
proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. By my decision promulgated on 8 February 2016 (appended to this
    decision) I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").
    I hereby remake the decision of the FtT.

Background

 2. The factual background to this appeal is as follows:

      a) The appellants are a family unit. Apart from the third appellant,
         who was born in and is a citizen of the United States of America,
         they are citizens of Ghana.

      b) The first and second appellants are a married couple born on [ ]
         1975 and [ ] 1966. The other appellants are their children, born on
         [ ] 1988, [ ] 2002 and [ ] 2007. They have a fourth child who was
         born on [ ] 2013.

      c) The first four appellants entered the UK in around 2005 as visitors
         and remained thereafter without leave to do so. The fifth appellant
         was born in the UK. The appellants claim that prior to entering the
         UK they lived in Italy and for a brief period in the US. They also
         claim that none of their children were born in Ghana or have ever
         lived there.

      d) The fourth appellant (born on [ ] 1988) was the only appellant to
         give oral evidence. I found him credible and accept the evidence he
         gave, which in sum is that he is fully integrated into life in the
         UK and has minimal connection to Ghana. All of his schooling has
         been in the UK. He currently attends a performing arts college and
         has taken some GCSEs. He has been to Ghana only once - on a brief
         visit when aged 4 - and is not in contact with anyone in Ghana. He
         has no knowledge about life in Ghana or ideas as to what he would
         do upon moving there with his family.

      e) The third appellant (born on [ ] 2002) was born in the US and is
         not a Ghanaian national. Now aged 13, all of her education has
         taken place in the UK. The fifth appellant, similarly, has
         undertaken all of her education in the UK.

 3. The appellants applied for leave to remain on the basis of their family
    and private life. On 4 June 2014 their application was refused. The
    respondent was not satisfied that they could meet the requirements of
    either Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules or Rule 276AD. She also did
    not accept that there were exceptional circumstances to justify
    allowing the application outside the Rules. In respect of the third,
    fourth and fifth appellants, the respondent acknowledged that they had
    been in the UK over seven years and therefore satisfied the first part
    of Rule 276ADE(1)(iv) but determined that it would be reasonable for
    them to leave the UK. Accordingly, it found they were unable to meet
    the requirements of this Rule.

Applicable law

 4. In considering this appeal, I have adopted a two stage approach:
    firstly, I have considered, in respect of each of the appellants,
    whether they are able to satisfy the requirements of the Immigration
    Rules. Secondly, in so far as any of the appellants are unable to meet
    the Rules, I have considered whether their removal from the UK would be
    contrary to Article 8 ECHR outside the framework of the Immigration
    Rules.

 5. Although I have considered each appellant individually, I have kept in
    mind that they are a family unit and the appeals need to be considered
    together with reference to each other and taking into account all
    material facts and considerations. See PD & Others (Article 8 -
    conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC).

 6. The Immigration Rules relevant to this appeal are those found at
    paragraph 276ADE(1) which provide as follows:

         The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on
         the
         grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of
         application, the applicant:
         (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-
         LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and
         (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the
         grounds of private life in the UK; and
         (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years
         (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
         UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of imprisonment)
         and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the
         UK; or
         (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent at
         least half of his life living continuously in the UK (discounting
         any period of imprisonment); or
         (vi) is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the UK
         for less than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but
         there would be very significant obstacles to the applicant's
         integration into the country to which he would have to go if
         required to leave the UK.

 7. In considering the appeal outside the Rules, I have had regard, inter
    alia, to

      a) the mandatory considerations set out in Part 5A of the Nationality
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, in particular section 117B; and

      b) the case law which makes it clear that there must be "compelling
         circumstances" to allow an appeal outside the Rules. See, for
         example SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

 8. I have also kept in mind that this appeal concerns the future of four
    children (the third, fourth and fifth appellant and their youngest
    sibling who is not a party). Their interests are a primary
    consideration and there must be a properly considered evaluation of
    their best interests which can then be balanced with other material
    considerations. See, for example, EV (Philippines) and others [2014]
    EWCA Civ 874; and JO and Others (section 55 duty) [2014] UKUT 552
    (IAC).

Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and the first and second appellants

 9. The first two appellants argue that they satisfy the requirement of
    276ADE(1)(vi) because there would be "very significant obstacles" to
    their integration into Ghana. They claim to not have resided in Ghana
    since around 1998 (ie for almost 20 years), to have only superficial
    links to the country and to be fully integrated into life in the UK.

10. I accept that the first and second appellants have lived most of their
    adult lives outside of Ghana and that they, along with their children,
    are now well integrated into life in the UK. However, that does not
    mean they would face very significant obstacles integrating into Ghana.
    Ghana is the country of their nationality where they grew up and were
    educated. They are familiar with the language, culture and society. No
    evidence was put before me to show that they would be unable to find
    work or educational opportunities for their children upon return to
    Ghana. Whilst they would undoubtedly face challenges moving to Ghana,
    the evidence before me falls significantly short of showing that there
    would be significant - and certainly not "very significant," which is
    the requirement under the Rules - obstacles to integration.
    Accordingly, I find that the first and second appellants are unable to
    satisfy the Immigration Rules.

Paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) and the third appellant

11. At the date of the application the third appellant was under 18 and had
    lived continuously in the UK for more than seven years. Accordingly,
    the question to be addressed, under 276ADE(1)(iv), is whether it would
    not be reasonable to expect her to leave the UK.

12. If the third appellant is removed from the UK it will be to Ghana,
    along with her family. In considering the reasonableness of her removal
    I take into account, on the one hand, that:

      a) She has never lived in, and is not a national of, Ghana.

      b) She is now a teenager and has lived almost her entire life (and has
         been educated solely) in the UK.

      c) Her connections to Ghana (other than it being the country of her
         parents' nationality) are minimal.

      d) She is fully integrated into life and education in the UK which is
         where all her friends and wider family live.

13. On the other hand, the third appellant is a fit, healthy and capable
    girl with supportive parents and there is no reason to believe she
    would be unable to integrate into, and gain an education in, Ghana, a
    country where her parents are citizens and with which they are
    familiar.

14. As highlighted in the recent decision of PD & Others at paragraph [39],
    the test of "reasonableness", which is applicable in respect of the
    third appellant, represents a less exacting threshold than other tests
    found in the Immigration Rules, such as "insurmountable obstacles,
    exceptional circumstances [and] very compelling factors".
    Reasonableness is certainly a less exacting standard than "very
    significant obstacles" which is the test relevant in respect of the
    first and second appellants.

15. Weighing all of the circumstances relevant to the third appellant, and
    noting in particular the length of time she has spent in the UK, her
    age, and the absence of connection to Ghana (where she is not a
    citizen), I find that it would not be reasonable to expect her to leave
    the UK. Accordingly, I find that the third appellant meets the
    requirements of Paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules and is
    entitled to remain in the UK on that basis.

Paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) and the fourth appellant

16. At the date of the application the fourth appellant was under 18 and
    had lived continuously in the UK for more than seven years.
    Accordingly, as with the third appellant, the question to be addressed
    is whether it would not be reasonable to expect him to leave the UK.

17. The fourth appellant is 17 years old and has lived in the UK since the
    age of 6. His connection to Ghana is minimal, having never lived there
    and only visited on one occasion. He has gone through the UK education
    system and built his life in the UK, developing relationships and
    connections. Lengthy residence in the UK as an older child is generally
    more significant, in terms of whether removal is reasonable, than time
    spent in the UK at a younger age: see, for example, Azimi-Moayed  and
    others [2013] UKUT 00197) (IAC) where seven years from the age of four
    is contrasted with the first seven years of life.

18. As a healthy, articulate and intelligent young man the fourth appellant
    would no doubt be able, with the support of his parents, to adapt to
    life in Ghana and overcome any obstacles he may face. However, that
    does not make it reasonable for him to be removed to a country he
    hardly knows from the country in which he has spent most of his life
    and his entire adolescence. Considering all of the factors relevant to
    the fourth appellant's circumstances, and noting in particular the
    length of time he has been in UK, his age whilst in the UK (6 - 17),
    his complete immersion into life in the UK and the absence of
    connection to Ghana, I find that his removal from the UK would not be
    reasonable and that he therefore satisfies the requirements of
    Paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules.

Paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) and the fifth appellant

19. The fifth appellant is nine years old and has lived her whole life in
    the UK. She has never visited Ghana. Whilst I accept that moving to
    Ghana would represent a huge disruption to her life, she would be
    moving with both her parents, who are from Ghana. She is still young
    and no evidence has been put before me to show particular circumstances
    (such as health problems) that would make the transition particularly
    challenge. Given her age, and that she would be travelling with her
    parents (and siblings) I do not consider her removal unreasonable. The
    fifth appellant's best interests are to remain with her parents and if
    they are removed to Ghana it is in her interests to accompany them and
    it is not unreasonable for her to do so. Accordingly, I find that the
    fifth appellant is unable to succeed in her application under the
    Immigration Rules.

Article 8 outside the Rules

20. Having found that the first, second and fifth appellants are unable to
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules, I now turn to consider
    their appeals under Article 8 ECHR outwith the framework of the
    Immigration Rules.

21. It is clear, from the length of time they have spent in the UK and the
    relationships they have developed, that the first and second appellants
    have established a private life in the UK and that their removal would
    interfere with that private life thereby engaging Article 8. The more
    difficult question and the issue for me to resolve is the
    proportionality of their removal.

22. In considering proportionality I apply the mandatory considerations
    stipulated in Part 5A of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 ("the 2002 Act"). Several of the considerations weigh against the
    first and second appellant - their private life was established whilst
    in the UK unlawfully, they are not financially independent, and the
    maintenance of effective immigration control is in the public interest.



23. However, Section 117B(6) states that where someone is not liable to
    deportation (which is the case here) the public interest does not
    require their removal if


         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and


         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom."

24. Given that the third, fourth and fifth appellants have lived in the  UK
    for a continuous period of seven years  or  more,  they  all  meet  the
    definition of being a "qualifying child". As  explained  above  in  the
    context  of  considering  the  Immigration  Rules,  it  would  not   be
    reasonable to expect the third and fourth appellants to leave the UK.


25. In Treebhawon and others (section  117B(6))  [2015]  UKUT  00674  (IAC)
    Section 117B(6) was clarified as follows:

         "20.  In  section  117B(6),   Parliament   has   prescribed   three
    conditions, namely:

                 b) the person concerned is not liable to deportation;
                 c) such  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                    relationship with a qualifying child,  namely  a  person
                    who is under the age of 18 and is a British  citizen  or
                    has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous  period
                    of seven years or more; and
                 d) it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the  qualifying
                    child to leave the United Kingdom.

             Within   this   discrete   regime,   the   statute    proclaims
             unequivocally that where these three conditions  are  satisfied
             the public interest does not require the removal of the  parent
             from the United Kingdom. Ambiguity there is none.

         21. Giving effect to  the  analysis  above,  in  our  judgment  the
             underlying Parliamentary intention  is  that  where  the  three
             aforementioned conditions are satisfied  the  public  interests
             identified in section 117B(1) - (3) do not apply."

26. The first and second appellants have a genuine and subsisting parental
    relationship with three qualifying children. For the reasons set out
    above at paragraphs [11]-[18], it would not be reasonable to remove two
    of those children (the third and fourth appellants) from the UK.
    Accordingly, the first and second appellants satisfy the conditions of
    Section 117B(6) with the consequence that the public interest does not
    require their removal from the UK. In the absence of there being a
    public interest in the removal of the first and second appellant from
    the UK, the balancing exercise under Article 8 inevitably falls firmly
    in their favour.

27. In respect of the fifth appellant, as explained in paragraph [19], it
    is in her best interests to reside with her parents, whether that be in
    the UK or Ghana.  Accordingly, to the extent that the first and second
    appellants succeed in their appeal under Article 8, the fifth
    appellant's appeal also succeeds.

Decision

28. Accordingly, I remake the decision of the FtT by:

      a) allowing the third and fourth appellants' appeals under paragraph
         276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules; and

      b) allowing the first, second and fifth appellants' appeals under
         Article 8 ECHR outwith the framework of the Immigration Rules.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 23 May 2016                   |

