
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26987/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 18 October 2017                    |On 02 November 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                              mr Md Kabir Miah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Seelhoff, a solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, a Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

1.   The appellant is a Bangladeshi national born on 30 November 1987.

2.   The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (FtT) which dismissed his appeal against the respondent's  decision  to
    refuse his human rights claim.  The  grounds  on  which  the  appellant
    attacked the decision of the FtT, promulgated on  19  January  2017  by
    Judge of First-tier Tribunal  Kimnell  (the  Immigration  Judge),  were
    found to be  arguable  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Brunnen  (Judge
    Brunnen).  On 18  August  2017  Judge  Brunnen  pointed  out  that  the
    appellant appeared to have a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
    qualifying child, who was born  on  3  November  2015.   The  appellant
    having applied on 13 February 2015 for further leave to remain  on  the
    basis of his marriage to Mrs Rubala Begum,  a  British  national,  then
    sought settlement in the UK under Appendix FM.

3.   The respondent refused the application for leave  to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds on 22 July 2015.

4.   In his decision, the Immigration Judge considered  that  the  appellant
    had not established on the facts his entitlement to rely on  Article  8
    of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights  (ECHR).   The  appellant
    claimed that his son, who was born in the UK on 3  November  2015,  had
    become integrated into British society and could  not  be  expected  to
    remove to Bangladesh particularly given that his mother was  a  British
    national.  The appellant claims to have developed a family and  private
    life with Ms Begum and his  son  and  that  Section  117B  (6)  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2002  applied  so  that  the
    public interest did not require his removal.

5.   The appellant was given permission  to  appeal  by  Judge  Brunnen  who
    considered it to be arguable as it was not conducive to the public good
    or justified to remove the appellant from the UK given that  he  had  a
    "qualifying child" and that it appeared arguable that it would  not  be
    reasonable to expect that child to leave the UK.  Accordingly, he  gave
    permission to appeal on those grounds.

The Hearing

6.   At the  hearing  I  heard  submissions  by  both  representatives.   Mr
    Seelhoff began by explaining that his client was a Tier 4 Migrant whose
    leave had been curtailed.  He indicated that the Immigration Judge  had
    found that the appellant had used deception to obtain a certificate  (a
    level 5 diploma).  Accordingly, the Immigration  Judge  concluded  that
    the appellant did not meet the suitability requirements having obtained
    his certificate by fraudulent means  as  the  respondent  had  alleged.
    This  conclusion  came  about  following  a  review  of  the  evidence,
    including the evidence of fraud placed before the FtT.   The  appellant
    could not meet the requirements of Appendix FM and  therefore  did  not
    qualify for leave to remain in the UK under the Immigration Rules.

7.    Mr  Seelhoff  submitted  that  the  appellant's  child,  who  remained
    nameless throughout the proceedings, could not reasonably  be  expected
    to leave the UK.  I was referred to paragraphs 43-47  of  the  decision
    where the Immigration Judge points out that  although  it  was  claimed
    that the appellant had "fully integrated" into the culture here. It was
    noted that that although it had been asserted that both  the  appellant
    and his UK wife were in fact of Bangladeshi origin, that assertion  had
    not been supported by any evidence. It was submitted that in  fact  the
    sponsor had been born in the UK, although both she  and  the  appellant
    had come from the Bangladeshi  community.   Having  identified  Section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act as the crucial provision, the Immigration Judge
    did not go on and address the  requirement  for  renewal  of  leave  to
    remain  inside  or  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   Nor   had   the
    Immigration Judge addressed the whole  public  interest.   I  was  also
    referred to the respondent's policy document  "Immigration  Directorate
    Instruction Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b -  "Family  Life
    (as a Partner or Parent) and Private Life: 10-year Routes".   According
    to that document it would usually be appropriate to grant  leave  to  a
    parent or primary carer to enable them to remain in the UK  with  their
    child  provided  there  is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship.  It may be appropriate to  refuse  to
    grant leave where the conduct of one parent or primary carer gives rise
    to considerations of such weight as to justify separation, if the child
    is otherwise to stay with another parent or alternative  primary  carer
    in the UK or in the  EU.   Those  circumstances  could  cover,  amongst
    others, criminality falling below the threshold set by paragraph 398 of
    the Immigration Rules or "a very  poor  immigration  history,  such  as
    where a person has repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration
    Rules".

8.   Mr Seelhoff submitted that the respondent  had  not  followed  her  own
    policy and the reasoning  was  incorrect.   Although  there  were  some
    aspects of a poor immigration history  the  judge's  findings  did  not
    support the view that it was such as to outweigh  other  considerations
    and justify the conclusion that the Immigration Judge reached.

9.   Mr Seelhoff then took me to the "suitability provisions"  and  accepted
    that the respondent would have been entitled to refuse leave to  remain
    in the UK inside or outside the Immigration Rules.  At the time of  the
    refusal (22 July 2015) the suitability criteria  are  contained  within
    Appendix  FM  S-LTR  1.1-3.1.   Items  listed  there  include  conduct,
    character and associations or other reasons which make  it  undesirable
    for the appellant to remain in the UK.

10.  At this point in the submissions I was  referred  to  the  case  of  SF
    [2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC).  In that case, which would have been published
    after the decision here, Judge Ockelton, a  vice  president,  indicated
    the  importance  of  taking  into  account  guidance  issued   by   the
    respondent.  Having regard to the guidance in that  case,  it  was  not
    reasonable to expect the youngest  child  to  leave  the  UK.   It  was
    pointed out that in this case the appellant would not be able to return
    to the UK as he had offended the suitability requirements and would  be
    prohibited from doing so.  It would therefore not be correct to analyse
    the case  in  terms  of  the  appellant  returning  from  abroad  (i.e.
    Bangladesh), making a fresh application and then returning to the UK.

11.  Finally, I was referred to ground 5  wherein  it  is  stated  that  the
    Immigration Judge had erred  in  not  considering  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's spouse had been  born  in  the  UK,  although  she  was  of
    Bangladeshi origin. Wherever her cultural roots  lay,  the  appellant's
    wife had not been to Bangladesh since she was aged two or three and, it
    was submitted, in support  of  ground  5,  that  her  status  had  been
    "devalued".

12.  I then heard submissions from Ms Willocks-Briscoe. She  submitted  that
    the judge had  rightly  concluded  that  the  requirements  of  Section
    117B(6) were not met in  that  the  public  interest  did  require  the
    appellant's  removal,  even  though  it  may  affect  his  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a  qualifying  child.  This  was  for  the
    reasons given at paragraph 47 et seq. in the decision.  The Immigration
    Judge pointed out in those paragraphs that the appellant had  developed
    a family life "exclusively"  while  he  had  been  present  in  the  UK
    unlawfully.  In the Immigration Judge's view, it was reasonable for the
    appellant and his child to return to Bangladesh and make an application
    to join his wife (Mrs Begum) and child.  The  Immigration  Judge  found
    that it was reasonable to expect the appellant  to  do  that.   It  was
    highly desirable that the appellant should return to Bangladesh to make
    his application and demonstrate that he is capable  of  satisfying  the
    Immigration Rules.

13.   Mrs  Willocks-Briscoe  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant's  child
    (Esshaq) was being held responsible for the behaviour  of  his  father.
    Esshaq was barely 1 year old and would be likely  to  remain  with  his
    mother in the UK if the father returned to Bangladesh.  Mrs  Begum  had
    support from other family members and it would not be unreasonable  for
    the appellant to go back to Bangladesh. The appellant had  unilaterally
    decided to settle in the UK and in the course of  doing  so  had  acted
    dishonestly in respect of his ETS test.  He had, essentially,  obtained
    leave by deception and it was in the public interest to require him  to
    return to Bangladesh, a country of which he was a national and in which
    his parents lived.  They would, presumably, be able to accommodate him.
     There was no serious detriment to the appellant's wife and family who,
    as I have stated, were supportive. Insofar as the decision required the
    appellant to leave the UK, it was not disproportionate to do  so.   The
    judge made no anonymity direction.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe explained  that
    the guidance of the Immigration Directorate (at page 49 and the bullets
    referred to there) did not prohibit the removal of the appellant in the
    circumstances.  In  any  event,  the  guidance  referred  to   in   the
    appellant's submissions merely contained examples of  circumstances  in
    which it might be appropriate to refuse to  grant  leave  and  are  not
    intended to envisage every circumstance.  In particular,  the  guidance
    does not state that in other cases an application for further leave  to
    remain would succeed.  In this case, the exercise of deception  was  of
    great importance and 10.2.3 of the Guidance supported  the  refusal  of
    leave to remain in this case.


14.  I was referred to paragraph 2  of  the  Immigration  Judge's  decision,
    where he sets out the background, including the fact that the appellant
    had to be served with forms IS151A and IS151A, Part 2.  An  attempt  to
    challenge  these  notices  by  way  of  judicial   review,   had   been
    unsuccessful.  The appellant's subsequent curtailment of leave followed
    from the use of deception leading to cancellation of the test  results.
    Plainly, the appellant did not meet the suitability  criteria  that  he
    would have to meet in order to be allowed to remain  in  the  UK.   The
    appellant had remained in the UK with full knowledge of his  precarious
    status.  There was not just one incident but the appellant had taken  a
    series of actions which resulted in his leave being cancelled.   Having
    considered all factors, it was submitted that  notwithstanding  Section
    117B, the question was whether the appellant should be allowed to  stay
    in the UK.  His overall level of behaviour was such that he ought to be
    barred under FM-SE or Appendix FM.  Otherwise, he did not  fall  within
    the suitability criteria.

15.   Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  submitted  that  the   failure   to   meet   the
    requirements of the  Rules,  including  the  suitability  requirements,
    impacted on the Article 8 assessment.  The requirements of Section 117B
    (6) did not "get you home" automatically.  The  Immigration  Judge  had
    explained this.  At this point Ms Willocks-Briscoe referred me  to  the
    bundle of  authorities  that  she  had,  helpfully,  produced  for  the
    hearing.  She took me first of all to the case  of  AM  which  she  had
    tabulated as section C of her bundle of authorities.  That case  was  a
    decision of the Court of Appeal.  She particularly took me to paragraph
    19 which states that:

         "The considerations in Section 117B (6) ought to have been  treated
         as  just  one  relevant  factor   when   considering   whether   an
         interference with Article 8 was justified.  Properly construed,  it
         did not take priority over the public interest considerations ..."

16.  I was also referred to the case of Rajendran [2016] UKUT  00138  (IAC).
    According to that case, it was pointed out that it may be an  error  of
    law for a court or tribunal to disregard the relevant  public  interest
    criteria.  There, at paragraph 30, the court  commented  on  the  first
    instance judge's alleged failure to take into account the  family  life
    of the appellant's daughter and son-in-law and grandson in the UK.  The
    court failed to see that this was the  case.   A  conclusion  that  the
    appellant enjoyed family life in the UK and the fact that the judge was
    clearly impressed with the level of care the appellant received and the
    closeness of her ties to her younger daughter and family.  However, the
    court went on to point out the decision of the House  of  Lords  Beoku-
    Betts [2008] U K H L 39 did not provide  support  for  the  proposition
    that a visitor, who had only been in the UK for a short period and  had
    no expectation of being able to succeed under the Immigration Rules for
    dependents, would be allowed to remain permanently.  The  appellant  in
    the Rajendran case fell within that category of person.  No application
    had been made under the  "carer"  provisions  of  the  Rules,  probably
    because she failed to meet the requirements. Therefore,  the  case  was
    not  comparable  to  the  case  of  Beoku-Betts.   The  appellant  was,
    effectively, in the UK unlawfully, Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted.

17.  Next I was referred to the case of Chikwamba in which  the  court  made
    it clear that the success of an application involving a child  was  not
    to be assumed.  I was also referred to the case of Chen at tab E in the
    authorities bundle.  In that case the Upper Tribunal pointed  out  that
    Appendix FM did not include consideration of the  question  whether  it
    would be disproportionate to expect an individual to return to his home
    country and rejoin his family in the UK.   There  may  be  cases  where
    there are no insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life  being  enjoyed
    outside the UK but where temporary separation to enable  an  individual
    to make an application for entry clearance appeared necessary,  it  may
    be disproportionate.  In all cases it will be  for  the  individual  to
    place before the  Secretary  of  State  evidence  that  such  temporary
    separation will interfere disproportionately with the  protected  human
    rights. It will not be enough to rely solely upon case  law,  including
    Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40.

18.  It was submitted by reference to these  cases  that  it  was  incumbent
    upon an appellant to place evidence before the court or tribunal of the
    impact of removal on the child.  No evidence of additional factors  had
    been placed before the FtT in this case.   The  suitability  provisions
    may have to be treated differently in leave to  remain  as  opposed  to
    entry clearance cases.

19.  Mr Seelhoff responded  to  say  there  was  no  proper  opportunity  to
    present evidence.  The suitability provisions should be decided in  his
    client's favour.  It was unreasonable to expect a young child to return
    with his parents to Bangladesh.   The  decision  was  disproportionate.
    All factors should have been taken into account.

20.  In the dialogue which followed it was pointed out that the  appeal  had
    been dismissed under the Immigration Act 2014 and  the  child  had  not
    even been born at the time of the original immigration  decision.   The
    sole basis on which an appeal could therefore be advanced would  be  on
    human rights grounds.  Both parties agreed that it was appropriate  for
    me to remake the decision in the event that I found a material error of
    law.

21.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision as to whether  or  not
    there was a material error of law in this case.

Discussion

22.  As Ms Willocks-Briscoe reminded me, the  appeal  was  solely  on  human
    rights grounds, following the implementation  of  the  Immigration  Act
    2014.  Sections 117A-D of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002 (the 2002 Act) set out the public interest criteria to be  applied
    to the determination of human rights claims.  Section 117B (6)  is  but
    one provision and, as the Court of Appeal said in AM [2017] E  WCA  Civ
    180, the consideration of  whether  the  interference  with  Article  8
    rights is justified in a context to which  Section  117B  (6)  applies,
    i.e. where there is the potential for a qualifying child to be required
    to be removed from the UK, it is but one factor to take  into  account.
    Properly considered, the rights of the child did not take priority over
    other public interest or public  considerations.   The  importance  and
    weight  to  be  attached  to  those  considerations  is   not   to   be
    underestimated.

23.  Given the finding that the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a qualifying child and that the child could not  live
    in a country, which the Immigration Judge described as a  "third  world
    country",  how  could  the  public  interest  justify  the  appellant's
    removal?

24.  It was suggested before me that, having recognised  the  fact  that  it
    was not reasonable to  expect  the  child  to  live  in  Bangladesh  in
    paragraph 47 of the decision, it could not be reasonable for him to  go
    on and find the appellant could be removed there. It was submitted that
    in the light of the appellant's immigration history  he  would  not  be
    granted entry clearance to return to the UK.

25.  Having carefully read the decision, I find that the  Immigration  Judge
    did not misapply Section 117B (6) of the 2002 Act to the  facts  as  he
    found them to be.  He had regard to the suitability requirements noting
    that they included cases where it was  "not  conducive  to  the  public
    good" for the applicant to be  allowed  to  remain  by  virtue  of  his
    character and associations.  Whilst it was conceded before me that  one
    instance of deception was not enough, I find that the appellant  has  a
    poor immigration history, using deception and remaining in the UK for a
    long period of time without any right to  be  here  and  utilising  the
    system  to  attempt  to  challenge  enforcement  procedures  that  were
    employed  against him.  As Ms Willock S-Briscoe submitted, this was not
    a case of an isolated incident of deception.

26.  The Immigration  Judge  firmly  rejected  the  appellant's  account  on
    credibility grounds and there has been no  successful  application  for
    permission to appeal that part of the decision.

27.  Mrs Begum apparently only met the appellant  in  late  2014,  when  the
    appellant's removal must have been imminent.   Although  the  appellant
    and his wife formed a family  life  together,  it  has  been  of  short
    duration and the appellant's private life beyond that of his own family
    seems to have been limited.  The appellant's child, who is still only 2
    years of age, although of British nationality, it is not yet at school.



28.  The Immigration  Judge  correctly  considered  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration  Rules,  having  first  decided  that  those   Rules   were
    inapplicable to the facts of this case.  He nevertheless considered the
    rules provided the framework in which Article 8 had to  be  considered.
    The appellant had a poor  immigration  history  and  the  question  is:
    whether it  was  right  for  his  child  potentially  to  suffer  as  a
    consequence?

29.  The child's mother  is  likely  to  remain  in  the  UK,  although  her
    Bangladeshi background would enable her to undertake regular visits  to
    that country. Alternatively, she may decide to return  there  with  the
    appellant and re-form the family unit. There is no convincing  evidence
    of any deleterious impact on the appellant,  the  appellant's  wife  or
    their child by virtue of the removal of the  appellant  to  Bangladesh,
    the country where the appellant has spent the bulk of his  adult  life.
    There are compelling and convincing public interest considerations  for
    the respondent to take the view that the appellant must be removed from
    the UK even if this results in the family being split up.

Conclusion

30.  In the circumstances ,  the  Immigration  Judge  was  are  entitled  to
    conclude that the removal of the appellant was proportionate to the end
    of effective immigration control and that conclusion took full  account
    of the rights of the appellant's child as well as other family members.



Notice of Decision

The appeal on human rights grounds is dismissed.

The FTT made no anonymity direction and no fee award.  There  is  no  appeal
against that decision.





Signed            W.E.Hanbury                    Date 1 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                                  Date 1 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

