
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: IA/26553/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 20 May 2014         On 12th August 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                        Maria Vanessa Pascual Salisi
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                   Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms. K. Reid of Counsel (Direct Access).
For the Respondent:    Mr. G. Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Andonian promulgated on 6 January  2014,  dismissing  the  Appellant's
      appeal against the Respondent's decision dated 12 June  2013  refusing
      to vary leave to remain on the basis of private and family life.


Background

   2. The Appellant is a national of the Philippines  born  on  24  November
      1987. Her personal details and immigration history  are  a  matter  of
      record on file, and it is unnecessary to rehearse them  here;  I  make
      reference as is incidental for the purposes of this document.


   3. On 6 December 2012 the Appellant applied for  variation  of  leave  to
      remain on the basis of private and  family  life.  She  had  initially
      entered the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student; however,  following  the
      withdrawal of the sponsor licence of two successive  course  providers
      the Appellant found herself facing a curtailment  of  leave.  In  such
      circumstances, by way of Form FLR (O) signed on 26 November 2012 and a
      supporting statement of representations,  the  Appellant  applied  for
      further leave to remain essentially on the basis of being in  a  same-
      sex relationship, her community ties in the UK,  and  the  absence  of
      family in the Philippines.  The  Respondent  refused  the  Appellant's
      application for reasons set out in  a  'reasons  for  refusal  letter'
      dated 12 June 2013 with reference in particular to paragraph 276ADE of
      the Immigration Rules.


   4. The Appellant appealed to the IAC. She attended the  hearing  and  was
      represented by Counsel (not Ms Reid). The Appellant's partner was also
      in attendance, but was not called to give evidence  (determination  at
      paragraph 1). The appeal was dismissed for  reasons  set  out  in  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination.


   5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  which
      was granted on 1 April 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Heynes.


Consideration

   6. As regards the Immigration Rules, the Appellant has not at  any  point
      claimed that her girlfriend is any of  a  British  citizen,  a  person
      settled in the UK, or a person in the  UK  with  limited  leave  as  a
      refugee or a  person  granted  humanitarian  protection.  Indeed,  the
      Appellant informed the First-tier Tribunal Judge that her partner  did
      not have settled  status  (determination  at  paragraph  1).  In  such
      circumstances, no reliance has been, or could be, placed  on  Appendix
      FM (see section GEN.1.1). As regards paragraph 276ADE,  the  Appellant
      does not satisfy the requirements in respect of age /  time  spent  in
      the UK under (iii)-(v), and therefore must seek to rely upon paragraph
      276ADE(vi).


   7. The Judge appropriately identified  this  to  be  the  relevant  issue
      (paragraph 2), but concluded against the Appellant in respect of "ties
      (including social, cultural or family) with the country to which [s]he
      would have to go if required to leave the UK", i.e.  the  Philippines,
      for reasons set out in paragraph 3 of the determination.


   8. The Judge said this: "Having spent 22 years in the Philippines and  in
      the absence of any evidence to the  contrary  I  am  not  prepared  to
      accept that any period of time she spent in the UK she has  lost  ties
      to her own country". Whilst that is a succinct statement  of  finding,
      it appropriately reflects the burden of proof and, in my judgement, in
      all of the circumstances is a sustainable conclusion  drawn  from  the
      available  evidence.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  highest  that  the
      Appellant's case was put was that she  had  lost  family  ties  -  her
      mother having died, her father being a seaman who was rarely seen  and
      rarely communicated with the family, her sister  having  emigrated  to
      Japan, and the Appellant not having had any contact with  her  brother
      since the Haiyan Typhoon (see statement in  support  of  application).
      The Rule is not limited to the question of  family  ties:  it  is,  of
      course, perfectly possible to have no family ties with a  country  but
      to retain social and cultural ties.


   9. Indeed no specific or  particularised  complaint  is  raised  in  this
      regard in the grounds in support of the application for permission  to
      appeal. In the context of ties and paragraph 276ADE what is raised  is
      the  Appellant's  sexuality,  and  her  partner's   unwillingness   to
      accompany her back to the Philippines. Neither the issue of sexuality,
      nor the partner's unwillingness to relocate to the  Philippines  is  a
      signifier of the Appellant's own ties to her country of nationality.


  10. I have noted paragraphs 11 and 12  of  Ms  Reid's  Skeleton  Argument.
      This, as Ms Reid acknowledged, seeks to raise matters not relied  upon
      in the grounds to the Upper Tribunal and which did not form the  basis
      of the grant of permission to  appeal.  Be  that  as  it  may,  in  my
      judgement reference to the guiding case law of Ogundimu [2013] UKUT 60
      (IAC) does not in reality advance the Appellant's case in this  regard
      any further. Paragraph 11 is otherwise no  more  than  an  attempt  to
      reargue the case in respect of ties, and erroneously  places  reliance
      upon the Appellant's sexuality, which, for reasons given above, is not
      determinative of the question  of  the  existence  of  ties  with  her
      country of nationality.


  11. The Appellant otherwise seeks to criticise  the  Judge's  approach  to
      Article 8 of the ECHR. Before me, emphasis is  essentially  placed  on
      two matters: the Appellant's relationship  with  her  partner  who  is
      unwilling to accompany her to the  Philippines;  and  the  Appellant's
      assertion that her sexuality would be  met  with  disapproval  in  the
      Philippines.


  12. The first of these points encounters the difficulty that the Appellant
      did not call her  partner  to  give  evidence  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal. Ms Reid sought to explain this as 'bad legal  advice':  that
      might be so, but it cannot form the foundation  of  criticism  of  the
      Judge for dealing with the case on the evidence presented to him by  a
      legally  represented  appellant.  The  Judge  concluded  that  in  the
      circumstances "There was a lack of any credible evidence before me  to
      persuade me that the appellant had any form of family  life  with  her
      partner", also adding "there was a total lack of any credible evidence
      of cohabitation for a reasonable period" (determination  at  paragraph
      1).


  13. As regards any disapproval  of  the  Appellant's  sexuality,  Ms  Reid
      acknowledged that there was no 'country information'  evidence  before
      the First-tier Tribunal  as  to  the  treatment  of  lesbians  in  the
      Philippines  and did not otherwise seek to suggest  that  this  was  a
      case presented as  a  claim  for  asylum  or  international  surrogate
      protection.  It  seems  to  be  that  Ms  Reid  essentially  seeks  an
      opportunity to present arguments that were not adequately presented to
      the First-tier Tribunal, but does so without identifying any error  on
      the part of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


  14. In my judgement the Judge explained with adequate reasons why  he  was
      not satisfied that family life had been shown  to  exist  between  the
      Appellant and her girlfriend: see paragraphs 1  and  6.  Further,  the
      Judge clearly considered Article 8 - both in  respect  of  family  and
      private life - outside the wording of the Rules (paragraph 6). If  any
      criticism might be made of him in this regard it is that  he  did  not
      accord any particular weight to the Immigration  Rules,  and  did  not
      direct himself as to the  necessity  of  the  Appellant  demonstrating
      compelling circumstances: however, such criticisms do  not  avail  the
      Appellant in that if anything they reveal  a  more  generous  approach
      than strictly required.


  15. As regards other aspects of private life - length of time  in  the  UK
      and concomitant social connections, and pursuit of studies - it is not
      apparent that anything of significance was advanced before the  First-
      tier Tribunal to take the Appellant's case beyond the expectations  of
      the Rules. In this context - particularly with regard to study and the
      Appellant's wish to purse becoming a dental nurse   -  see  Patel  and
      others [2013] UKSC 72 (especially per Lord Carnwath at  paragraph  57)
      and Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC).


  16. In my  judgement  the  grounds  in  support  of  the  application  for
      permission to appeal did not reveal  any  error  of  law,  and  it  is
      surprising to me that permission to appeal was granted. Permission was
      not granted on the basis of anything in the grounds, but by  reference
      to the case of Gulshan. In this context any possible error on the part
      of Judge Andonian in not directing himself expressly to Gulshan, or in
      accordance with it, could not avail  the  Appellant  in  circumstances
      where the Judge expressly stated that he considered  Article  8  as  a
      "free-standing Article". Ms Reid valiantly seeks to put a gloss on the
      challenge: but essentially she wishes to run arguments that  were  not
      duly presented to the First-tier Tribunal. Such an approach  does  not
      identify any relevant error of law in this particular case.


  17. Accordingly I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not  err  in
      law, and his decision stands.


Decision

  18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no material error of
      law and stands.


  19. The appeal is dismissed.






Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     11 August 2014
