
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/26173/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3rd May 2016                               |On 10th May 2016             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                         MS ENUNICE MBABAZI KICONCO
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



    1. The appellant is a citizen of Uganda born on  26th  July  1982.  She
       married Mr Sam Tarsis Mukwaya, a Swedish citizen born on 1st January
       1966, in Sweden on 19th April 2006. In April 2006 she was granted  a
       residence permit in Sweden. Her husband had already travelled to the
       UK for work in the UK by this stage. She arrived to join him on 12th
       May 2006. The appellant was granted a residence permit as the spouse
       of Mr Mukwaya in the UK on 18th October 2006. In February  2007  the
       couple separated. Mr Mukwaya subsequently travelled  to  Sweden  and
       seemingly tried to divorce the appellant on 13th May 2008,  although
       an order from Senior District Judge Waller on 3rd April 2012  states
       that the divorce was not recognised in the UK as the  appellant  was
       not served with the document. It is now accepted by  the  respondent
       that the appellant remains married to Mr Mukwaya. It  is  not  known
       when Mr Mukwaya left the UK but HMRC records record him working here
       until February 2012.

    2. On 3rd June 2014 the respondent refused the  appellant  a  residence
       permit on the basis of a retained right of residence  in  accordance
       with Regulations, 6, 7 &  10 of the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
       2006 (henceforth the EEA Regulations).

    3. The appellant's appeal against the decision was dismissed under  the
       EEA  Regulations  by  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   James   in   a
       determination promulgated on the 24th March 2015.  However  I  found
       that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law  and  set  aside  the
       decision in its entirety in my decision promulgated on 17th November
       2015. My reasons are set out in that decision which is  appended  at
       Annex A.

    4. The matter came before me remake the appeal. The issue which remains
       to be determined is whether the appellant is entitled to a residence
       permit or permanent residence on the basis that she is married to an
       EEA national who  is  and/or  was  exercising  Treaty  rights  as  a
       qualified person in the UK in accordance either with  Regulations  6
       and 7 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 or Regulation 15  of
       the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

Evidence - Remaking

    5. The respondent provided evidence to the  Tribunal  together  with  a
       witness statement from  Mr  John  Richards  of  the  HMRC  that  the
       appellant's husband, Mr Sam Mukwaya, was employed in the UK and paid
       tax from March 2008 to February 2012 as an employed person, employed
       by Arriva  Plc.  There  are  no  records  for  self  assessment  tax
       submissions or of the payment of tax on the basis of employment from
       2012 onwards or prior to this date.

    6. The appellant relied upon her statement that prior to his work  with
       Arriva Plc Mr Mukwaya had worked as a night club  manager  for  Pier
       One in Dalston. She referred to the fact that  she  had  provided  a
       payslip from 2006 to support this (which  showed  tax  and  national
       insurance being paid). Mr Clarke also identified in the respondent's
       file a letter from Pier One Night Club dated  20th  May  2006  which
       stated that Mr Mukwaya had been an assistant manager with them  from
       2nd October 2005 and continued to  be  so  employed.  The  appellant
       added in oral evidence that Mr Mukwaya had worked Thursday,  Friday,
       Saturday and Sunday  evenings  and  for  sometime  during  the  days
       sorting out things such as the cleaners. She had  met  Mr  Lule  who
       wrote the original letter from Pier One  held  on  the  respondent's
       file. Mr Mukwaya had done his bus driving training  during  the  day
       time whilst working for Pier One at night. He had also  done  casual
       work for a care agency  during  the  days  until  she  had  obtained
       employment as they needed more money. The appellant was certain that
       Mr Mukwaya continued to hold the employment with Pier One  up  until
       the point when she separated from him in February 2007. She is  also
       certain he continued with this employment until he went to work  for
       Arriva after their separation. She knew  Mr  Mukwaya  continued  his
       employment there after she separated from him as a  friend  of  hers
       knew Mr Williams who was another manager at Pier One. She was  aware
       that Mr Mukwaya started his  bus  work  after  they  separated,  and
       thought it was in approximately 2007 but she was not certain.

Submissions - Remaking

    7. Mr Clarke submitted for the respondent that  the  evidence  did  not
       show that the appellant's husband had exercised Treaty rights for  a
       continuous period of five years.  The  HMRC  evidence  clearly  only
       showed a period of work of 3 years  and  11  months.  This  did  not
       suffice to show the appellant was entitled  to  permanent  residence
       under Regulation 15 of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2006.  He
       understood that the checks done by the HMRC were ones  which  should
       have recorded all tax paid by a person with  Mr  Mukwaya's  national
       insurance number.

    8. The appellant submitted that she was certain  that  Mr  Mukwaya  had
       been employed from May 2006 when she joined him in the UK until  his
       employment with Arriva Plc. She therefore believed she was  entitled
       to permanent residence.

Conclusions - Remaking

    9. I am satisfied that the appellant is married to a  Swedish  citizen,
       Mr Sam Mukwaya and has been married to him since April 2006.

   10. The appellant cannot currently qualify to remain on the basis of her
       marriage to Mr Mukwaya under Regulations 6 and 7 of the  Immigration
       (EEA) Regulations 2006 as there is no evidence  he  is  currently  a
       qualified person in the UK. The appellant does not know  whether  he
       currently lives and works in the UK and there is no  other  evidence
       going to this issue.

   11. The only question which remains is whether she acquired a  right  of
       permanent residence as a result of her marriage to  Mr  Mukwaya  and
       his work during the period May 2006 to February 2012. Regulation  15
       (1) (b) of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  means  that  a
       family member of an EEA national who has resided in the UK with  the
       EEA national in accordance with these Regulations for  a  continuous
       period of five years shall acquire a  right  to  reside  in  the  UK
       permanently.

   12. It is clearly the case that Mr Mukwaya was a  qualified  person  for
       the period March 2008 to February 2012 as the HMRC evidence sets out
       that he worked for Arriva Plc during this period. That  evidence  is
       also clear that no tax or national insurance was paid for  any  work
       by Mr Mukwaya prior to March 2008.

   13. The appellant has however given coherent and detailed evidence about
       Mr Mukwaya's work prior to this for Pier One Night Club  during  the
       period May 2006 to  March  2008,  which  is  also  supported  by  an
       original letter from that entity (found in  the  respondent's  file)
       and one pay slip for  May  2006.  It  was  this  evidence  that  the
       respondent found satisfactory to grant  her  original  EU  dependent
       residence permit. I find the appellant to be a careful and  credible
       witness who is able to  describe  her  husband's  work  during  this
       period in some detail. She evidently does not give  evidence  as  to
       whether Pier One Night Club paid tax or national insurance  as  they
       should have done  however  as  this  is  not  a  matter  within  her
       knowledge. I find on the balance of probabilities, on  the  evidence
       before me, that Mr Mukwaya worked for Pier One Night Club as claimed
       by the appellant but that company  did  not  pay  tax  and  national
       insurance as represented on the payslip. I find that this  work  was
       genuine and effective despite the failure of Mr  Mukwaya's  employer
       to deal properly with HMRC.

   14.  I am therefore also satisfied on the balance of probabilities  that
       Mr Mukwaya worked during the period May 2006 to March 2008 and  thus
       was a qualified person during this period,  as  he  was  during  the
       period March 2008 to February 2012, making a totally period of  five
       years and nine months as a qualified person.  I  am  also  satisfied
       that the appellant  has  not  left  the  UK  for  a  period  of  two
       consecutive years or more since acquiring permanent  residence,  and
       thus that she is entitled to a right of  permanent  residence  under
       Regulation 15(1) of  Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in its entirety.

   3. I remake the  appeal  by  allowing  it  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
      Regulations 2006.

Signed: Fiona Lindsley
                                                   Date: 4th May 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley































Annex A


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



   15. The appellant is a citizen of Uganda born on  26th  July  1982.  She
       married Mr Sam Tarsis Mukwaya, a Swedish citizen born on 1st January
       1966, in Sweden on 19th April 2006. In April 2006 she was granted  a
       residence permit in Sweden. She and her husband  then  travelled  to
       the UK for work, arriving  on  12th  May  2006.  The  appellant  was
       granted a residence permit as the spouse of Mr Mukwaya in the UK  on
       18th October 2006. In February 2007 the couple separated. Mr Mukwaya
       subsequently returned to Sweden and seemingly tried to  divorce  the
       appellant on 13th May 2008,  although  the  appellant  contests  the
       validity of this divorce. Proceedings were  then  commenced  in  the
       Principal Registry of the Family  Division  on  15th  February  2012
       whereby the appellant challenged the validity of  this  divorce  and
       obtained an order from Senior District Judge  Waller  on  3rd  April
       2012 stating that the divorce was not recognised in the  UK  as  the
       appellant was not served with the document. On  3rd  June  2014  the
       respondent refused the appellant a residence permit on the basis  of
       a retained right of residence in accordance with Regulations, 6, 7 &
        10 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006  (henceforth  the  EEA
       Regulations).

   16. The appellant's appeal against the decision was dismissed under  the
       EEA  Regulations  by  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   James   in   a
       determination promulgated on the 24th March 2015. Judge James  found
       on the evidence before him that the appellant had not  been  married
       to Mr Mukwaya for three years; had not shown  that  there  had  been
       domestic violence within the marriage; had not shown Mr Mukwaya  had
       obtained permanent residence; and had not shown he was still  living
       or working in the UK.  He  also  found  that  the  couple  were  now
       divorced. He accepted that they had lived as a  married  couple  and
       worked for a year prior  to  this  divorce  and  the  appellant  was
       currently a worker but this  alone  did  not  suffice  to  meet  the
       Regulations.

   17. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Grimmett on 13th August 2015 on the basis that it was arguable  that
       the First-tier  judge  had  erred  in  law  in  not  facilitating  a
       procedurally fair hearing as he had  arguably  confused  Mr  Mayanja
       (the MacKenzie's friend) with Mr Adewale (an  ex  boyfriend  of  the
       appellant) and had thus arguable not allowed the Mackenzie's  friend
       to play a proper role in the hearing, leaving  the  appellant  at  a
       disadvantage in presenting her case.

   18. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law



Submissions

   19. The grounds of  appeal  are  very  hard  to  understand.  However  I
       understand  them  to  contend  firstly  that  there  was  procedural
       unfairness due to the confusion over the identity of the MacKenzie's
       friend and not  allowing  the  MacKenzie's  friend  a  proper  role.
       Secondly that the appeal ought to have been adjourned,  and  failure
       to do so was also procedurally unfair. Thirdly that it was wrong  to
       find  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the  appellant  was
       divorced.  Fourthly  that  Article  8  ECHR  ought  to   have   been
       considered.

   20. Mr Jafar made lucid submissions which pointed to the fact  that  the
       appellant had shown signs of being very confused by the  proceedings
       according to the decision at paragraphs 7, 15 and 34. He argued that
       the appellant's credibility had been infected by the confusion  over
       the identity of the MacKenzie's friend at paragraph 8  and  39  when
       the First-tier Tribunal had not been  able  to  understand  why  the
       MacKenzie's friend would not give evidence, thinking him to  be  the
       ex-boyfriend of the appellant who had been willing  to  do  this  in
       2011 and who  ought  to  have  known  about  her  relationship  with
       husband. This was a material error as the appellant's evidence as to
       whether she was married and had experienced domestic  violence  from
       her husband was rejected because she was  not  seen  as  a  credible
       witness.

   21. Mr Jafar submitted that in addition the decision that the  appellant
       was divorced failed to properly consider the order of the  Principal
       Registry of the Family Division dated 3rd April  2012  which  states
       that the Swedish divorce is  not  recognised  in  the  UK,  and  the
       conclusions of Judge Dawson in the decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal
       promulgated on 23rd October 2012. These  documents  meant  that  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal was irrational  on  this  point.



   22. Mr Melvin conceded  that  there  had  been  a  confusion  about  the
       identity of the MacKenzie's friend but argued that the confusion was
       not material.

Conclusions - Error of Law

   23. I am satisfied that  Judge  James  misunderstood  the  role  of  the
       appellant's friend before the Tribunal. It was not right  to  inform
       him and the appellant that  he  could  only  take  notes.  There  is
       evidence from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal that this  put
       the appellant at a disadvantage as at paragraph 34  the  appellant's
       ability to present her case is termed as "garbled" and at  paragraph
       7 she  is  described  as  looking  "puzzled".  As  was  said  in  RK
       (entitlement  to  represent  s.84)  Bangladesh  [2011]  UKUT   00409
       conclusion (4): "Accordingly, where  a  family  friend  was  seeking
       (otherwise than in the  course  of  a  business)  to  represent  the
       appellant at a hearing,  the  Immigration  Judge  had  no  right  to
       restrict the friend's involvement to that of a Mackenzie  Friend  on
       the basis that he was not legally qualified (see also HH (Sponsor as
       representative) Serbia [2008]UKAIT 00063"

   24. I am also satisfied that there was a confusion in  the  identity  of
       the MacKenzie friend which for the reasons put by Mr Jafar has  made
       the credibility findings against the appellant unsound.

   25. I am also  satisfied  that  the  decision  that  the  appellant  was
       divorced from her husband was irrational as it was contrary  to  the
       evidence of the decision of Upper Judge  Dawson  from  2012  and  an
       order of the Principal Registry of the  Family  Division  dated  3rd
       April 2012.  It  is  also  notable  that  respondent's  own  refusal
       decision dated 3rd June 2014, against which the  appellant  appealed
       stated, that she had not shown she was divorced from her husband  at
       page 2 of 4.

   26. In these circumstances I find that the First-tier Tribunal has erred
       in law and it is appropriate to set aside the decision of the First-
       tier Tribunal in its entirety.

Re-making

   27. The parties initial said they thought the matter  should  return  to
       the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing however I found that  it  was
       appropriate for the remaking hearing to be before the Upper Tribunal
       given the delays in hearing dates in the First-tier Tribunal and the
       narrow point that was now to be decided.

   28. It was agreed that the appellant wished simply  to  argue  that  her
       appeal should be allowed on the basis that she was married to an EEA
       national who was exercising Treaty rights as a qualified  person  in
       the UK. Mr Melvin agreed that the respondent did not argue that  the
       appellant was divorced from her Swedish husband, and  thus  accepted
       that she was still married to him.

   29. Mr Jafar applied for an adjournment of the re-making hearing  as  he
       wished to pursue the request made  in  advance  of  the  hearing  in
       writing by the appellant for directions that the respondent  request
       information regarding the appellant's husband's work from  HMRC  and
       provide this to the Tribunal. He argued that it was appropriate  for
       me to make such a direction as the appellant  had  set  out  in  her
       witness statements that she had been a victim of domestic  violence,
       and he  also  called  evidence  from  the  appellant  in  which  she
       explained that she did not wish to locate her husband as she did not
       want him to know where she lived as he might  then  harass  or  even
       hurt her. She had provided evidence in her witness statements  about
       where he lived and worked in 2011. She did not know what he had done
       since this time, and had no mutual friends or family who could  give
       her this information. Mr Jafar submitted that it was appropriate  to
       make this request when it was clear that the appellant's husband was
       trying to subvert  her  entitlement  to  EEA  rights  by  improperly
       obtaining a Swedish divorce and sending the  document  to  the  Home
       Office.  He  submitted  that  he  had  previously  experienced  this
       information being provided without difficulty.

   30. Mr Melvin opposed the adjournment on the basis that whilst  I  could
       make such a direction in his experience the HMRC would not agree  to
       give the records about the appellant's husband's work as there  were
       no exceptional reasons for them to do so and in his experience  this
       process had taken up to nine months.

   31. I found that in all the circumstances it was  in  the  interests  of
       justice to adjourn the matter and make the requested direction,  but
       the case would be listed for a for-mention  hearing  in  two  months
       time to check progress with the request by the respondent  to  HMRC.



          Decision:

   4. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   5. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in its entirety.

   6. The remaking hearing is adjourned, with a for mention  hearing  to  be
      listed in 2 months time.

Directions:

   1.  The Secretary of State will forthwith  use  her  best  endeavours  to
      obtain tax and or  national  insurance  records  from  HMRC  or  other
      government agencies relating to Mr  Sam  Tarsis  Mukwaya,  citizen  of
      Sweden, DoB 1/1/1966 whose last known  employer  was  the  Arriva  Bus
      Company   in   London   and   whose   last   known   address   was   [
                                 ].
   2. Any evidence so obtained should be filed with the Tribunal and  served
      on the appellant forthwith.
   3.  If the appellant obtains any evidence regarding her husband's work or
      other exercise of Treaty rights in the UK this is to be filed with the
      Tribunal and served on the respondent forthwith.


Signed: Fiona Lindsley
                                                   Date: 11th November 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley








