
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26361/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th May 2016                     |On 13th June 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between
                              MISS SEEMAB IQBAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma, of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, a home office presenting officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

     1. This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision of the  First-
        tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against a decision taken  on  14
        May 2014 to refuse her application for indefinite leave to remain on
        the grounds of being a victim of domestic violence.

Background Facts

     2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born  on  9  November
        1987.  She entered the UK on 25th March 2012 with leave as a Tier  4
        student. She was subsequently granted leave to remain as  a  foreign
        spouse from 18 June 2013 to 18  June  2015.  On  2  April  2014  she
        applied for indefinite leave to  remain  as  a  victim  of  domestic
        violence under the  Immigration  Rules  HC395  (as  amended).   That
        application was refused because  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not
        satisfied that the appellant had shown  that  her  relationship  had
        been caused  to  permanently  breakdown  as  a  result  of  domestic
        violence.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

     3.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier   Tribunal.    In   a
        determination promulgated on 8 September 2015, Judge Meah  dismissed
        the  appellant's  appeal.   The  First-tier   Tribunal   found   the
        appellant's evidence to be incredible, that she  had  not  been  the
        victim of domestic violence and that she was not a witness of truth.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

     4. The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
        The grounds of appeal, in essence, were that the First-tier Tribunal
        failed to follow case-law, that the judge applied a higher  standard
        of  proof,  failed  to  consider  the  evidence  appropriately,  had
        conducted the hearing in an unfair manner and failed to adjourn  the
        matter when the representation was wholly inadequate.  On  12  April
        2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth  granted  the  appellant
        permission to appeal.  In  granting  permission  Judge  Hollingworth
        indicated that it was arguable that the analysis of  the  judge  was
        insufficient and that the judge had failed  to  set  out  sufficient
        reasons in relation to the lack of supporting evidence and failed to
        attach sufficient weight to that evidence.  Thus,  the  appeal  came
        before me.

Summary of the Submissions

     5. The first ground of appeal argues that the judge erred by failing to
        follow the case of JL (Domestic violence:  evidence  and  procedure)
        India [2006] UKAIT 00058 ('JL').  It is asserted that in  that  case
        the respondent conceded  that  the  correct  standard  of  proof  in
        domestic violence matters is the low standard. Reference is made  to
        paragraph 14 of the decision in JL. It is asserted that the decision
        in JL was confirmed by the Court of Appeal in  Ishitaq  [2007]  EWCA
        CIV 386 and by the court in R (Hadis Balakoohi) v SSHD  [2012]  EWHC
        1439 (Admin).

     6. The second ground of appeal is that the judge adopted a standard  of
        proof higher than the balance of probabilities. Reference is made to
        paragraph 12 of the First-tier Tribunal  decision.  It  is  asserted
        that the judge was  incorrect  to  say  that  no  proper  supporting
        evidence had been provided as evidence had been  obtained  from  the
        appellant's GP and from proof of her attendance of appointments with
        her local mental health team. It is also argued that the judge erred
        by failing to attach appropriate weight to  the  evidence  that  the
        appellant had submitted from official sources.

     7. The third ground of appeal is that the judge failed to consider  the
        evidence appropriately. It is asserted that the judge did not attach
        weight to the evidence from the appellant's GP and her psychiatrist.
        The grounds assert that the judge entered into conjecture by stating
        that the GP, psychiatrist and psychologist do not have  the  ability
        to detect whether or not the time limited NHS  resources  are  being
        misused. It is submitted that it  is  arguable  that  when  read  in
        conjunction with paragraph 17 the judge erred  by  requiring  up-to-
        date evidence.

     8. The fourth ground of appeal is that the judge conducted the  hearing
        in an unfair manner. It is submitted that the judge placed  far  too
        much focus on the appellant's vague  responses  concerning  her  sex
        life. It is asserted that the appellant found it difficult before  a
        male judge, the male Home  Office  presenting  officer  and  a  male
        representative to discuss the issue of sex. It is submitted that the
        judge erred by expecting that the  appellant  would  be  comfortable
        talking about her sex life or sexual abuse. It is asserted that  the
        insensitive manner in which these issues were approached during  the
        hearing has led to a situation of unfairness. Reference is  made  to
        the witness statement of the appellant of 27 February  2015  wherein
        it makes clear that she felt uncomfortable disclosing and discussing
        her marital life with her male representative. It is  asserted  that
        in these circumstances, in order to ensure fairness and justice,  it
        was incumbent upon  the  judge  to  ascertain  whether  or  not  the
        appellant was content to proceed with an all-male court  or  whether
        she would prefer an all-female court. It is submitted that  the  un-
        comfortability faced by the appellant in  answering  such  questions
        would explain her vague responses. It is submitted that there is  no
        major  discrepancy  in  the  appellant's  evidence  as  despite  the
        incapability of her ex-husband to consummate their marriage he still
        made sexual demands. It is asserted that the  judge's  finding  that
        the appellant had concocted an  elaborately  elaborate  scenario  in
        order to achieve indefinite leave to remain in  the  UK  was  wholly
        unfair and inaccurate and not a finding open to  the  judge  because
        this ignores the possibility that the appellant could succeed  under
        paragraph 276ADE in that as a single woman in Pakistan  without  any
        male support network she would face  significant  obstacles  in  re-
        establishing herself in the country deemed to be the third dangerous
        for women. And furthermore there are protection issues arising based
        upon the risks that the appellant  would  face  an  account  of  her
        membership of a particular social group and  again  having  no  male
        support network upon which she could rely upon for protection

     9. The fifth ground of appeal is that the judge failed to  adjourn  the
        matter  when  it  was  clear  that  there  was   wholly   inadequate
        representation. It is submitted that  the  duty  of  the  first-tier
        tribunal judge is to ensure fairness, justice and just  disposal  of
        matters and that the judge therefore has an  obligation  to  adjourn
        matters. It is submitted that  it  incumbent  upon  judges  to  halt
        proceeding where representation is wholly inadequate. The  appellant
        relies  upon  the  decision  of  BT  (Former   solicitors'   alleged
        misconduct [2004] UKIAT 311. It  is  asserted  that  the  allegation
        concerning the conduct of the previous  representatives,  Bajwa  and
        Co, will be put to that firm. The grounds  of  appeal  set  out  the
        following comments that it is asserted  the  judge  made  about  the
        quality of the representation:

            '(a)  I also received the appellant's bundle comprising a total
            of 14 page purporting to contain  various  other  documents  to
            support the appeal (paragraph 5)

            (b)   Mr Bajwa's very brief submissions (paragraph 17)

            (c)   Mr Bajwa did not seek to persuade me ... All he  did  was
            to ask me to accept the appellant's story ... And to allow  her
            appeal on that basis. (Paragraph 18)

            (d)   Mr Bajwa stated article 8  was  not  being  relied  upon.
            Paragraph 21'

    10. Mr Sharma adopted the grounds of appeal and submitted that the cases
        of JL and Ishitaq assisted the  appellant.  He  submitted  that  the
        judge had misdirected himself as to the proper approach. In response
        to my question Mr Sharma confirmed that no application had been made
        at the First-tier tribunal hearing  either  for  the  matter  to  be
        adjourned or for the case to be heard by  an  all-female  court.  He
        submitted that it was  open  to  the  tribunal  to  infer  that  the
        appellant felt uncomfortable. He submitted that when the tribunal is
        dealing with issues of this  nature  they  should  be  cautious.  In
        particular, the appellant's background is one of  conservatism,  she
        is from Pakistan. He referred to her conservative appearance and the
        background information provided in support. He submitted that  those
        factors together with  the  nature  of  the  answers  given  by  the
        appellant should have highlighted to the judge  that  something  was
        not right. He submitted that the judge fell into  error  in  finding
        that there was no evidence to support the appellant's assertions. He
        submitted that there was sufficient evidence that there was a strong
        possibility that the appellant had suffered domestic violence.

    11. Mr Sharma submitted that the complaint about the representation  had
        been put to Bajwa and Co. He submitted that the  representation  was
        so inadequate that the judge should have adjourned the matter.  When
        looking at the content of the bundle of documents it is  clear  that
        supporting documents have not been included that were available.  He
        submitted that although Article 8  was  not  being  pursued  it  was
        improper not to consider paragraph 276ADE. There is no reference  to
        Article 8 in that paragraph. He submitted that the  brevity  of  the
        determination and the appeal bundle has resulted  in  the  appellant
        not being able to make her case properly yet

    12. Mr Tarlow relied on the Rule 24 (of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
        Tribunal) Rules 2008) response. He submitted that  the  standard  of
        proof is the civil standard which is the balance  of  probabilities,
        there is no lower standard in domestic violence cases. He  submitted
        that the judge could reasonably do what he had to do  which  was  to
        make a finding on the evidence as to whether or  not  the  appellant
        had been a victim of domestic violence.  He  submitted  that  it  is
        clear from paragraphs 17 and 18 that the  judge  took  into  account
        that there is no mention of evidence of domestic  violence  made  by
        the health professionals. The finding of the judge was entirely open
        to him. He noted that no evidence has been produced today  that  the
        complaint had been made to Bajwa  and  Co.  He  submitted  that  the
        determination is more than adequate, there  are  sufficient  reasons
        and that there was no material error of law.

Discussion

    13. I will deal with the fifth ground of appeal first.  It  is  asserted
        that the representation by Bajwa and Co  was  wholly  inadequate  so
        that the failure of the judge to  adjourn  amounted  to  a  material
        error of law.

    14. In BT (Former solicitors' alleged  misconduct)  Nepal  [2004]  UKIAT
        00311 the Tribunal considered:

            "4.   Ms Tucker asserts that the  letter  from  the  solicitors
            dated 11 August was in response to the Appellant's  refusal  to
            pay their fees. We do not know whether or not that is right and
            we decline to make any finding against Adams  Solicitors  in  a
            case in which, although allegations are made implicitly against
            them, they have been given no opportunity at all  to  reply  to
            them. If the certificate which they gave in July is true,  then
            the reason for the letter of 11 August may, in truth,  be  that
            the Appellant had decided no  longer  to  retain  them  as  her
            solicitors. We do not know.

            5.    We wish to make it clear that, in general,  we  will  not
            make a finding of fact based on an  allegation  against  former
            representatives unless, first, it  is  clear  that  the  former
            representatives have been given an opportunity  to  respond  to
            the allegation which is  being  made  expressly  or  implicitly
            against them, and secondly, we are either shown the response or
            shown correspondence which indicates that  there  has  been  no
            response."

    15. In this case the appellant now indicates that a complaint  has  been
        made to Bajwa  and  Co.  However,  no  correspondence  was  provided
        indicating such and neither was any response available.  In  respect
        of the assertion that the judge made comments about the  quality  of
        the representation and the particular paragraphs quoted I find  that
        these are not critical about the quality of the representation.  For
        example, the appellant's 'quote' from paragraph 18 is taken  out  of
        context and is misleading:

            "Mr Bajwa did not seek to persuade me... All he did was to  ask
            me to accept the appellant's story... And to allow  her  appeal
            on that basis. (Paragraph 18)"

    16. At paragraph 18 the judge  was  referring  to  whether  or  not  the
        appellant was suffering from suicidal ideation when he set out:

            "There is no evidence to suggest that the appellant is suicidal
            or that she is suffering from suicidal ideation and  again,  Mr
            Bajwa did not seek to persuade me that this  was  the  case  or
            that it was a relevant consideration here. All he  did  was  to
            ask me to accept the appellant's story regarding what she  said
            she suffered at the hands of her  husband,  and  to  allow  the
            appeal on that basis."

    17. I do  not  find  that  the  judge's  comments  referred  to  by  the
        appellant, either individually or collectively,  are  indicative  of
        the judge having concerns about the quality of  the  representation.
        No specific details of the inadequacy of  representation  have  been
        given. No written evidence of a formal complaint and a response from
        Bajwa and Co have been provided. I do not consider that it  was  not
        incumbent upon the  judge  to  adjourn  the  matter.  There  was  no
        material error of law.

    18. The fourth ground of appeal is that the judge conducted the  hearing
        in an unfair manner. No application was made by  the  appellant  for
        the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal to be  before  an  all-female
        court. There was no application for an adjournment.

    19. It is asserted that the issues were  approached  in  an  insensitive
        manner and that the  appellant's  un-comfortability  with  answering
        intimate questions could explain why her answers appeared vague. The
        appellant  did  indicate  (in  correspondence)  that  she  had  felt
        embarrassed in discussing the details of  her  marital  relationship
        because her representative was male. The judge  concluded  that  the
        failure by  the  appellant  to  explain  what  he  saw  as  a  major
        discrepancy in the evidence 'significantly damages her credibility'.
        However, the judge did not consider solely the evidence given orally
        during the hearing he also considered the application,  the  witness
        statements of 28 August 2014 and 18 August 2015 and the  information
        provided to her GP and other  health  professionals.  Whilst  it  is
        incumbent upon a judge to ensure that a hearing is conducted  fairly
        which includes ensuring that any questioning is  appropriate  it  is
        not incumbent upon a judge to ascertain whether or not the appellant
        was content to proceed with an all-male court purely on the basis of
        a mention in a letter that the appellant had been uncomfortable  and
        when the appellant was legally represented at the hearing. I do  not
        consider that the judge conducted the hearing in an unfair manner.

    20. I also note (although this is  not  a  point  I  have  taken  in  to
        consideration in my error of law decision) that  the  appellant  was
        represented by Mr Sharma, a male barrister, at the hearing before me
        and no application had been made for an  all-female  court  for  the
        Upper Tribunal hearing. If an error of law  was  found  the  hearing
        would ordinarily proceed with a view to re-making  the  decision  in
        the Upper Tribunal which may entail giving evidence and being  cross
        examined.

    21. It is also argued that the judge's finding that  the  appellant  had
        concocted an elaborately elaborate  scenario  in  order  to  achieve
        indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  was  wholly  unfair  and
        inaccurate and not a finding open to the judge because this  ignores
        the possibility that the appellant  could  succeed  under  paragraph
        276ADE and there are protection issues arising based upon the  risks
        that the appellant would face an account  of  her  membership  of  a
        particular social group. The appellant's representative informed the
        judge that Article 8 was not being pursued.  No  grounds  appear  to
        have been pursued in relation to the appellant's private life either
        under  paragraph  276ADE  or  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   No
        application for asylum or humanitarian  protection  has  been  made.
        There was no error in the judge failing to consider either of  these
        issues in the circumstances.

    22. The first ground of appeal argues that the judge erred by failing to
        follow the case of JL. It is asserted that correct standard of proof
        in domestic violence matters is a low standard.

    23. In the headnote in JL the Tribunal set out:

            "2.   Evidence of domestic violence. If (but only if) there has
            been a valid application, the Immigration Judge is not confined
            on an appeal to the evidence "required"  by  the  Secretary  of
            State, nor is  an  appeal  bound  to  fail  if  the  "required"
            evidence  has  not  been  produced.  The  question  of  whether
            domestic violence has occurred is to be determined on the basis
            of all the evidence before  the  Immigration  Judge.  Paragraph
            289A(iv) is to be read down to reflect this."

    24. There is no finding that the standard of proof is  a  low  standard.
        The  issue  concerned  the  requirement  in  the  IDIs  for  certain
        specified 'required evidence' to be produced. The Tribunal held:

            "38. The suggestion that  an  appellant  appearing  before  the
            Tribunal and seeking to prove a fact of which he has the burden
            of proof is limited to proving it  by  evidence  and  on  terms
            prescribed by the respondent is a somewhat  alarming  one.  The
            terms  of  paragraph  289A  of  the   Immigration   Rules,   if
            interpreted in the sense for which the respondent contends, and
            if directly applicable, as he submits, to the determination  of
            an appeal, apparently mean that any evidence available  to  the
            appellant, however independent and however persuasive,  can  be
            excluded from the decision-making and appellate process by  the
            respondent simply not "requiring" it. Further, an appellant who
            is unable  to  produce  evidence  that  is  "required"  by  the
            respondent will be prevented from  proving  his  case,  however
            persuasive the other evidence that he submits. If the Secretary
            of State's case  is  right,  the  Immigration  Judge  could  be
            required to dismiss the appeal, and to  ignore  the  persuasive
            evidence, for the simple reason that  the  evidence  "required"
            had not been submitted...

            46.  For  this  reason  we  consider  that  the  provisions  of
            paragraph 289A that refer to the need to provide  the  evidence
            "required" by the Secretary of  State  apply  only  within  the
            parameters  of  s31A  and  the  Regulations.   Once   a   valid
            application has been made the role of the "requirement"  ceases
            and, in accordance with the power to make them under  s3(2)  of
            the 1971 Act, the provisions of paragraph 289A should  be  read
            without reference to the requirement. On  this  view,  for  the
            purposes of an appeal, paragraph 289A(iv) is to  be  read  down
            as:

            "(iv) is able to establish that the relationship was caused  to
            permanently break down before the  end  of  that  period  as  a
            result of domestic violence.""

    25. In Ishtiaq the Court of Appeal confirmed that an applicant should be
        expected to produce evidence of the kind provided  for  in  the  IDI
        guidance but if she cannot then any cogent relevant evidence can  be
        taken into account:

            "31.  In my judgment, para 289A(iv) should be construed  so  as
            to further the policy of enabling persons  whose  relationships
            have permanently broken down as a result of  domestic  violence
            before the  end  of  the  probationary  period  to  be  granted
            indefinite leave to remain. A construction which  precludes  an
            applicant, whose relationship has in  fact  broken  down  as  a
            result of domestic violence, from proving her case by producing
            cogent relevant evidence would defeat the  evident  purpose  of
            the rule. The purpose of para 289A(iv) is to  specify  what  an
            applicant has to prove in order to qualify for indefinite leave
            to  remain  during  the  probationary  period:  viz  that   the
            relationship has been caused to break  down  permanently  as  a
            result of domestic violence. It is  not  the  purpose  of  para
            289A(iv) to deny indefinite  leave  to  remain  to  victims  of
            domestic violence who can prove their case, but cannot do so in
            one of the ways that have been prescribed by the  Secretary  of
            State in his instructions to caseworkers." [emphasis added]

    26. In Balakoohi, the High Court set out that independent and  objective
        evidence is not required to establish a claim for domestic violence.

            "83.  Finding. It is not correct that independent and objective
            evidence must be provided to establish  a  claim  for  domestic
            violence. As Dyson LJ explains in his judgment in Ishtiaq , the
            applicant should be expected to produce evidence  of  the  kind
            provided for in  the  IDI  guidance.  Where  such  evidence  is
            lacking, the decision-maker should, where appropriate, ask  the
            applicant to produce further evidence which is independent  and
            objective, namely evidence which supports or  corroborates  the
            applicant's evidence but which is derived from a  source  other
            than the applicant. If the applicant gives good reasons for not
            being able to produce it, she should be permitted  to  rely  on
            whatever evidence she wishes. It  will  be  for  the  decision-
            maker, in carrying out the structured  decision-making  process
            using all evidence provided, to decide how much  weight  should
            be placed upon that all the evidence including  evidence  which
            is self-serving or lacking  in  independence  and  objectivity.
            [emphasis added]"

    27. The cases establish that the question of whether  domestic  violence
        has occurred is to be determined on the basis of  all  the  evidence
        before the Immigration Judge. The weight  to  be  attached  to  that
        evidence is a matter for the judge. The cases  do  not  support  the
        appellant's assertion that there is a lower  standard  of  proof  in
        domestic violence cases. The judge applied the correct  standard  as
        set  out  on  paragraph  6  of  the  decision  namely,  balance   of
        probabilities.

    28. Grounds 2 and 3 are interrelated. Ground 2  argues  that  the  judge
        applied a higher standard of proof than  balance  of  probabilities.
        Reference is made to paragraph 12 of the decision  where  the  judge
        found:

            "There was in fact no proper supporting evidence to  show  that
            the appellant had been the victim of any domestic violence..."

    29. Ground 3 argues that the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  evidence
        appropriately.

    30. The judge did consider the evidence in the appellant's bundle  which
        was at pages 2-12. He describes this as letters  from  the  NHS.  He
        also considered documents sent in support of the  application  which
        included notes from her GP. The judge did  not  consider  that  this
        evidence showed  that  the  appellant  had  suffered  from  domestic
        violence. When looking at the evidence it is clear that  his  was  a
        finding open to the judge.  The two GP notes of 16 August  2013  and
        16 January 2014 make no mention of domestic violence being reported.
        The impression is one that the appellant was depressed  because  her
        in laws had taken her husband to  their  house  and  they  had  been
        brainwashing him against her and subsequently  because  her  husband
        had moved out and sent divorce papers. The GP  notes  record  on  17
        February 2015 - history of domestic  violence  (First).  The  letter
        from her psychiatrist on 16 December 2014 does not mention  domestic
        violence. The letter dated 4 February 2015 from her community social
        worker mentions abuse from her in-laws -  no  specific  details  are
        given. The letter dated 29 October 2014 from a counsellor refers  to
        the appellant disclosing that she is being harassed by her former  -
        in laws which she described as mentally torturing  her  -  this  was
        because they continue to send her  bills.  As  the  judge  correctly
        pointed out at best these indicate that the appellant  has  reported
        that she has been the victim of domestic abuse. This does  not  lead
        to a conclusion that the judge considered that objective independent
        supporting evidence was  a  requirement.  The  question  of  whether
        domestic violence has occurred is to be determined on the  basis  of
        all the evidence before the judge. The weight to be attached to that
        evidence is a matter for the judge. The judge  had  the  benefit  of
        seeing the appellant and hearing her giving oral  evidence.  He  was
        able to assess her credibility at first hand. The evidence  in  this
        case is not consistent. The application provides no detail of sexual
        abuse or specific incidents that amount to domestic violence.  There
        were a number of complaints about her in-laws  and  of  her  husband
        being rude. The witness statement  in  support  of  her  application
        mentions that after an argument her husband packed his bags and went
        back to his fathers "I have  been  crying  and  contacted  him  many
        times. I even apologised if there is anything wrong  I've  said.  He
        does not want to live together and  wanted  a  divorce."  There  are
        several other pieces of evidence that similarly  paint  a  different
        picture to the appellant's later evidence. The judge considered  all
        the evidence in the round. The findings were ones that were open  to
        him.

    31. The judge did not require up  to  date  evidence.  When  considering
        paragraph 17 it is clear that what the judge  was  referring  to  is
        evidence of the appellant's suicidal ideation which  may  have  been
        relevant and would need to be assessed at a current date.

    32. There are no material errors  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        decision.

Decision

There was no error of law such that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
is set aside.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 10 June 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
