
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/26000/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 4 August 2015                     |On 18 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                            JIBAN KUMARI BHANDARI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Aitken, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Brown, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal whose date of birth is recorded  as
    1 January 1955.  She entered the UK as a visitor on 3 October 2013.  By
    application dated 24 March 2014 she  sought  leave  to  remain  as  the
    dependent relative of her son.  She could not meet the requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules but relied on Article 8 of the ECHR  outwith  the
    Rules, relying on strong family  life  with  her  UK  sponsor  and  his
    family, absence of other family members in Nepal  to  provide  support,
    and health care needs.

 2. The respondent refused her application on 4 June 2014.  She appealed to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Judge  Morrison  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  determination
    promulgated on 19 November 2014.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    following grounds:-

         "1. Having regard to irrelevant considerations.  A  medical  report
         described the appellant's condition including  severely  restricted
         mobility.  At paragraph 21(i) the Judge said:  "The  appellant  was
         able  to  enter  and  leave  the  hearing  room  without  requiring
         assistance either from her son or any form of mechanical assistance
         and for that reason I am only prepared to place limited  weight  on
         Dr Shah's report" ... the Judge was not in a position of  expertise
         to restrict the medical evidence ... clearly an important factor in
         the assessment of Article 8 especially when one considers  that  he
         has made a finding that a strong family life  existed  between  the
         appellant and the sponsor.

         2. Error in consideration of availability  of  care  facilities  in
         Nepal.  At paragraph 20 the Judge states:  "In addition there is no
         suggestion that either the appellant or  sponsor  carried  out  any
         research of their own in relation to availability or  affordability
         of care services in Nepal".   However,  at  paragraph  21(iii)  the
         Judge refers to a letter from the city council which confirms  that
         there was no provision for care homes for the elderly ... the Judge
         also erred by irrationally placing no weight on the  report  simply
         on the basis that "it has also been prepared for the purpose of the
         application and there is no  other  evidence  ...  that  care  home
         facilities or day to day care are not available in Nepal or if such
         care is available then it would not be affordable."

         3. The Judge has therefore failed to carry out a proper  assessment
         of the appellant's Article 8 case.  Clearly in circumstances  where
         a Judge has made findings that a strong family life existed between
         the appellant and her son and that the appellant had no other close
         relatives in Nepal the findings ... in respect of  the  appellant's
         health condition and availability of care were material factors  in
         any Article 8 assessment.  In erroneously failing to take them into
         account the Judge has erred in law."

 5. A First-Tier Tribunal Judge refused permission to  appeal,  considering
    the grounds to  be  only  disagreement  and  an  attempt  to  re-argue.
    However,  on  12  May  2015  a  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  granted
    permission, saying:

         "On balance there is sufficient in  the  grounds  to  make  out  an
         arguable  case  that  the  Judge  erred  in  his  approach  to  the
         appellant's evidence.  It is arguable that the Judge adopted a  two
         stage consideration of ... Article 8 ... - R (MM &  Others)  [2014]
         EWCA Civ 985, Ganesabalan [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin)."

Submissions for appellant.

 6. Further to ground 1: the Judge by using the phrase  "for  that  reason"
    made his view trenchantly clear.  Even if he was entitled to take  some
    account of his own common sense observations, he made too much of  them
    and too little of  medical  evidence  which  included  a  record  of  a
    shoulder injury as a result of a fall, which  confirmed  an  underlying
    mobility problem.  The point was obviously material, being a factor  in
    finding there to be no good arguable case.

 7. Ground 2: the appellant had produced a letter from her local  authority
    in Nepal showing that there was no provision for care for the  elderly.
    Research had been carried out.  That was the best  evidence  available.
    The Judge provided insufficient reasoning for not accepting it.

 8. Ground 3: the Judge had made an unusually strong  positive  finding  of
    family life  between  adults,  based  on  the  appellant's  dependency.
    Reflecting the terms of the grant of permission, the Judge  should  not
    have found a two stage approach to be a barrier to  full  consideration
    of Article 8.  The Judge did touch on such matters at paragraph 30, but
    that was inadequate.

 9. The determination should be set aside and a fresh hearing ordered as it
    might be appropriate to have further evidence on  the  availability  of
    care facilities in Nepal.

Submissions for respondent.

10. It was for the Judge to give such weight as  he  thought  fit  to  each
    aspect of the evidence including the medical report.  He  was  entitled
    to take account of his own observations so as to lessen the  weight  to
    be given to the report.  Reading his  determination  fairly  and  as  a
    whole, that was only one of a number of reasons.  At paragraphs 18  and
    19 (i) - (iv), in  particular,  the  Judge  gave  several  reasons  for
    finding that the appellant sought to mislead  the  respondent  and  the
    Tribunal, that there were significant discrepancies  in  the  evidence,
    and that she was all in all an unimpressive witness.   It  was  notable
    that the medical report and the letter  from  the  local  authority  in
    Nepal had both been obtained prior to  the  appellant's  entry  to  the
    United Kingdom.  She admitted (although her son denied) that  she  came
    here with the intention of remaining.  She had prepared the way  for  a
    further in-country  application  and  entered  under  false  pretences.
    Those justified findings properly diminished the weight to be given  to
    the documentary evidence as to which the judge was said  to  have  gone
    wrong.  The first and second grounds had to be seen  in  that  context.
    The degree of weight to be given to the documents was  for  the  Judge.
    That could  be  interfered  with  only  on  grounds  of  perversity  or
    irrationality, which were not averred.  The appellant  complained  that
    there was error in the assessment of availability of care in Nepal  but
    that was not relevant as she had not been found to have any significant
    care needs, which was a prior consideration.  There  was  no  error  of
    approach arising from the third ground of appeal or from  any  question
    of  a  two  stage  or  single  stage  approach  to  Article   8.    The
    determination at paragraph 30 made it clear what the  Judge's  view  on
    proportionality was in any event.  A  finding  of  strong  family  life
    between the appellant and sponsor did not entitle her to  a  successful
    outcome.  A comparison could be drawn with Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 630 at
    paragraph 25 where the Court of Appeal found that the debate whether an
    applicant has or has not a family life for the purposes  of  Article  8
    was "liable to  be  arid  and  academic"  because  the  proportionality
    factors were the same regardless of whether family or private life  was
    engaged.  The  determination  referred  to  all  relevant  factors  and
    contained all that was required to address Article 8 whether treated in
    one or in two stages.

Discussion and conclusions.

11. The Judge was entitled to observe that despite her claims  of  severely
    restricted mobility the appellant entered and  left  the  hearing  room
    without assistance.  That was a sensible reason for limiting the weight
    to be placed on Dr Shah's report.  The Judge did not give the report no
    weight at all.  His use of the phrase "for that reason" should  not  be
    construed so strictly  as  to  avoid  reference  to  the  rest  of  the
    determination.  He gave several good reasons for finding the  appellant
    an unimpressive witness, with which reasons no quarrel  could  properly
    be taken.

12. The Judge expressed himself clearly and strongly also on  the  document
    from the local authority, saying that he was "not prepared to place any
    weight" upon it, but again that should not be  taken  out  of  context.
    The Judge was correct to observe that there was no evidence  that  care
    home facilities or day to day care  were  not  available  elsewhere  in
    Nepal or that they would not be affordable.  The  appellant's  son  has
    supported her from the UK and could continue to do so if  she  were  in
    Nepal, where the costs of assistance are likely to be  lower.   As  the
    Presenting Officer pointed out, she was not  found  to  have  any  very
    significant care needs  apart  from,  as  accepted  by  the  Judge,  "a
    restricted range of movement in her shoulder which may  interfere  with
    some of her day to day activities".  Even at highest and at face  value
    the letter could not advance the appellant's case very far.

13. The appellant accepted that her case  fell  short  of  the  Immigration
    Rules in respect of adult dependent relatives  with  care  needs.   The
    Judge correctly took those Rules as a starting point at  paragraph  23.
    The submission was made to him that those  provisions  themselves  were
    not compliant with Article 8, but the Judge was  not  persuaded.   That
    argument has rightly not been pursued in the Upper Tribunal.

14. Asif Ali Ashiq [2015] CSIH 31  was  a  judicial  review  case  but  its
    observations are equally applicable to the  approach  to  be  taken  by
    tribunals.  Giving the opinion of the Court, Lady Smith said:

         [4] The rules cannot, however, be construed as providing a complete
         code for all article 8 claims: MS v Secretary of State for the Home
         Department;  MF  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department. Facts and circumstances are bound to arise from time to
         time which were  not expressly foreseen  by  the  drafters  of  the
         rules yet are such as  might,  on  an  application  of  article  8,
         require the grant of a right to remain. The rules do  not  dispense
         with the duty, under primary legislation (the Human Rights Act), of
         those who make decisions about family life claims  to  comply  with
         the provisions of the convention. Nor could they properly have done
         so; their exposure to the democratic process, as explained  in  MS,
         was limited. Thus, if a family life claim arises and  it  does  not
         qualify under the rules, the Secretary of  State  must  nonetheless
         consider it, in implement of her statutory duty.

         [5] But how is a decision maker to do that and to show  that,  when
         reaching his decision, he recognised and understood his  article  8
         duties? How is he to show that he did not  confine  himself  to  an
         application of the rules? The answer has been discussed in a number
         of recent cases (Izuazu (Article 8 -  new  Rules)  [2013]  UKUT;  R
         (Nagre) v Home Secretary [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin); MS v Secretary of
         State for the Home Department; Singh v Secretary of State  for  the
         Home  Department,  Khalid  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
         Department [2015] EWCA Civ 74). These discussions  refer  to  there
         being two stages - first, consideration of  whether  the  applicant
         can bring himself within the new rules and then, secondly, whether,
         considering article 8 separately from the rules,  leave  to  remain
         should be  granted.  Equally,  however,  as  the  discussions  have
         progressed, it has been made clear  that  it  is  not  a  formulaic
         approach that is required. The point is, rather, one of  substance.
         The decision maker needs to show  that  the  application  has  been
         considered by reference to the rules and  that  it  has  also  been
         considered simply by reference to article 8 but the need is for him
         to  do  that,  not  to  do  it  in  a  particular  way.  No   doubt
         consideration by reference to the rules will  normally  take  place
         first. If it is not decided that leave to remain can be granted  on
         that basis, the decision maker will then need to address article 8.
         It may be that, at that stage, the decision  maker  concludes  that
         any family or private life issues raised have in fact already  been
         fully addressed at the first stage  in  which  case,  adopting  the
         language of Underhill LJ in Singh v Secretary of State for the Home
         Department at paragraph 66, "obviously  there  is  no  need  to  go
         through it all again" and all that will be  necessary  is  for  the
         decision maker, "to say so".  There will be no need  to  conduct  a
         full separate examination of the facts on an application of article
         8 outside the rules if all the relevant issues  have  already  been
         addressed in the consideration under the rules.

         [6] An issue arose before us, albeit somewhat tangentially,  as  to
         whether there is an intermediary test - between consideration under
         the Rules and consideration  outside  the  rules  -  involving  the
         decision maker deciding whether the application  includes  a  "good
         arguable case" that leave should be granted on article  8  grounds,
         outside the Rules and only if he concludes that it does,  going  on
         to assess that claim. The discussions in paragraph  30  of  MS  and
         paragraphs 29 - 30 of Nagre might be thought to suggest that  there
         is an  entirely  separate  stage  involving  such  a  test.  In  MM
         (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA
         Civ 985, Aikens LJ said, at paragraph 129, that he  could  not  see
         much utility in imposing such a further, intermediary, test; if the
         applicant cannot satisfy the rules, then there either is  or  there
         is not a  further  article  8  claim  and  that  will  have  to  be
         determined by the relevant decision-maker. We agree. That is  what,
         essentially, was clarified in Izuazu, MS, and MF and we do not read
         the references to "good arguable case" as imposing another separate
         hurdle to be overcome by  an  applicant.  The  reference  to  "good
         arguable case" must, we consider, be read as referring to the  need
         for it to be evident from the terms  of  the  application  that  an
         article 8 issue arises. For the avoidance of doubt, we do not  read
         it as, in a fresh application case, detracting from  the  terms  of
         Rule 353 (see below). It does not raise the bar any higher than the
         need for there to be "realistic prospects" of the claim succeeding.
         That was recognised by the court  in  MS  where,  having  discussed
         whether the petitioner had  presented  a  good  arguable  case,  it
         observed that, in concluding that there was no  realistic  prospect
         of the claim succeeding  before  an  immigration  judge,  the  Lord
         Ordinary had "taken in the ambit of the test that we have adopted."
         (at paragraph 36)

15. Paragraph 29 of the present determination makes it clear that the Judge
    did not think this to be a case requiring a full  separate  examination
    under Article 8.  He came to that view notwithstanding his finding of a
    strong family life among the appellant, her son and  his  family  which
    had not been considered in detail by the respondent.

16. If the Judge did think  there  to  be  intermediate  test,  he  clearly
    thought it was a lower one.  The outcome would have been no  different.
    As the Court said in Ashiq, the issue is not one of the formula adopted
    but of substance.  Paragraph 30 of  the  determination  says  all  that
    might be needed.

17. The Judge in my view made no material error by taking  account  to  the
    extent that he did of his observations of the appellant's mobility,  by
    placing limited weight on the report of Dr  Shah,  and  by  placing  no
    weight on the letter from the local authority.  Nor  did  he  make  any
    material error in relation to the assessment of the case under  Article
    8.  He came to a view on the whole facts and  circumstances  which  was
    plainly open to him, which was properly justified.

18. It is not strictly necessary  to  go  further  than  that  for  present
    purposes, but I do  not  think  there  could  realistically  have  been
    another outcome under Article 8 of the  ECHR  outside  the  Rules.   If
    there had been any error of approach which required a  fresh  decision,
    then on the evidence and submissions advanced for both  sides  I  would
    have had no difficulty in reaching the same result.

19. The determination of the First-Tier Tribunal shall stand.


           [pic]


           6 August 2015
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
