
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26033/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 May 2015                       |On 21 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                             HEATHER LEIGH VOGEL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Burnett, instructed by Pickup Scott Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Holmes, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of South Africa  born  15  July  1989.   She
    entered the United Kingdom on 28 May  2008  as  a  visitor  with  leave
    conferred until 29 November 2008, and has lived here since  that  date.
    The appellant thereafter made an application for leave to remain  as  a
    dependent relative, which was refused in July  2009.  She  subsequently
    made an application for a Certificate of  Entitlement  to  a  Right  of
    Abode, but this application was rejected in a decision of 5 August 2011
    and the Secretary of State thereafter maintained her position  in  this
    regard in a decision of 6 November 2012.

 2. A further application for a Certificate of Entitlement to  a  Right  of
    Abode was made by the appellant on the 17  May  2013,  which  was  once
    again refused on 12 June 2013. The substance of this decision reads  as
    follows:

         "You have applied for a Certificate of Entitlement on the basis  of
         being born outside the United Kingdom after 1  January  1983  to  a
         person born, registered or naturalised in the United Kingdom  prior
         to your birth.

         You have provided  birth  certificates  for  your  father,  mother,
         paternal grandparents and marriage certificates  for  your  parents
         and paternal grandparents in support of your claim.  Based  on  the
         evidence provided the Secretary of State is of the opinion that you
         have no claim to a Certificate of Entitlement.

         Your father was born in South Africa in 1965 and became  a  British
         citizen and citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies at birth  by
         descent under Section 5(1) of the British Nationality Act 1948  due
         to his father being born  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Any  consular
         registration after his birth did not alter his birth status.   Your
         father became a British citizen by descent on 1 January 1983  under
         Section  11(1)  of  the  British  Nationality  Act  1981.   British
         citizenship cannot be passed down  by  two  generations  except  in
         certain circumstances, none of which apply in  this  case.  We  are
         unable to proceed with your application."

 3. The appellant appealed this decision to the First-tier Tribunal and, by
    way of a determination  promulgated  on  4  November  2013,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hopkins dismissed the appeal  on  all  grounds.   On  11
    March  2014  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Perkins  granted   the   appellant
    permission to appeal and thus the matter came before me,  initially  on
    the 9 April 2014.

Error of Law

 4. At the outset  of  the  aforementioned  hearing  Miss  Holmes  properly
    accepted that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  by  failing  to
    undertake a substantive consideration of  the  Article  8  ECHR  ground
    relied upon by the appellant.

 5. As to the issue of whether the appellant is entitled to  a  Certificate
    of Entitlement, it is clear this revolves around  the  application  and
    relevance of section  7  of  the  British  Nationality  Act  1948  -  a
    provision  which  the  First-tier   Tribunal   failed   to   give   any
    consideration to. As a consequence, Ms Holmes also  accepted  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's determination of this issue was  also  flawed  by
    legal error.

 6.  For  the  above  reasons  I  found  that  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
    determination contained an error on a point of law capable of affecting
    the outcome of the appeal and I set it aside. The hearing of the appeal
    was subsequently adjourned.

 7. Unfortunately, in the  period  that  followed  there  were  substantial
    difficulties in finding a  date  for  the  further  hearing  which  was
    convenient  to  both   myself   and   the   parties'   representatives.
    Regrettably this could not be achieved until 28 May 2015.   This  delay
    did though have the positive consequence of  enabling  the  parties  to
    obtain further evidence in relation to their respective cases,  all  of
    which has been of  significant  assistance  to  me  in  coming  to  the
    conclusions set out below.

Remaking of decision under appeal

Dramatis Personae

 8. In order to properly set the  submissions  in  context  I  shall  first
    identify the dramatis personae as well as the facts which  are  not  in
    dispute.

 9. The appellant's paternal grandfather, Mr Allen Vogel, was born  in  the
    United Kingdom on 5 July 1940.  He married Ms Eileen Vogel on  4  April
    1964 - Ms Vogel also being born in the  United  Kingdom,  on  11  April
    1944.  Both of the  appellant's  paternal  grandparents  are  therefore
    British nationals by birth.

10. They lived together in South Africa where their  son,  the  appellant's
    father Mr Allan Seton Vogel, was born on 11 July 1965.  At the time  of
    his birth the appellant's father was a citizen of  the  United  Kingdom
    and Colonies by descent by operation of Section  5(1)  of  the  British
    Nationality Act 1948.  On 25 June 1969 the appellant's  father's  birth
    was registered at the British Consulate  in  Johannesburg.  It  is  the
    purpose, effect and consequence of this  registration  that  forms  the
    core of the appellant's claim to be a British citizen.

11. The appellant's parents married in South Africa on 15 July 1989 and the
    appellant was born in that country on 1 December 1989.

Entitlement to a Right of Abode

Summary of Submissions

12. No disrespect in meant in summarising the parties' submissions  in  the
    terms that I do below.   Both  parties  made  comprehensive  and  well-
    structured submissions of some complexity but they can be resolved down
    to the following points.

13. Mr Burnett submits that the registration of  the  appellant's  father's
    birth at the British Consulate in Johannesburg on 25 June  1969  was  a
    registration falling within the confines of Section 7  of  the  British
    Nationality Act 1948.  The consequence  of  such  registration,  it  is
    said, was that the appellant's father became a CUKC "otherwise than  by
    descent" as of its date. Prior to this, the appellant's father had been
    a CUKC "by descent" as a consequence of the operation of section  5  of
    the 1948 Act.

14. It is said that  the  appellant's  father  was,  therefore,  a  British
    citizen "otherwise than by descent" as of the date of  the  appellant's
    birth. As a consequence the appellant, having  been  born  outside  the
    United Kingdom after the coming into force of the 1981 Act, is  also  a
    British citizen by operation of section 2(1)(a) of that Act.

15. Miss Holmes disputes little of the above analysis save  that  she  does
    not accept (1) that the appellant's father has been registered pursuant
    to Section 7 of the 1948 Act or, (2) if he was so registered that  such
    registration had the effect of altering his  status  from  a  CUKC  "by
    descent" to a CUKC "otherwise than by  descent".  Consequently,  it  is
    said that he became a British Citizen "by descent" upon commencement of
    the British Nationality  Act  1981  and,  in  such  circumstances,  the
    appellant is not a British citizen - as to which see  section  2(1)  of
    the 1981 Act.

Legal Framework

16. It is prudent at  this  stage  to  set  out  the  relevant  legislative
    framework in some detail.

17. Sections 2 and 14 of the British Nationality Act 1981 read as follows:

         "2.  Acquisition by Descent

             (1)   A  person  born  outside  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
                  qualifying  territories  after  commencement  shall  be  a
                  British citizen if at the time of the birth his father  or
                  mother -

                   a) Is a British citizen otherwise than by descent ...

         14.  Meaning of British Citizen (by descent).

               1) For the purposes of this  Act   a  British  citizen  is  a
                  British citizen 'by descent' if and only if -

                   a) ....

                   b) Subject to  Subsection  (2),  he  is  a  person  born
                      outside the United Kingdom  before  commencement  who
                      became  a  British  citizen   at   commencement   and
                      immediately before commencement:

                        i) Was a citizen of the United Kingdom and  Colonies
                           by virtue of s. 5 of the 1948 Act (citizenship by
                           descent)...."

18. Turning to the British Nationality Act 1948 - sections 5 and 7 read:

         "5.  Citizenship by Descent

               1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a  person  born
                  after the commencement of this Act shall be a  citizen  of
                  the United Kingdom and Colonies by descent if  his  father
                  is a citizen of the United Kingdom  and  Colonies  at  the
                  time of birth.

               2) Provided that if the father of such a person is a  citizen
                  of the United Kingdom and Colonies by descent  only,  that
                  person shall not be a citizen of the  United  Kingdom  and
                  Colonies by virtue of this section unless -

                   a) ...

                   b) That person's birth having occurred in a place  in  a
                      foreign  country  other  than  a  place  such  as  is
                      mentioned in the last forgoing paragraph,  the  birth
                      is registered at a United  Kingdom  Consulate  within
                      one year of its occurrence, or, with  the  permission
                      of the Secretary of State, later; or...

         7.   Registration of Minors

               1) The Secretary of State may cause the minor  child  of  any
                  citizen  of  the  United  Kingdom  and  Colonies   to   be
                  registered as a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies
                  upon application made in the prescribed manner by a parent
                  or guardian of the child.

               2) The Secretary of State may, in such special  circumstances
                  as he thinks fit, cause any minor to be  registered  as  a
                  citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies."

19. Moving on to the regulations relevant  to  my  consideration.   I  turn
    first to the British Nationality Regulations 1948  (Number  2721/1948).
    Paragraph 3 of these Regulations reads as follows:

         "3.  An application for the registration of  a  minor  child  of  a
             citizen of the  United  Kingdom  and  Colonies  as  a  citizen
             thereof made under subsection (1) of  section  7  of  the  Act
             shall be made in  writing  and  shall  include  the  following
             particulars, that is to say:-

               a) A statement whether the applicant is a parent or  guardian
                  of the child and, if he is a guardian,  how  he  became  a
                  guardian;

               b) A statement showing that a parent of the child is,  or  if
                  deceased  was,  a  citizen  of  the  United  Kingdom   and
                  Colonies;

               c) A statement of the reasons for which it  is  desired  that
                  the child should be registered as a citizen of the  United
                  Kingdom and Colonies."

20. Paragraph 5(3) of the same Regulations states:

         "5(3)    An application made in accordance  with  Regulation  3  of
             these Regulations shall be made to the  authorities  specified
             in the last foregoing paragraph, so  however  that  references
             therein to the place of residence of the  applicant  shall  be
             construed as references to the place of residence of the minor
             child in respect of whom the application is made."

21. Regulation 19(1) reads:-

         "19(1) Subject to  the  provisions  of  this  Regulation,  the  fee
             specified in the Seventh Schedule hereto  may  in  the  United
             Kingdom be taken shall be applied in the manner set out in the
             said Schedule."

22. I finally turn to the  Registration  of  Births  and  Deaths  (Consular
    Offices)  Regulations,  1948   (Number   2837/1948).    The   following
    regulations are of relevance:

         "2.  For every consular district there shall be kept -

               a) A consular register of births, in the form A  set  out  in
                  the Schedule  to  these  Regulations,  for  recording  the
                  births of citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies born
                  in the district on or after 1 January 1949, and  also,  in
                  cases falling within Regulation 13 of  these  Regulations,
                  the birth of certain citizens of the  United  Kingdom  and
                  Colonies born outside the district...;

         7.    Subject  to  the  provisions  of  the  two  next   succeeding
             Regulations, where the birth or death  of  a  citizen  of  the
             United Kingdom and Colonies, or of a British  subject  without
             citizenship, is reported, either orally or in  writing,  to  a
             consular officer as having occurred within his district at any
             time during the seven years immediately preceding, the officer
             shall register the birth or death if he is satisfied as to the
             nationality of the child or the deceased person and as to  the
             other facts of the case....

         19.  (1) A certified copy of an entry in a counsellor  register  of
             births or deaths shall be issued by the  consular  officer  on
             request and on payment of the prescribed fee ....

         21.  The fees to  be  charged  in  respect  of  entry  in  consular
             registers of births and deaths and  in  respect  of  certified
             copies of entries in such registers shall be such fees as  may
             from time to time be prescribed under  the  Consular  Salaries
             and Fees Act 1891."

Discussion and conclusions

23. The first question I must determine is whether the  appellant's  father
    was registered pursuant to section 7 of the 1948  Act.  The  burden  of
    proof is on the appellant to the balance of probabilities.

24. In a witness statement drawn by the appellant's paternal grandmother on
    24 April 2014, and adopted at the hearing without being the subject  of
    cross-examination, the following is said:

         "On the 11th of July 1965 our first child, Allan  Seton  Vogel  was
         born. On the 15th of May 1967 our second son,  Andrew  David  Vogel
         was born.

         At this stage of our lives we were not sure if  we  were  going  to
         remain in South Africa and whilst  we  were  renewing  our  British
         passports we were advised by the British Consulate to register  our
         children  as  British  Nationals  as  this   would   ensure   their
         nationality. We were told to do this as South Africa was no  longer
         part of the Commonwealth.

         The reason for doing this was that if  the  country  should  become
         politically unstable then we would be entitled to leave the country
         with our children knowing that they were British  and  without  the
         need of obtaining permission from the South African government.

         My husband was not earning much at this time and it  was  expensive
         to register them. We had to save up for a few years to get both  my
         sons registered. This is why they were not registered at  the  time
         of their births.

         We had a daughter, Sharon Leslie Vogel on 26th February 1971 and we
         had her registered too."

25. The only relevant documentation produced by the appellant on this issue
    is what is described in the index to the appellant's bundle as a  "copy
    birth  certificate  of  the  appellant's  father".   In   addition   to
    identifying the appellant's father's  name  and  date  of  birth,  this
    document records the birth as having taken place "within  the  district
    of the British Consul-General at  Johannesburg"  -  with  the  date  of
    registration being recorded thereon as 25 June 1969.

26. The notice at the end of this document reads:

         "I, Douglas Aubrey Herridge, Her Britannic Majesty's Vice Consul at
         Johannesburg, do hereby certify that this is a  true  copy  of  the
         entry of the birth of Allan Seton Vogel, No. 73,  in  the  register
         book of births kept at this Consulate - General"

27. Mr Burnett's primary submission is that this registration  of  25  June
    1969 is a registration for the purposes of section 7 of the 1948 Act. I
    do not accept that this is so.

28.  I do not accept Mr Burnett's submission  that  the  birth  certificate
    referred to in paragraphs 25 and 26  above  supports  in  any  way  the
    assertion that such registration was a registration of the purposes  of
    section 7 of the 1948 Act.  This  certificate  makes  no  reference  to
    section 7 of the 1948 Act on its face, nor does it  make  reference  to
    the registration of the appellant's father as a CUKC. It does, however,
    specifically refer to the entry of the appellant's  father's  birth  in
    the "register book of births".

29. Contrary to that commended by Mr Burnett, the registration of  a  birth
    at a Consulate and registration of  a  minor  as  a  CUKC  pursuant  to
    section 7 of the 1948 Act are not one and the same thing. Had this been
    Parliament's intention then it  is  difficult  to  understand  why  the
    language used in section 7 and that used in section 5(1)(b) is the  not
    the same - the latter specifically referring the fact  of  the  "birth"
    being registered - unlike in section 7 in which reference  is  made  to
    registration as a CUKC.

30. This conclusion is further supported by the existence and terms of both
    the British Nationality Regulations 1948 and The Registration of Births
    and Deaths (Consular Offices) Regulations 1948.

31. The two sets of Regulations were both made in December 1948. Regulation
    2 of the latter requires every consular district  to  keep  a  register
    recording the fact of  births  of  CUKC's  born  in  its  district.  By
    regulation 7 therein such a birth can be reported orally or in writing,
    and if so reported  the  birth  must  be  registered  if  the  relevant
    official is satisfied as to the nationality of  the  child  and  "other
    facts of the case".

32. The procedure for registration of a minor as a CUKC under  the  British
    Nationality Regulations 1948 is, however, markedly different  and  much
    more prescriptive - as one would  have  expected  given  the  terms  of
    section 7  of  the  1948  Act.  There  must  be  an  'application'  for
    registration, unlike  under  the  Registration  of  Births  and  Deaths
    Regulations pursuant to which the registering  official  can  act  upon
    receipt  of  an  oral  'report'  of  a  birth  of  a  relevant  person.
    Furthermore, an application made under British Nationality  Regulations
    1948 must be made in  writing  and  must  be  accompanied  a  statement
    identifying (i) whether the applicant is a parent or  guardian  of  the
    minor child being registered, (ii) whether such person is  a  CUKC  and
    (iii) why it is desired  the  minor  child  be  registered;  whereas  a
    registration  of  a  birth  contains  no  such  requirements  for   the
    production of specified information.

33. Looking  at  the  structure  and  content  of  the  1948  Act  and  the
    aforementioned  two  sets  of  1948  Regulations  it  is  clear  in  my
    conclusion that the registration of a birth with a consular  office  is
    not of itself a registration under section 7 of the 1948 Act.

34. Having come to this conclusion I now turn on facts of the instant  case
    to determine whether it has  been  demonstrated  that  the  appellant's
    father was registered pursuant to section 7 of the 1948 Act. I conclude
    that it has not been demonstrated that he was.

35. As set out earlier, I  do  not  accept  that  the  'birth  certificate'
    showing registration of the appellant's father in the book of births at
    the Consulate in Johannesburg on 25 June 1969  demonstrates  there  has
    been a registration for the purposes of section  7  of  the  1948  Act.
    Whilst the appellant's grandmother provides  unchallenged  evidence  of
    her recollection of the events in this regard from the late 1960's, and
    specifically asserts that she and her husband were advised to  register
    their children's births as 'British Nationals' -  this  evidence  lacks
    detail. There is no evidence, for example, as to the process  that  was
    undertaken to register the appellant's father, whether  this  was  done
    orally or in writing or whether the application was  accompanied  by  a
    statement of the type required by British Nationality Regulations 1948.



36. There is also no evidence that the  appellant's  grandmother  undertook
    more  than  one  registration  process  on  behalf  of  her  son   (the
    appellant's father). I observe in this regard that the  timing  of  the
    registration of the appellant's father's birth with the  Consulate,  as
    identified on the birth certificate, accords with the timeline for  the
    registration referred to in the appellant's grandmother's statement.

37. Whilst the appellant's grandmother cannot be criticised in any way  for
    the lack of detail in her evidence, given that the she is  being  asked
    to recall events which took place over 50  years  ago,  the  burden  of
    proof nevertheless lies on the appellant. Having considered all of  the
    evidence  before  me  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant   has
    demonstrated to the  balance  of  probabilities  that  her  father  was
    registered as a CUKC pursuant to section 7 of the 1948 Act.

38. Consequently, I conclude that the appellant's father became  a  British
    citizen "by descent" upon commencement of the 1981  Act  and  also  had
    such status at the time of the appellant's birth. The appellant,  being
    born outside the UK, did not therefore acquire British citizenship from
    her father at birth.

39. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal against the decision refusing her a
    Certificate of Entitlement to a Right of Abode is dismissed.

Article 8 ECHR - Decision and Conclusions

40. Both parties are in agreement that I should also consider  whether  the
    Respondent's decision leads to a  breach  of  Article  8  ECHR  -  such
    decision leaving the appellant without lawful authority  to  remain  in
    the UK and thereby requiring her to leave the  country  with  immediate
    effect.

41. Mr Burnett properly  did  not  assert  that  the  appellant  meets  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules relating to  family  and  private
    life i.e. paragraph 276ADE or Appendix FM to  the  Rules.  She  clearly
    does not.

42. I therefore turn to consider Article 8 ECHR outwith the confines of the
    Rules. There have been numerous judicial pronouncements relating to the
    task that the Secretary of State and the Tribunal must  undertake  when
    considering such issue - the most recent statements  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal being found in Singh v The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, Khalid v The Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2015] EWCA Civ 74; PG (USA) v The Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2015] EWCA Civ 118 and Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  I  have  taken
    into  account  and  applied  the  ratio  of  these  decisions   to   my
    considerations.

43. In summary, a failure to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules
    is a weighty factor in determining  an  Article  8  claim  outside  the
    Rules, such weight  being  particularly  significant  where  the  Rules
    provide a "complete code" or where "any gap between the Rules and  what
    Article 8 requires is comparatively narrow"; this being because such  a
    claim will already have been addressed to  a  significant  extent  when
    rejecting it  under  the  Rules.  Where  there  are  matters  that  are
    substantial and which could play no, or no  significant,  part  in  the
    consideration under the Rules, then a full assessment will be  required
    in which they are balanced against all  other  relevant  considerations
    including the very weighty public  interest  in  effective  immigration
    control.

44. Moving to the relevant circumstances of the appellant's claim.  I  take
    the  following  factual   matrix   from   the   First-tier   Tribunal's
    determination:

         "(8)  In  1999  the  Appellant's  parents  divorced.  In  2002  the
         Appellant's father moved to the UK. He was able to do so by  reason
         of his British citizenship...

         (9)  The Appellant remained in South Africa  with  her  sister  and
         mother. She and her sister used to come to the UK from time to time
         to visit their father.

         (10) The Appellant's mother was concerned about the level of  crime
         in South Africa and  so  decided  it  was  best  for  her  and  her
         daughters to relocate to the UK. Initially Kelly  [the  Appellant's
         sister] came on her  own,  so  that  she  could  go  to  school  in
         Wendover, Buckinghamshire. This was in August 2007.

         (11) The Appellant and her mother came in May 2008. The Appellant's
         mother obtained a passport for the  journey,  as  she  has  British
         citizenship through her father, who was born in the UK...

         (12) The Appellant came with her South African passport...It  shows
         she arrived on 28th May 2008 and was given leave to enter  for  six
         months. She says this was as a visitor. Her  leave  to  remain  has
         never been extended...

         (13) Efforts were then made to enable the Appellant and her  sister
         to acquire British citizenship. Her sister, who was under  the  age
         of 18, was able to register as a British citizen...

         (14) But things did not go smoothly for the Appellant. She was over
         the age of 18, so could not register as  a  British  citizen  under
         section 3 of the British Nationality Act 1981, as  her  sister  had
         done. After twice being sent the incorrect forms, she  was  advised
         that she should apply as a dependent relative of a British  citizen
         under paragraph 317 of the Immigration Rules. On 15 July 2010  this
         application was refused because it was considered that she was  not
         living alone outside the UK in the most  exceptional  compassionate
         circumstances. The refusal was not accompanied by any  decision  to
         remove her from the UK, so she did not have a right of appeal...

         (16) Whilst she  has  been  in  the  UK,  the  Appellant  has  been
         studying. Initially she studied at Amersham and Wycombe College for
         a foundation degree in Art and Design. Then she followed  a  course
         at Bournemouth University, which resulted in her obtaining a degree
         in Animation Production.

         (17)  In  2009  whilst  at  Bournemouth  University,  she  met  her
         boyfriend...who was on the same course. They have continued  to  be
         together since. He is a British citizen, who was born in the UK...

         (18) The Appellant lives with her father  in...Milton  Keynes.  Her
         boyfriend  lives  in...Milton  Keynes   with   his   parents.   The
         Appellant's mother lives...in the Aylesbury area.  The  Appellant's
         sister lives in  Aylesbury.  The  appellant's  grandmother,  Eileen
         Vogel, also lives in  Aylesbury.  All  these  persons  are  British
         citizens. The Appellant's only close relative in  South  Africa  is
         her grandmother on her mother's side. She is in a care home so  she
         could not support the Appellant there...

         (20) ...[the Appellant] is  not  currently  able  to  take  up  any
         employment because of her lack of immigration  status.  The  bundle
         shows copies  of  emails  showing  interest  in  her  work  in  the
         animation field.  In the meantime she is occupying herself by doing
         voluntary work at charity shops..."

45. The appellant has now given further evidence to the effect  that  since
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal her  long-term  relationship
    has ended. She now lives with her mother, having moved in with her last
    year. She was previously living with her father as was detailed in  the
    First-tier Tribunal's determination. The  appellant's  mother  supports
    her  financially  and  the  appellant  visits  her  father  weekly   or
    fortnightly. I accept this evidence as truthful.

46. On the evidence before me  I  accept  Ms  Holmes  submission  that  the
    appellant has not established that she has a family life with anyone in
    the United Kingdom. In coming to this conclusion I have directed myself
    to, and applied, the judicial learning set out in paragraphs 48  to  72
    of the Upper Tribunal's decision in Ghising (family  life  -  adults  -
    Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC).

47. Whilst the appellant  is  currently  living  with  her  mother  and  is
    financially dependent upon her because of her inability to work,  there
    is no particularised evidence of any emotional ties  or  bonds  between
    them over and above those one would normally expect to see  between  an
    adult child and that child's parent.  It  is  also  relevant  that  the
    appellant was previously living separately from her mother, both during
    the time she was living with her father and, more significantly, during
    the years  she  spent  living  in  Bournemouth  whilst  at  university.
    Looking at all the evidence in  the  round,  which  on  this  issue  is
    limited, I do not accept that the appellant has demonstrated  that  she
    has a family life for the purposes of Article 8 ECHR with anyone in the
    United Kingdom.

48. Clearly, the appellant has established a significant  private  life  in
    the UK since her arrival here  in  2008,  during  which  time  she  has
    studied extensively and undertaken charity work. Her relationships with
    her numerous family members  in  the  UK,  including  her  parents  and
    siblings, also form a significant part of her private life here.

49. I find that requiring the appellant to leave the United  Kingdom  would
    interfere with her private life here and that such  interference  would
    be of sufficient severity so as to engage Article 8.

50. Given my findings above rejecting the appellant's  claim  that  she  is
    entitled to a right of abode in the UK, there can be  no  dispute  that
    requiring her to leave would be in accordance  with  the  law  (in  the
    wider sense given to this phrase when the ECHR is under consideration),
    and would be in pursuance of a legitimate aim.

51. The final issue before me is that of proportionality.

52. From 28 July 2014, as a consequence of  the  introduction  of  sections
    117A-117D of the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  I  am
    required to take into account a number of specified considerations.  In
    doing so in this case I observe that the appellant  can  speak  English
    fluently. Furthermore, I accept, given the  appellant's  qualifications
    and the 'interest' that has been shown by potential  employers  in  her
    skill set - that it is unlikely that she  would  be  a  burden  on  the
    taxpayer if she remained here. She has also integrated into society  in
    the UK, and would be further integrated if  she  were  given  leave  to
    remain.

53. By section 117B(5) I am required to give little weight to private  life
    established by a person at a time that such person's immigration status
    is precarious. The appellant's status in the UK has at all  times  been
    precarious, given that her continued presence here has, at  all  times,
    either been unlawful or dependent on obtaining a further grant of leave
    (See AM (s117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT  0260  (IAC)).  I  therefore  attach
    little weight to the private  life  she  has  established  during  this
    period.

54. The appellant can gain no benefit from section 117B(6), as she  has  no
    qualifying partner or child.

55. Mr Burnett placed  significant  reliance  on  the  application  of  the
    'principles' laid down by their Lordships House  in  Chikwamba  v  SSHD
    [2008] UKHL 40. He submitted  that  the  appellant  meets  all  of  the
    requirements of paragraph 186 of the Immigration Rules, save  that  she
    does not hold entry clearance for entry  in  such  capacity  (paragraph
    186(vi)). There is, he asserted, no  sensible  reason  to  require  the
    appellant to return to South Africa simply in order for her to make  an
    application for entry clearance, which would be bound to succeed.  Such
    an  approach  would,  he  submitted,  be  disproportionate  given   the
    appellant's circumstances and ties to the UK, her lack of ties to South
    Africa and the precarious security situation there.

56. In Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  Treebhowan;  Hayat  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1054], Elias
    LJ gave consideration both to the opinions in Chikwamba and  number  of
    subsequent decisions of the Court of Appeal - summarising the  judicial
    learning to be derived therefrom in the following terms:

          "30  In  my  judgment,  the  effect  of  these  decisions  can  be
         summarised as follows:

             a)   Where  an  applicant  who  does  not  have  lawful  entry
                  clearance pursues an Article 8 claim, a dismissal  of  the
                  claim on the procedural ground that  the  policy  requires
                  that the applicant should have made the  application  from
                  his home state may (but not necessarily will) constitute a
                  disruption of family or private life sufficient to  engage
                  Article  8,  particularly  where  children  are  adversely
                  affected.

             b)   Where Article 8 is engaged, it will be a disproportionate
                  interference with family or private life to enforce such a
                  policy unless, to use the language of Sullivan  LJ,  there
                  is a sensible reason for doing so.

             c)   Whether it  is  sensible  to  enforce  that  policy  will
                  necessarily  be  fact  sensitive;  Lord  Brown  identified
                  certain potentially relevant factors  in  Chikwamba.  They
                  will  include  the  prospective  length  and   degree   of
                  disruption of family life and whether other members of the
                  family are settled in the UK.

             d)   Where Article 8 is  engaged  and  there  is  no  sensible
                  reason for enforcing the policy, the decision maker should
                  determine the Article 8 claim on its  substantive  merits,
                  having regard to  all  material  factors,  notwithstanding
                  that the applicant has no lawful entry clearance.

             e)   It will be a very rare case where it is  appropriate  for
                  the  Court  of  Appeal,  having  concluded  that  a  lower
                  tribunal has disproportionately interfered with Article  8
                  rights in enforcing the policy, to  make  the  substantive
                  Article 8 decision  for  itself.  Chikwamba  was  such  an
                  exceptional case. Logically the court  would  have  to  be
                  satisfied that there is only  one  proper  answer  to  the
                  Article 8 question before substituting its own finding  on
                  this factual question.

             f)   Nothing in Chikwamba was intended to alter  the  way  the
                  courts should approach substantive  Article  8  issues  as
                  laid down in such well known cases as Razgar and Huang.

             g)   Although the cases do  not  say  this  in  terms,  in  my
                  judgment if the Secretary of State has no sensible  reason
                  for requiring the application to be  made  from  the  home
                  state, the fact that he has failed to  do  so  should  not
                  thereafter carry any weight in the substantive  Article  8
                  balancing exercise."

57. In the more recent decision of the Court of Appeal in Agyarko &  Ors  v
    SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 440, Sales LJ - with the agreement of Longmore and
    Gloster LJJ said as follows:

         "[31] In Chikwamba, the House of Lords found that there would be  a
         violation of Article 8 if the applicant for leave to remain in that
         case were removed from the United Kingdom and forced to make an out-
         of-country application for leave to enter which  would  clearly  be
         successful, in circumstances where the interference with her family
         life with her husband associated with the removal could not be said
         to serve any good purpose. It is possible to envisage  a  Chikwamba
         type case arising in which Article 8 might require  that  leave  to
         remain be granted outside the Rules, even though it  could  not  be
         said that there were insurmountable obstacles to the applicant  and
         their spouse or partner continuing their family life overseas.  But
         in a case involving precarious family life, it would  be  necessary
         to establish that there were exceptional circumstances  to  warrant
         such a conclusion."

58. Mr Burnett submits that  the  Applicant  is  bound  to  succeed  in  an
    application for entry clearance made  pursuant  paragraph  186  of  the
    Immigration Rules and asserts that this fact alone, or  in  combination
    with the appellant's circumstances in the UK, the  precarious  security
    situation in South Africa and the lengthy delays by  the  Secretary  of
    State in dealing with the appellant's claims, makes it disproportionate
    to require her to leave the UK and make an entry clearance application.

59. I do accept this is so, even if I proceed on the basis, as commended by
    Mr Burnett, that the  Applicant  is  bound  to  succeed  in  any  entry
    clearance application she makes.

60. Whilst I accept that the appellant's grandmother has recently  suffered
    a very traumatic incident in South Africa, as  the  appellant  and  her
    family have in the past,  I  do  not  accept  the  evidence  before  me
    discloses that the 'security situation' there is such  that  it  should
    form a matter of any significant weight in my Article 8 considerations.
    Neither do I accept that any significant weight should be  attached  to
    the purported delays by the Secretary  of  State  in  relation  to  her
    dealings the appellant.  The appellant is  not,  and  has  never  been,
    entitled to a right of abode in the UK - as the Secretary of State  has
    repeatedly identified.

61. I attach little weight to the  private  life  that  the  appellant  has
    established in the UK whilst she has lived here unlawfully and  I  have
    found that she does not have a family life in the UK -  although,  even
    had I concluded that the appellant does have a family  life  here  this
    would not have led me to come to a different conclusion on the  Article
    8 ground.

62. Neither the opinions of their Lordship's House in  Chikwamba,  nor  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in Treebhowan and Hayat,  seek  to  set
    out a legal threshold as to when it would be appropriate, in any  given
    case, to require an applicant to make an application from  outside  the
    United Kingdom; rather, each alludes to an expectation  that  in  cases
    where the only matter weighing in the respondent's side of the  balance
    is the public policy of requiring a person to  apply  under  the  Rules
    from abroad, that legitimate objective will usually  be  outweighed  by
    factors resting on the appellant's side of the balance.

63. In the instant appeal the public policy of requiring a person to  apply
    under the Immigration Rules from abroad is not the only matter weighing
    in the respondent's side of the balance.  The  appellant  has  remained
    unlawfully in the United Kingdom for a lengthy period of  time,  albeit
    for most of that  time  pursuing  applications  for  leave  or  British
    citizenship.

64. There is a significant public interest in refusing permission to remain
    to those persons, such as the appellant, who fail to establish a  right
    to remain under the Immigration Rules  and,  looking  at  the  evidence
    before me as a whole, I  find  that  it  is  clearly  proportionate  to
    require this appellant to return to her homeland for a temporary period
    in order to make an application to return to the UK - if that  is  what
    she chooses to do.  The  public  interest  in  instant  case  is  ample
    justification for requiring her to undertake this course of action.

65. I also find, having taken all relevant  factors  into  account  and  in
    particular given the significant weight to be attached  to  the  public
    interest identified above, that it  is  proportionate  to  require  the
    appellant to return to her homeland permanently; this being despite her
    lack of family members there, and the connections that she now  has  to
    the UK. Contrary to  appellant's  assertions,  the  evidence  does  not
    disclose that she has no real prospect of obtaining employment in South
    Africa - indeed there is no country information at all placed before me
    in this regard, and I see no reason why she  can  integrate  back  into
    South African society upon her return.

66. For these reasons I dismiss the appellant's appeal brought on Article 8
    ECHR grounds.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on all grounds

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 10 July 2015
