
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26944/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 1st June 2017                          |On 14th July 2017                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                 RAJVIR KAUR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Singh of the Birmingham Law Practice Limited
For the Respondent:    Mrs M Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of India born on 15th December  1982.
    She first arrived in the UK on 18th October 2010 when she  was  granted
    leave to enter as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant  until  30th  July
    2012.  She was  subsequently  granted  leave  to  remain  in  the  same
    capacity until 30th October 2014.  However, that leave  to  remain  was
    curtailed on 1st April 2014 following an application by  the  Appellant
    dated 5th March 2014 for further leave to remain as a Tier 4  (General)
    Student Migrant.  That application was refused on 15th  July  2015  for
    the reasons given  in  the  Respondent's  letter  of  that  date.   The
    Appellant appealed, and her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Hopkins (the Judge) sitting  at  Birmingham  on  19th  October
    2016.  He decided to dismiss the appeal for the reasons  given  in  his
    Decision dated 25th October 2016.  The Appellant sought leave to appeal
    that decision, and on 23rd March 2017 such permission was granted.

 2. The Judge dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules  because  he
    found the Appellant failed to score sufficient points for a  CAS  under
    Appendix A of HC 395 because when she made her application, the  Centre
    for Teaching in Management Limited, at which the Appellant proposed  to
    study, did not hold a Tier 4 Sponsor licence.   The  Judge  also  found
    that the Appellant had not produced a false TOEIC certificate  for  the
    purposes of paragraph 322 of HC 395, but he considered the  Appellant's
    rights under Article 8 of the ECHR outside of the Immigration Rules and
    although he  found  that  the  Respondent's  decision  amounted  to  an
    interference with the Appellant's private life, he also found that such
    interference was proportionate.

 3. At the hearing before me, Mr Singh argued that the Judge had materially
    erred in law in that when considering the Appellant's  Article  8  ECHR
    rights, the Judge had acted unfairly and  unreasonably  in  not  taking
    account of or failing to attach sufficient weight to the fact that  the
    Home Office had failed to allow the Appellant 60 days in order to  find
    a new Sponsor.

 4. In response, Mrs Aboni submitted there had been no such error  of  law.
    She referred to  the  Rule  24  response  and  said  that  the  60  day
    concession had not been an issue argued before the Judge.  The  grounds
    of application amounted to no more than  an  attempt  to  re-argue  the
    appeal.

 5. I find no error of law in respect of the Judge's  decision  that  there
    had been no disproportionate interference with the Appellant's  Article
    8 ECHR rights outside of the Immigration Rules.   The  Judge  explained
    his decision in paragraphs 31 to 33 of the Decision.   It  is  apparent
    from what he wrote then that he took into account all relevant evidence
    and came to a decision which was open to him  on  that  evidence.   The
    Judge demonstrated that he  had  carried  out  the  balancing  exercise
    necessary for any assessment of proportionality, and  had  attached  an
    appropriate weight to the public interest.  The Judge was  entitled  to
    conclude  that  that  public  interest  outweighed  any   compassionate
    circumstances.  In particular, the Judge was correct to  attach  weight
    to the public interest in accordance with Section 117B(1)  and  (4)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The Judge took  into
    account and dealt with the Appellant's complaints as to the actions  of
    the Home Office.  The Judge was  aware  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    granted one previous period of 60 days' concession as he referred to it
    in paragraph 9 of the Decision.

 6. For these reasons I find no error of law in the decision of the  Judge.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Date 12th July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

