
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26441/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 3rd July 2013                              |on 20th August 2013          |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                             JANET KEMI LADEINDE
                         (AKA ARAMIDE OLUKEMI AZEZA)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Leskin of Birnberg Peirce and Partners.
For the Respondent: Mr Tarlow - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Hanes, promulgated on 17th April 2013, in which  she  allowed
        the appeal to the limited extent  that  the  decision  was  not  in
        accordance  with  the  law  and  that  the   application   remained
        outstanding awaiting a lawful decision.


     2. An automatic deportation order was made against  the  appellant  on
        29th October 2008 which was later withdrawn  by  the  Secretary  of
        State. A further decision dated 5th November 2012 was then made  in
        which the appellant's application for a Residence Card was  refused
        on the basis it was not  accepted  that  the  appellant  was  in  a
        durable relationship. The reasons for this are fully set out in the
        relevant refusal letter.


     3. Judge Hanes found the appellant and her partner are  in  a  durable
        relationship, based upon previous findings to this effect by  Upper
        Tribunal Judge Coker who the heard an  earlier  appeal  sitting  at
        Field House on 1st January 2012.


     4. Permission to appeal was initially refused by another judge of  the
        First-tier Tribunal but granted on a renewed application  by  Upper
        Tribunal Judge Goldstein on the basis that if the discretion  under
        Regulation  17(4)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
        Regulations 2006 (as amended) had  previously  been  exercised  and
        section 86 (3) (b) of the Nationality Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
        2002 empowered the Judge to review the exercise of that discretion,
        failure to do so was an arguable error of law.



Error of law finding




     5. As the Upper Tribunal found in Ukus (discretion:  when  reviewable)
        [2012] UKUT 00307(IAC) there are a number of  ways  in  which  this
        distinction can be  approached  and,  in  particular,  whether  the
        impugned decision has been lawfully made. In paragraph 11  of  that
        determination it is stated:


              "This may be done:

                  (i)      by reference to the criteria by which a decision
           is  susceptible  to             a  successful  application   for
           judicial review;


                  (ii)     by considering whether  the  decision  maker has
           appreciated the              powers vested in him by reaching  a
           decision that properly            recognises them, or


                  (iii)    put simply, by considering whether the  decision
           maker has           done the job required of him  regardless  of
           whether, in the                   appeal, the  Judge  agrees  or
           disagrees with his decision.

     6. A reading  of  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  shows  that  the
        respondent clearly recognised (a) that the relevant rules were  not
        the Immigration Rules but  the  2006  Regulations   (b)  that  even
        though primarily rejecting the appellant's claim to be in a durable
        relationship, acknowledged that if  the  durable  relationship  had
        been proved the appellant was only entitled to a Residence Card  as
        an extended family member if it was considered appropriate to issue
        the  card  which  involved  the  exercise  of  a  discretion;   (c)
        identified the factors that were required to be taken into  account
        in  reaching  the  decision  which,  in  this  case,  included  the
        appellant's personal circumstances, the application on its  merits,
        and the fact the appellant was convicted  on  28th  March  2006  of
        possessing/improperly  obtaining/another's  identity  document  for
        which she was sentenced to 15 months imprisonment.  The  respondent
        then (d) balanced those factors  one  against  the  other  and  (e)
        reached  a  conclusion  that  they  were  not  of  a   sufficiently
        compelling nature to warrant the  exercise  of  the  discretion  in
        favour of the appellant.


     7. I find that the refusal letter supports the appellant's  contention
        that the case worker had considered the exercise of  a  discretion,
        albeit on the face in the alternative, and that this was  a  lawful
        exercise of that discretion. I do  not  find  it  proved  that  the
        process by which  it  was  made  would  have  been  susceptible  to
        Judicial Review.  As the decision maker properly noted his function
        and what he was  required  to  do  when  fulfilling  it,  and  then
        proceeded to reach a decision on that basis,  I  find  Judge  Hanes
        made a material error of law in finding that the discretion had not
        been exercised on the facts and in finding that it was therefore an
        unlawful decision and in allowing the appeal to the limited  extent
        that the decision was not in accordance with the law on  the  basis
        that a lawful decision remained outstanding. The  determination  is
        set aside although the  finding  of  the  existence  of  a  durable
        relationship and  the  appellant's  immigration  history  shall  be
        preserved findings.


        Although the case was listed for an initial hearing it was possible
        to grant Mr Tarlow additional time  to  consider  the  papers  thus
        allowing the Tribunal to proceed remake the decision.





Submissions for the remaking of the decision




     8. Mr Leskin referred the Tribunal to the case of YB (EEA reg 17(4)  -
        proper approach) Ivory Coast [2008] UKAIT 00062, and in  particular
        paragraph 38, in which the Tribunal found:


              38. However, we are not merely required to be  satisfied  that
   the respondent's             decision was in accordance with the law, but
   also to decide for ourselves whether          the  reg  17(4)  discretion
   should have been exercised differently. The burden  rests              on
   the appellant to show that the discretion should be exercised differently
   by us:              see FD (EEA discretion: basis of appeal) [2007] UKAIT
   00049 ( Since hearing this            appeal it has come  to  our  notice
   that on 10 March 2008 the Court of Appeal                   ordered  that
   FD's appeal be treated  as  withdrawn  (C5/2007/1767)  in  the  light  of
   the respondent withdrawing its decision in view of  her  acceptance  that
   she had             not considered all of  FD's  personal  circumstances.
   But the Court's order in no           way impugned the guidance for which
   FD was reported).


     9. It was submitted that the proper approach  that  should  have  been
        adopted by Judge Hanes is set out in the head note to the  case  in
        which the Tribunal summarise  their  findings.  Mr  Leskin  further
        submitted that as it was accepted the appellant was  in  a  durable
        relationship the only issue was how the discretion should have been
        exercised and it was necessary, therefore, to consider the  process
        as set out in the second paragraph of the head note.


    10. There was also a challenge to the Secretary of State's decision  on
        the basis that in  refusing  to  exercise  her  discretion  in  the
        appellant's favour she had relied upon the criminal  conviction  of
        28th March 2006.  It was argued that as on 16th May 2012  UKBA  had
        stated that no  further  action  was  being  taken  to  deport  the
        appellant on public policy/public  security  grounds,  reliance  on
        such factors when considering Regulation 17(4) was wrong.


    11. In relation to the second element of the test,  the  need  to  have
        regard as a rule  of  thumb  only,  to  the  criteria  set  out  in
        comparable provisions of the Immigration Rule, it  was  claimed  by
        reference to  the  current  Immigration  Rules  and  in  particular
        Appendix FM, and the suitability/eligibility factors, that  on  the
        evidence the appellant would meet the suitability criteria although
        in assessing terms of eligibility these were elements that  had  to
        be  considered  as  part  of  the  YB  assessment.  The  Tribunal's
        attention was drawn to paragraph 23 of the case  in  which  it  was
        found:


              "However, there are important caveats which must attach to any
   renvoi to               national law  for  reg  17(4)  purposes.  One  is
   implicit in what we stated earlier:           clearly  such  renvoi  must
   focus on whether  extended  family  members  can  meet            certain
   substantive requirements; it must not seek  to  define  terms  which  are
     Community law terms (such as "durable  relationship").  Second,  whilst
   the                 principle of non-discrimination justifies  renvoi  to
   the immigration rules, it must            be  borne  in  mind  that  such
   rules do not provide a precise comparison. The rules            which are
   most similar,  those  dealing  with  dependent  relatives  and  unmarried
   partners, refer to persons applying for settlement, whereas  a  residence
   card is             issued only for five years or "the  envisaged  period
   of residence in the United            Kingdom of  the  qualified  person"
   (reg  8(6)).  Thirdly  renvoi  must  be  to   national                law
   provisions that relate to in-country  applications.  In  this  case,  for
   example,            one should look at para  295D,  not  para  295A.  The
   reason for this is because                provision is only made for  the
   issue of a residence card in-country.  A  fourth               caveat  is
   implicit in what we have  already  stated  in  the  preceding  paragraph:
   renvoi must be done in conformity with general  principles  of  Community
   law. A              further and interrelated caveat is  this.  We  cannot
   see that such reference can be            assimilated to  an  examination
   of whether the comparable national law criteria             are  met.  To
   seek to reduce it solely  to  such  criteria  would  run  contrary  to  a
     general principle of Community law, namely that of proportionality.  It
   would          also overlook that the power given  by  the  Directive  to
   decide such cases "in            accordance with national legislation" is
   paired with another Directive principle or              requirement  that
   there    be    "an    extensive    examination    of     the     personal
   circumstances".  Neither  principle  is  necessarily  met  simply  by   a
   mechanical              checking of the comparable national law criteria.
   It  may  be  in  many  cases  that  the               assessment  of   an
   applicant's  position  under  the  relevant  immigration   rules   covers
   much of the ground required to achieve an  "extensive  examination".  But
   that will           not necessarily be the  case,  if  for  example,  the
   decision-maker has decided that           the applicant fails under  just
   one of the requirements of the relevant immigration             rules and
   goes no further.  The  comparable  immigration  rules  can  only  provide
   guidance, therefore, on what requirements an applicant  under  reg  17(4)
   should              normally be expected to meet."


    12. It is said that the appellant's partner is  an  EEA  national  from
        Germany exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  Mr  Leskin
        submitted that many of the requirements of Appendix FM can  be  met
        although 1.10 could not as they were not living  together.  It  was
        submitted that YB is authority for  the  proposition  that  it  was
        necessary to undertake a comparison and that this provision  should
        extend to include people not living together; especially those  who
        are in a durable relationship.


    13. In relation to the eligibility criteria under the Rules  Mr  Leskin
        accepted that it was necessary for  an  individual  not  to  be  in
        breach of the Rules in the United Kingdom and  that  the  appellant
        was.  He submitted, however, that she could benefit from the  first
        exemption as there are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  her  partner
        continuing to live outside the United Kingdom relating to  his  own
        domestic circumstances. Adequate maintenance and  accommodation  is
        also available.


    14. It was therefore argued that the appellant would be  able  to  meet
        the requirements of the Immigration Rules if the same applicable to
        her. It was argued that the appellant should be allowed  to  remain
        and that the discretion should have been exercised in  her  favour.
        The fact the  respondent  made  the  decision  not  to  remove  the
        appellant by way  of  deportation  as  a  result  of  her  criminal
        behaviour but then used that against her in relation to  the  issue
        of a Residence Card is said to be illogical and legally flawed.


    15. Mr Tarlow relied on the reasons for refusal letter  dated  5th  May
        2012 and argued that when exercising her discretionary  powers  the
        Secretary of  State  is  allowed  to  consider  the  behaviour  and
        criminal convictions of the appellant. In  paragraph  25  of  Judge
        Coker's determination there is also reference to the fact documents
        had been submitted that  she  did  not  accept  were  genuine.  The
        appellant overstayed and made a long residence  claim  using  false
        documents which was relevant to the way in which the  Secretary  of
        State considered the discretionary power. The  Secretary  of  State
        was entitled to take into account unspent criminal convictions  and
        there was nothing wrong in law in the way in  which  she  conducted
        the assessment. The fact the Secretary of State was  not  going  to
        deport the appellant did not mean  that  she  had  to  give  her  a
        Residence Card.




Discussion



    16. In Ukus (discretion: when reviewable) [2012]  UKUT  00307(IAC)  the
        Tribunal held that there are thus four  possible  situations  where
        the Tribunal is considering an appeal arising from the exercise  of
        a discretionary power: (i) the decision maker has failed to make  a
        lawful decision in the  purported  exercise  of  the  discretionary
        power vested in him and a lawful  decision  is  required.  In  this
        situation the Judge is required, on SSHD v Abdi [1996] Imm  AR  148
        lines, to allow the appeal to the extent of deciding the respondent
        needs to make a fresh decision - it makes no difference whether the
        discretion is one the exercise of which the Tribunal has  power  to
        review;  (ii)  the  decision  maker  has  lawfully  exercised   his
        discretion and the Tribunal has no jurisdiction  to  intervene  i.e
        because the discretion was a discretion exercised  outside  of  the
        Rules for example under a policy;  (iii)  the  decision  maker  has
        lawfully exercised his discretion  and  the  Tribunal  upholds  the
        exercise of his discretion; or (iv) the decision maker has lawfully
        exercised his discretion and  the  Tribunal  reaches  its  decision
        exercising its discretion differently.


    17. I accept the submission in relation to the Tribunal's  jurisdiction
        to consider the exercise of the discretion. In section  84  of  the
        2002 Act grounds of challenge to an immigration decision  not  only
        include at s.84(i)(e)  that  "the  decision  is  otherwise  not  in
        accordance with the law" but also at s.84(i)(f)  that  "the  person
        taking the decision should have exercised differently a  discretion
        conferred by immigration rules...."


    18. I find no  merit  in  the  argument  the  Secretary  of  State  was
        prohibited  from  taking  into  account  the  appellant's  criminal
        conviction when considering whether  discretion  to  allow  her  to
        remain in the United Kingdom should be exercised in her favour.


    19. In Rahman [2012] CJEU Case-83/11  the  Court  of  Justice  for  the
        European Union (CJEU) considered whether, having met  the  defining
        criteria  for  an  Extended  Family  Member  (EFM),  the  applicant
        thereafter had an automatic right to  enter  and  reside  with  the
        Union citizen in the host state.  The CJEU held that Article 3 does
        not automatically entitle an EFM, who meets the defining  criteria,
        to join and reside with a Union citizen in  a  host  Member  State.
        That right is reserved for ordinary family members, as  defined  by
        Article 2 and transposed into UK law by Regulation 7  of  the  2006
        Regulations. All that Article 3 requires of a Member State is  that
        it should make it possible for an EFM to obtain a decision upon his
        application that is founded upon an extensive  examination  of  his
        personal circumstances and, in the event of refusal, to justify the
        decision with reasons. It follows that the host country has a  wide
        discretion with regard to the selection of factors that  are  taken
        into account. However, the host Member State must ensure  that  its
        legislation contains criteria for the exercise of  that  discretion
        which  are  consistent  with  the  normal  meaning  of   the   term
        'facilitate' and of  the  words  relating  to  dependence  used  in
        Article 3(2), and which  do  not  deprive  that  provision  of  its
        effectiveness.


    20. The United Kingdom's domestic  legislation  does  not  deprive  the
        relevant  provisions  of  effectiveness  and  clearly  within   the
        criteria to be considered there is considerable scope granted to  a
        Member  State  relating  to  which  aspects   of   an   applicant's
        personality/character/connections are  deemed  relevant.   In  this
        appeal the appellant has been convicted of a criminal  offence  for
        which she was sentenced to 15 months  imprisonment.   No  authority
        was provided to support the submission that because  the  Secretary
        of State decided not  to  use  the  conviction  as  the  basis  for
        deporting the appellant on public  security/public  policy  grounds
        she is prevented from taking the  conviction  and  the  appellant's
        behaviour that lead to the conviction into  account  when  deciding
        whether she is a suitable person to receive a Residence  Card.  The
        conviction is evidence of a deliberate  act(s)  of  dishonesty  for
        which the appellant was convicted and  sentenced  by  the  criminal
        courts.  I find it is not irrational to say that it could  be  take
        into account as clearly is it is very relevant factor.   It  is  in
        fact bizarre to say that it  should  not  and  should  be  ignored.
        There is also a second example of the appellant seeking  to  employ
        deception  as  identified  by  Mr  Tarlow  in  his  submissions  by
        reference to Upper Tribunal Judge Coker's determination promulgated
        on 15th February 2012.  Judge  Coker  notes  in  the  determination
        discrepancies in the evidence given regarding an alleged engagement
        party.  She noted in paragraph 21 that although it was claimed that
        between 1999 and 2005 the appellant had stayed with her brother and
        a friend at 1 South Dene, and that  many  documents  produced  pre-
        dating 2005 were addressed to her at 1 South  Dene,  the  appellant
        was unable to say what area of London South Dene was in, other than
        to give the postcode and say it was in the North West. Judge  Coker
        also noted in  paragraph  24  that  a  large  number  of  documents
        produced as having been  submitted  by  the  appellant  she  denied
        having seen or having submitted and that some  of  those  documents
        were not genuine as a number of them had telephone numbers on  them
        which did not exist as at the date of the letters.


    21. Judge Coker was not satisfied the appellant had been in the  United
        Kingdom for  as  long  as  she  claimed  and  found  that  she  had
        manipulated the  truth  to  suit  her  own  ends  and  conveniently
        forgotten or denied evidence that was adverse  to  her  claim.  The
        appellant's claim that she  was  unaware  the  documents  had  been
        fraudulently  manufactured  for  the  purposes  of  the  claim  was
        rejected. It was also found her lack of  knowledge  relating  to  1
        South  Dene  was  an  important  piece  of  evidence,  as  it   was
        inconceivable that she would have been staying in  the  house  over
        such a lengthy period of years without knowing which area of London
        she was living in.  The appellant's  claim  to  have  been  in  the
        United Kingdom since 1990/1 was rejected and it was found  she  had
        been here since November 2004.


    22. It is clear therefore that in addition to the  criminal  conviction
        there is  an  unchallenged  judicial  finding  that  the  appellant
        employed deception in an attempt to succeed with her application to
        remain on the basis of the long residence rule. This is  a  further
        relevant aspect of her personality which the Secretary of State was
        entitled to take  into  account  when  assessing  whether  she  was
        willing to exercise her discretion in the appellant's favour.


    23. I have considered the points in the appellant's favour outlined  in
        great detail by Mr Leskin, but when all the facts  of  this  appeal
        are  carefully  considered  it  is  my  primary  finding  that  the
        Secretary of State has lawfully exercised her  discretion  and  the
        Tribunal upholds the exercise of her discretion.


Decision

    24. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    25. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make no such order as no application was made for anonymity  and
   the            facts do not establish the need for such an order.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 15th August 2013












