
                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26781/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th December 2016                |On 17th January 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                               Mr. KWME OWUSU
                        (NO ANONYITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

An Anonymity Direction is NOT made. There has been no request and  there  is
no apparent need.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Himself.
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Although it is the respondent who is appealing in these  proceedings  I
    will continue to refer to the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of Ghana, born on 17 February 1983. He came
    to the United Kingdom in July 2000 on a six months visit Visa and  then
    overstayed. He began a relationship with Mrs Naomi Achiaa who  is  also
    from Ghana. On 23 December 2011 she gave birth to their daughter C and,
    on 3 June 2013, to their son,O. His partner has an older child  P  from
    her marriage, born on 28 November 2004. Her marriage was  dissolved  by
    divorce on 7 December 2010.

 3. He made application for leave to remain on the 5th February 2015 on the
    basis of his family life.

 4. His application was refused on 9 July 2015 and a notice for his removal
    was issued  at  the  same  time.  The  respondent  had  considered  the
    application under the immigration rules. It was not  accepted  that  he
    and Mrs Naomi Achiaa were in a genuine and subsisting relationship akin
    to marriage. This been in existence for at least two years prior to the
    date of the application. It was not accepted that Ms Naomi Achiaa was a
    British citizen or settled  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Regarding  their
    children, the appellant could not succeed under the parent route in the
    immigration rules because the children were not British  nationals  nor
    had they lived in the United  Kingdom  seven  years.  Furthermore,  the
    appellant did not have sole responsibility for  their  care.  Regarding
    his private life the respondent took the view that he could reintegrate
    into life in Ghana. No exceptional  circumstances  were  identified  to
    justify allowing the appeal on free-standing article 8  basis.  It  was
    accepted that the appellant had a close relationship with Mrs  Achiaa's
    child P but this was not felt enough to justify the grant of  a  period
    of leave.

The First -tier Tribunal

 5. His appeal was heard on 29 March 2016 before Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Wedderspoon and Designated Judge Baird.  The  appellant,  like
    now, was unrepresented. The appeal was allowed on human rights grounds.
    The appellant's oral evidence was that he began his  relationship  with
    Mrs Naomi Achiaa in 2004 and they lived together in London and later in
    Liverpool. Mrs Naomi Achiaa gave evidence and said  that  she  acquired
    British citizenship on 21 February 2010.

 6. The tribunal referred to the relevant immigration rules in relation  to
    family life and private life. Reference was also made to section 117  B
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The tribunal  also
    referred to the decision of SS v Congo [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

 7. The tribunal accepted the evidence  of  the  appellant  and  Mrs  Naomi
    Achiaa that they had been cohabiting for more than two years and  found
    that the relationship was genuine and subsisting. It was accepted  that
    Mrs Naomi Achiaa is a British national as are all of the children.  The
    financial requirements under appendix FM were not met.

 8. Regarding paragraph 276 ADE the tribunal concluded  that  although  the
    appellant had been away from Ghana for a number of years  he  would  be
    able to integrate back into life there.

 9. The tribunal found the existence of a family and  private  life  within
    the meaning of article 8. It was accepted the  appellant  had  a  close
    bond with P and that she had been educated here since  2009  and  would
    find difficulty in settling  in  Ghana.  It  was  felt  to  remove  the
    appellant would have a detrimental effect on the rest of the family and
    would in effect be requiring  the  whole  family,  consisting  of  four
    British citizens, to move to Ghana.

The Upper Tribunal.

10. Permission to appeal was sought by the respondent  on  the  basis  that
    although the decision referred to SS v Congo [2015] EWCA  Civ  387  the
    tribunal did not adequately consider whether  the  rules  provided  for
    adequate consideration  of  the  article  8  issues  involved.  It  was
    contended that the tribunal should have had regard to the provisions of
    EX1. It was argued that the tribunal had treated the best interests  of
    the children as a`trump card'rather than a  primary  consideration  and
    did not properly follow EV Philippines and others v  SSHD  [2014]   874
    that the best interests of the children should be considered  in  light
    of the position of their parents.

11. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis argued.

12. At hearing, the presenting  officer  contended  that  the  approach  to
    article 8 was flawed and undue weight was given to the position of  the
    children.  Furthermore  it  was   contended   there   was   no   proper
    consideration  of  paragraph  276  ADE.  It  was  accepted   that   the
    relationships were genuine.

13. The appellant advised me that his partner acquired a permanent right of
    residence. He said that her husband had acquired French nationality and
    she came here as his family member under Treaty Provisions. A  copy  of
    her residence card is in the papers. Her former husband has been living
    in France for the past four years and has no contact with his daughter.
    His partner works part-time. His partner's child had  been  bullied  at
    school and the family had involve social services. To  this  effect  he
    provided me with a letter dated 8 December 2016.

Consideration

14. The tribunal's decision is poorly structured.  The  refusal  under  the
    partner route of appendix FM appears to be on the basis  the  financial
    requirements are not met. There is no explanation  for  the  conclusion
    that Mrs Naomi Achiaa and  the  three  children  are  British  citizens
    though this was not disputed before me. There is no clear consideration
    of EX1.

15. Paragraph 276 ADE is referred to at paragraph 31 in the  context  of  a
    free-standing   assessment   rather   than   the   immigration   rules.
    Notwithstanding the lack of sequence the decision  does  indicate  that
    the appellant would not benefit from 276ADE(1)(vi).

16. The appeal has been allowed of free-standing article 8  basis,primarily
    because of the situation of  the  appellant's  partner  and  the  three
    children. Reference is made to section 117 B(4) and (5) and the  weight
    to be attached to the relationships. This would indicate  the  tribunal
    was conscious of this  provision  when  carrying  out  a  free-standing
    article 8 assessment but the tribunal could have been clearer.

17. In SS v Congo [2015] EWCA Civ 387 the Court of Appeal at  paragraph  43
    warned tribunals not to attach undue weight to the concept of the rules
    being a complete code. Paragraph 44 referred  to  the  proper  approach
    being to identify the relevant rule. If this was satisfied  that  would
    be the end of the matter. There can be  a  reasonable  case  for  going
    beyond the rules and the interests of a child can reduce the margin  of
    appreciation afforded to the respondent. The decision of EV Philippines
    and others v SSHD [2014] 874 however highlights that the maintenance of
    immigration control can outweigh the child's best interests.

18. The First-tier Tribunal decision would have benefited from a structured
    sequential approach. It is clear that the tribunal were  influenced  by
    the evidence of the appellant and his partner. The  history  given  and
    the ongoing nature of  the  relationship  between  the  appellant,  his
    partner and all the children of the family was accepted.

19. The tribunal found the paragraph 276 ADE was not met.

20. The appellant could not meet all of the requirements  of  appendix  FM.
    The tribunal  should  have  clearly  dealt  with  EX1.  Impliedly,  the
    tribunal took the view the exceptions  did  not  assist  the  appellant
    otherwise the appeal should have been allowed under the rules.

21. The considerations in a free-standing article 8  assessment  are  wider
    than  EX1.Although  the  decision  emphasises  the  interests  of   the
    children, particularly the eldest child, the decision does  convey  the
    impression that the entire family dynamics were considered.  The  issue
    is not the clarity of analysis by the tribunal but  whether  there  has
    been a material error of law by the tribunal in reaching its  decision.
    Whilst I do find shortcomings in the structure of the decision  I  have
    looked at the decision in its entirety and the facts found.  It  is  my
    conclusion the tribunal was entitled, having refused the  appeal  under
    the immigration rules, to go on to consider a free-standing  article  8
    assessment and to allow the appeal on that basis.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal on human  rights
grounds does not materially err in law and shall stand.


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Farrelly

