

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/26785/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 June 2013                                |On 7 June 2013               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                           JOSEPH SEBASTIAN ANTONY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not present or represented.
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. Permission to appeal has been granted by the Upper Tribunal to  this
       appellant (a citizen of India born on 8 February 1977) in respect of
       the failure of the First-tier Tribunal to determine  the  appeal  in
       respect of the decision to remove the appellant; permission has  not
       been granted on the grounds submitted by the appellant to  challenge
       the decision to dismiss his appeal against the Secretary of  State's
       decision to refuse him further leave to remain.
    2. The appellant did not attend the Upper Tribunal hearing  on  6  June
       2013. I am satisfied that he had been served upon the  appellant  at
       his last known address in the United Kingdom. I decided  to  proceed
       with the hearing the in the absence of the appellant.
    3. I find that the First-tier Tribunal erred by failing  to  allow  the
       appeal in respect of the decision  to  remove  the  appellant.  That
       decision had not been in accordance with the  law  for  the  reasons
       enunciated in the judgment of the Court of Appeal in  Ahmadi  [2013]
       EWCA Civ 512.




          DECISION

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

      I set aside the determination.

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing the appeal against the
    decision of the Secretary  of  State  to  remove  the  appellant  under
    Section 47 of the Immigration Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006.  The
    appeal against the refusal of the Secretary of State to vary the  leave
    to remain of the appellant is dismissed.



    Signed


    Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


    6 June 2013

