
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26340/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13th August 2015                  |On 26th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  MS M O A
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms B Asanovic (instructed by Jesuis Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Secretary of State with regard to a decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judges Lamb and Easterman) promulgated on 19th January 2015  by  which
    it allowed the Appellant's appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse to grant her leave to remain in the UK.

 2. For the sake of continuity and clarity I shall continue to refer to  Ms
    A as the Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent in this
    determination.

 3. The Appellant is a Nigerian citizen born on 21st  November  1972.   She
    has two children, P born on 19th December 1996 who is also  a  Nigerian
    citizen and I born on 20th May 2003 in Ireland.  As a result  I  is  an
    Irish citizen.

 4. The Appellant first came to the UK as  a  visitor  in  2003  with  both
    children.  She returned to Nigeria in 2006 leaving P and I in  the  UK.
    It is her evidence that after 2006 she travelled to  and  from  Nigeria
    for trading activities during which she  left  the  children  with  her
    siblings who are resident in the UK.

 5. The Appellant and her husband were estranged in 2003.

 6. On 18th  May  2009  the  Appellant  was  apprehended  at  Heathrow  and
    interviewed by an immigration officer.  She was recorded as  saying  at
    that time that her children were living in Nigeria, a matter which  she
    has subsequently acknowledged was a  lie.   Since  2009  she  has  made
    various attempts to remain in the United Kingdom.

 7. She was not permitted to work.  Her evidence was that  she  lived  with
    her children only partially and intermittently.  Latterly and  for  two
    months  prior  to  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    Appellant had been living with both children in  Aberdeen  in  premises
    rented by someone else.  The Secretary of State made removal  decisions
    in relation to  the  Appellant  and  both  children.   However,  it  is
    acknowledged that as an Irish citizen those are ineffective in relation
    to I.

 8. The Appellant appealed on her own and  her  sons'  behalf  against  the
    removal decision which is the appeal which came before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The appeal was argued on the basis that  the  Appellant  was
    entitled to a derivative right of residence under Regulation 15A of the
    EEA Regulations, an argument which found favour with the Judges.

 9. The Judges in the determination set out the history in relation to  the
    children and where they had lived.  So far as I is concerned he has  an
    Irish passport.  He commenced primary school in  April  2009  where  he
    remained until July 2012.  The school recorded him as living  with  his
    mother in Tilbury in 2010 and then in  Chafford  Hundred  in  2012  and
    2013.

10. In September I began attending Bosland Green Primary school in  Bristol
    but the school letter does not indicate his address at the time.

11. I was registered at a GP surgery in Chafford Hundred in  May  2009  and
    remained with them until February 2013.  His next of kin and carer  was
    recorded by the GP surgery as his mother, the Appellant.

12. P was born in Nigeria and is of Nigerian nationality.  He  had  various
    visit visas to enter the UK between 2003 and 2006 but has  subsequently
    overstayed.  P has been to school in the UK in 2006 at Tollgate Primary
    School in London.  He then attended St Pauls' Church of England Primary
    School in Wolverhampton  between  September  2007  and  June  2008  and
    between September 2008 and September 2009 he attended Rogby  School  in
    London.  From September 2009 to July 2013 he attended Gable Hall School
    in Essex.  Whilst in Essex he was registered as a patient at  the  same
    GP practise as I.

13. In the First-tier Tribunal's  discussion  and  conclusions  the  Judges
    pointed out  that  the  refusal  letter  contained  two  flaws  in  its
    reasoning.  One was that it did not accept that I was an Irish citizen;
    although by the time of the  hearing  it  was  conceded  that  he  was.
    Consequently the Secretary of State  in  the  refusal  letter  did  not
    consider  the  legal  consequences  of  the  fact  that  he  is  Irish.
    Secondly, the First-tier Tribunal noted that in the refusal letter  the
    Secretary of State considered  whether  the  Appellant  was  the  "sole
    carer" for I and set the standard of proof as proof  beyond  reasonable
    doubt.  That meant that the Secretary of State had not  considered  the
    test under Regulation. 15 as to whether the Appellant was I's  "primary
    carer".  On that basis the Tribunal thought the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law and on that basis the Appellant would have been
    entitled to succeed.  However, the Tribunal went  on  to  consider  the
    matter substantively.  It noted that I, although having  an  order  for
    his removal and his appeal not being before them as an EEA  citizen  he
    is in law entitled to stay in the UK.  If  the  Appellant  were  to  be
    returned to Nigeria with P, who is also Nigerian, that would leave I at
    the age of eleven in  the  UK  without  his  mother  and  brother.   No
    evidence had been provided as to the arrangements which would have been
    made to look after him if he was left on his own which  was  profoundly
    unsatisfactory and could not possibly  be  in  his  best  interests  or
    secure his welfare.  It found (Paragraph 31) that he would be compelled
    to leave with his mother and brother because it would undoubtedly be in
    his best interests to live with them.

14. The Tribunal then considered whether that would breach I's rights as an
    EEA citizen.  It found that it could:-

         "... not see how any child could  satisfy  the  requirement  to  be
         financially self-supporting, yet the provision cannot  be  read  as
         applying in a way which avoids  that  requirement.    It  therefore
         seems to restrict the Zambrano rights as set out in  the  case  law
         which we have cited.  Our obligation in those circumstances  is  to
         apply full EU rights  namely  the  TFEU  rather  than  Article  15A
         wording.  Applying  those  rights  as  explained  by  Elias  LJ  in
         Harrison, the Appellant is a third country national who  upon  whom
         I, a minor child, is dependent.   He  is  an  EU  citizen  and  the
         refusal of a right of residence to his mother would deprive him  of
         the genuine enjoyment of the substance of the rights  attaching  to
         his status of European Union citizen".

15. For those reasons the First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal.

16. The Secretary of State's grounds from which permission  to  appeal  was
    granted are on the basis that the Tribunal erred in  its  finding  that
    the regulation restricted the Zambrano [2011] EUECJ C-34/09  rights  as
    set out in case law but failed to taken into account judgements  in  Zu
    and Chen v SSHD [2004] ECR 1-9925 which makes clear that the rights  of
    citizens of the union to reside in another member state are subject  to
    the limitations and conditions imposed by the Treaty  and  by  measures
    adopted to give it effect.  The grounds argue  that  the  Secretary  of
    State  is  entitled  to   impose   a   requirement   under   Regulation
    15A(2)(b)(ii) that the EEA national child is  residing  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a self-sufficient person.  As such it  is  argued  that  the
    Tribunal erred in allowing the appeal.

17. Secondly, it is asserted that the Tribunal erred by failing to  provide
    adequate reasons for its finding that  the  Appellant  is  the  primary
    carer of the child I despite the fact that on  the  basis  of  its  own
    findings the Appellant had only lived with her children  partially  and
    intermittently.

18. Before me Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds.  Counsel for  the  Appellant
    defended the decision and reasons pointing out that the  Appellant  had
    relied on directly affected rights.  It was argued that I has  a  right
    to reside under the Regulations and the Directive and it is clear  from
    the case of Amos that the rights referred to in Zambrano does not  just
    apply to British children and in this case the decision would deprive I
    of the genuine enjoyment of his rights as an EU citizen.

19. I agree with the Secretary of State that the  First-tier  Tribunal  has
    misdirected itself as to the law and the EEA Regulations.   I  disagree
    with  the  argument  that  no  EEA  national  child  in  the  UK  could
    conceivably be self-sufficient and thus meet the requirements  of  that
    part of Regulation 15A.

20. An EU citizen is only entitled to remain in the UK if he is  exercising
    Treaty  rights  (with  a  very  few  exceptions  provided  for  in  the
    Regulations.

21. The relevant part of Regulation 15A provides:

          1) A person ("P") who is not an exempt person and  who  satisfies
             the criteria in Paragraph  (2),  (3),  (4A)  or  (5)  of  this
             Regulation is entitled to a derivate right to  reside  in  the
             United Kingdom  for  as  long  as  P  satisfies  the  relevant
             criteria.

          2) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if -

               a) P is the primary carer of an EEA national  ("The  relevant
                  EEA national"); and

               b) The relevant EEA national -

                   i) Is under the age of eighteen;

                  ii)  Is  residing  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  self-
                      sufficient person; and

                 iii) Would be unable to remain in the United Kingdom if  P
                      were required to leave.

22. The point about the derivative rights  of  residence  is  that  certain
    persons are entitled to be in the United Kingdom in order  to  exercise
    Treaty Rights and if they are under the age of eighteen and are  unable
    to do so alone then their parent may be entitled to a derivative  right
    in order to provide their care.  Regulation 15A provides as above.   It
    also provides for a child who is in the United Kingdom and at school at
    a time an EEA national parent was in the United Kingdom as a worker for
    him to remain to complete his education with a non EEA parent who  will
    then have a derivative right.

23. Derivative rights are temporary and do not lead to a permanent right of
    residence.  They last only while the EEA  national  has  the  right  to
    reside.

24. There is also provision for the primary carer of a British citizen  who
    would be unable to reside in the UK without the person's presence  with
    them.

25. It can thus be seen that the provisions of Regulation 15A are there  to
    safeguard a British or EEA national's right to exercise rights  in  the
    United Kingdom.  For an EEA national the rights are defined in the  EEA
    Regulations.  An EEA national is entitled to exercise Treaty Rights  in
    the United Kingdom, for a short period as a job seeker  and  thereafter
    as a worker, a self-employed person,  a  self-sufficient  person  or  a
    student.

26. Unless an EEA national  is  exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom, they have no right to remain.  They do not have a right to  be
    in the United Kingdom otherwise.  In the situation of this family I  is
    an EEA national and the only Treaty  right  he  could  be  said  to  be
    exercising is that as a student because he is in education.  Regulation
    4(1)(d) defines student as a person who -

          i) is enrolled, for the principal purpose of following  a  course
             of study  (including  vocational  training)  at  a  public  or
             private establishment which is -

              aa) financed from public funds; or

              ab) otherwise recognised by  the  Secretary  of  State  as  an
                  establishment which has been accredited for the purpose of
                  proving  such  courses  or  training  within  the  law  or
                  administrative practise of the part of the United  Kingdom
                  in which the establishment is located;

         ii) there is comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the  United
             Kingdom;

        iii) assures the Secretary of State, by means of a declaration,  or
             by such equivalent means as the person may choose, that he has
             sufficient resources not to become  a  burden  on  the  social
             system of the United Kingdom during his period of residence.

27. It is clear therefore that the requirement in Regulation  15A  for  the
    EEA national child in education to be self-sufficient ensures  that  he
    complies with the definition of a student contained  in  Regulation  4.
    If he does not meet the definition of  student  he  is  not  exercising
    Treaty rights and thus falls outwith  Regulation  15A  and  his  parent
    cannot have a derivative right to reside.

28. Neither the EEA Directive  nor  the  Regulations  provide  for  an  EEA
    national child to enter the United Kingdom and be educated at the  UK's
    expense and to receive medical treatment at the UK's expense.

29. In this case I has neither medical insurance nor is he self-sufficient.
     He is thus not a "student" as defined by the Regulations and so cannot
    be said to be exercising Treaty rights in the UK and thus the Appellant
    is not entitled to a derivative right of  residence  under  Regulations
    15A and her appeal fails.

30. It also follows that as the child, I is not exercising  Treaty  rights,
    the Secretary of State's decision is not wrong in law  for  failing  to
    address Regulation 15A.

31. Having found the First-tier Tribunal erred in allowing the  appeal  and
    having set its decision aside, In re-deciding the appeal I dismiss  the
    Appellant's original appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State.


Signed   Date 24th August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



Direction regarding anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings


Signed   Date 24th August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

