
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/26686/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at RCJ Belfast                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 October 2015                   |On 28 January 2016                   |
|Judgment given orally at hearing     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               DR Stuart Ross
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A O'Brian, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Connolly, Counsel instructed by Madden &
                    Finucane Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge M. M. Hutchinson who heard the appeal of Dr  Stuart
    Ross on 9 December 2014.  The appellant in these proceedings therefore,
    is the Secretary of State but I refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of the USA. He appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision by the respondent  to  refuse  a  residence
    card.  The application for a residence card was on the basis that he is
    the spouse of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights, his spouse said
    to be a self-employed person.   The  respondent's  decision  identified
    what could be said to  be  deficiencies  in  the  documentary  evidence
    provided by the appellant in relation to  the  self-employment  of  his
    wife.

 3. The appellant's wife, Maria Cristina Tuero-O'Donnell, is a  citizen  of
    Spain. The basis of her self-employment is as a  language  teacher,  as
    set out in the First-tier Judge's decision.

 4. In the respondent's refusal of the application for a residence card  it
    said that the evidence provided  in  relation  to  self-employment  was
    insufficient because it did not prove that  the  appellant's  wife  was
    exercising Treaty rights for five years. Reference is made to  the  tax
    returns provided, the respondent stating that those are for  the  EEA's
    sponsor's personal  records  and  are  not  for  official  use.   Other
    evidence that could have been provided is identified  in  the  decision
    letter,  in  terms  of  for  example,  tax   and   national   insurance
    contributions, bank statements reflecting self-employment, accountant's
    letters, and "official account statements". The overall conclusion  was
    that insufficient evidence of self-employment had been provided.

 5. First-tier Judge Hutchinson heard evidence from the appellant, his wife
    and from another witness, Mr Thomas Logue.  She identified at [15] what
    the issue in the case was namely "one of adequacy of evidence."  Having
    heard evidence from  the  witnesses  and  considered  what  documentary
    evidence there was,  she  allowed  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA  Regulations").  It
    may be, although it is not clear,  that  the  judge  also  allowed  the
    appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR, although that is not expressly said
    to be the case under the subheading "Decision".

 6. The respondent complains about the judge's conclusions with respect  to
    the EEA Regulations, the argument in essence echoing the terms  of  the
    decision letter, namely  that  there  was  a  lack  of  documentary  or
    supporting evidence of the appellant's wife's  self-employment.  It  is
    said that the judge impermissibly allowed the gap in that  evidence  to
    be filled by oral evidence. In other words, there was an over  reliance
    by the judge on oral evidence to  the  exclusion  of  what  documentary
    evidence  could  and  should  have  been  expected.  At  1(d)  of   the
    respondent's grounds it is said  that  whilst  the  oral  evidence  was
    deemed cogent by the  First-tier  judge,  that  did  not  overcome  the
    "paucity of evidence" in support of the assertion that the  Regulations
    are met.

 7. Submissions on  behalf  of  both  parties  can  be  summarised  in  the
    following way.  On behalf of the respondent the grounds were relied on.
     I was referred to the reasons for refusal letter in general terms,  to
    the effect that it identified what evidence could have been provided on
    behalf of the appellant.

 8. For the appellant Ms Connolly submitted that the  judge  was  perfectly
    entitled to take into account the oral  evidence.  It  was  within  the
    judge's province, as it were, to allow the oral evidence to  supplement
    what documentary evidence there was, even though it could be said  that
    some of the documentary evidence was lacking. I  was  referred  to  the
    nature of the appellant's employment in terms of what could  have  been
    expected.

 9. There was separate argument on behalf of the respondent in relation  to
    Article 8 but, as I indicated during the course  of  submissions,  that
    seems to me to be very much a side issue.

10. Generally speaking, where  evidence  of  a  fact  could  reasonably  be
    expected to be provided the Tribunal is  entitled  to  expect  that  it
    would be.  Applications for residence cards are, as is well-known, open
    to abuse by those seeking to take advantage of free movement rights  of
    workers in the European Union.

11. It is readily apparent however, that First-tier  Judge  Hutchinson  was
    well aware of the issues in the appeal. As I have already indicated, at
    [15] she clearly identified the issue in the appeal in the  very  first
    sentence, that is to say, an apparent lack of supporting evidence.  She
    pointed out however, that she had had  the  advantage  of  hearing  and
    seeing the witnesses. At  [19]  she  said  that  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant, his wife  and  Mr  Logue  was  consistent  and  given  in  a
    straightforward manner, and  which  confirmed  the  appellant's  wife's
    ongoing self-employment as a  language  teacher.   The  judge  said  as
    follows:

         "I accept that due  to  the  nature  of  her  business,  which  she
         generally runs from her  home,  although  on  occasions  she  gives
         lessons in her student's homes, that she does not have  advertising
         or invoices etc.  I also further accepted the  consistent  evidence
         that she gets paid in cash and  that  she  does  not,  as  a  rule,
         deposit this money in an account, using it  instead  for  household
         expenses."

12. She then went on at [20] to refer to the income from  the  business  as
    being relatively modest but in general she has not had to  make  a  net
    tax payment because her income falls below the personal allowance.

13. Reference is also made to the appellant's spouse raising  the  couple's
    children. She concluded that it was entirely credible  that  she  would
    wish to work around those commitments.  She gave an example in the oral
    evidence of the number of weeks when she had not worked at all  because
    of the children being unwell.  Judge Hutchinson also said that although
    self-employment may be part-time,  that  does  not  make  it  any  less
    effective (presumably in terms of the exercise of Treaty rights). There
    is also reference to Ms Tuero-O'Donnell's previous work at  a  language
    school and that she obtains all  her  clients  by  word  of  mouth  and
    recommendations.  This would appear to reflect on the issue of evidence
    of advertising, referred to in the decision letter.

14. At [22] the judge said that she accepted the point made  on  behalf  of
    the  respondent  that  there  is  perhaps  "a  paucity  of  independent
    documentary evidence" but she reminded herself that she did not require
    corroboration.  She also said that the  appellant  and  his  wife,  and
    indeed Mr Logue (a retired  tax  inspector)  would  be  perpetrating  a
    reasonably sophisticated fraud over an extended period if she  were  to
    accept the inference that the oral and other evidence in  the  detailed
    records kept by Ms  Tuero-O'Donnell  of  her  ongoing  self-employment,
    cannot be relied on as accurate.

15. At [17] she said that it was regrettable  that  there  was  no  written
    evidence  of  national  insurance  contributions  or  statements   from
    clients, or diaries noting client appointments over the years.   It  is
    clear however, that she had a plain understanding of the basis  of  the
    sponsor's self-employment and undertook a careful analysis of it.

16. It is not a case here, of no  documentary  evidence  and  simple  blind
    acceptance by the judge of the oral evidence of individuals  who  could
    be said to have a  motive  for  deception.   The  judge  was  perfectly
    entitled to conclude that although documentary  evidence  was  lacking,
    the deficiencies in that evidence were made up by, or supplemented  by,
    credible oral evidence.

17. In these circumstances, I am not satisfied that it has been established
    that there is any error of law in the First-tier judge's decision.  The
    decision to allow the appeal under the EEA Regulations is to stand.

18. It is not necessary for me to decide the point in relation to Article 8
    of the ECHR because the decision in that respect, so far as it  can  be
    deduced, fell in line with that under the EEA Regulations.   There  may
    otherwise have been a separate point about whether an Article 8  ground
    of appeal is available at all in an appeal against  the  refusal  of  a
    residence card, in the light of recent authorities, but this is not one
    of those cases on which a determination on that issue needs to be made.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law. Its decision to allow the appeal  therefore
    stands.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  27/01/16
