
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26252/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31 March 2014                              |On 07th April 2014           |
|Delivered orally                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

                          Badruddin Ahmed Siddiquee

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     The Appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge R A Jones who, sitting at Taylor House on  20
    December 2013 and in  a  subsequent  determination  promulgated  on  17
    January 2014 (and whilst dismissing  the  appeal  of  the  claimant,  a
    citizen of Bangladesh, against the Secretary of State's decision  dated
    11 June 2013 to refuse to  vary  the  claimant's  leave  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student) allowed the appeal to the extent that the associated
    Section 47 removal decision was not in accordance with the law.

2.   In granting permission to appeal that part of the decision,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge R A Cox unequivocally had this to say:

         "The point is a  simple  one.   The  Judge  undoubtedly  materially
         misdirected himself in law.  The Respondent's decisions  were  made
         on 11 June 2013, that is to say after Section 51 of the  Crime  and
         Courts Act 2013 came into force  on  8  May  2013.   Therefore  the
         removal decision under Section 47 of the 2006 Act was, contrary  to
         the Judge's understanding, in accordance with the law."

3.   Mr Melvin on behalf of the Secretary of State not  surprisingly  relied
    on the grounds and the observations of the First-tier Judge who granted
    the Secretary of State permission to appeal.  He maintained that it was
    indeed a material error  of  law  that  the  First-tier  Judge,  having
    dismissed the claimant's substantive  immigration  appeal  should  have
    nonetheless allowed the  appeal  in  terms  of  Section  47  given  the
    legislation to the contrary that indeed had been in force some five  to
    six months before the hearing of the appeal before the First-tier Judge
    and therefore something that with great respect to the Judge, of  which
    he should have been aware.

4.   I made a point of explaining to Mr Siddiquee that the  purpose  of  the
    hearing before me was solely to determine whether or not  the  decision
    of the First-tier Judge in allowing the claimant's appeal in  terms  of
    Section 47 was an  error  of  law  material  to  the  outcome  of  that
    particular decision.  I further explained  to  him  the  basis  of  the
    Secretary of State's grounds of challenge and the observations  of  the
    First-tier Judge who granted  permission  (as  stated  above).   Having
    ensured that he understood the purpose of  the  hearing,  Mr  Siddiquee
    informed me that he therefore appreciated that as a matter of law  this
    Tribunal had no alternative but  to  allow  the  Secretary  of  State's
    challenge to the First-tier Judge's decision.

5.   It was readily apparent to me that in common with the First-tier  Judge
    who granted permission to appeal and for like  reason,  the  First-tier
    Judge did indeed materially err in law.

Conclusion

6.   The making of the decisions of the First-tier  Tribunal  in  dismissing
    the appeal of the Respondent under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR did not involve the making of an error on a point
    of law.  I do not therefore set aside those decisions.

7.   The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the
    appeal against the decision to remove the Respondent under  Section  47
    of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act  2006  did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

8.   I set aside that decision.

9.   I remake that decision in the appeal by dismissing it.


Signed                                  Date 3 April 2014



Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
