
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/26079/2015
                                                IA/26078/2015, IA/26075/2015
                                                IA/26077/2015, IA/26076/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision &  Reason            |
|                                             |Promulgated                   |
|On 9 January 2018                            |On 19 January 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     MS
                                     NMS
                                     NS
                                     MS2
                                     AS
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellants:    Mr S Karim, instructed by Cranbrook Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellants'  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Young  promulgated  18.11.16,  dismissing  their  linked
    appeals against the decisions of the Secretary of State, dated  8.7.15,
    to refuse their applications for LTR on Human Rights grounds.

 2. The Judge heard the appeal on 25.10.16.

 3. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Baker  on
    25.5.17. However,  when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Blum granted permission on 31.10.17.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 9.1.18 as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision of Judge Young should be set aside.

 6. In granted permission to appeal, Judge Blum noted that nowhere  in  the
    decision does the First-tier Tribunal Judge  specifically  address  the
    best  interests  of  the  two  child  appellants.  Whilst  the  factors
    considered in the  proportionality  assessment  are  also  relevant  to
    assessing the best interests of the  children,  the  requirement  under
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 is  for
    an assessment distinct to the proportionality balancing exercise. Judge
    Blum  considered  it  arguable   that   this   failure   rendered   the
    proportionality assessment unsafe.

 7. Judge Blum also found it arguable that in attaching  little  weight  to
    the private lives of the two children, the  judge  failed  to  consider
    that  as  children  they  had  little  control  over  their  precarious
    immigration status and should not be blamed for the  conduct  of  their
    parents, following Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2013] UKSC 74 and  Kaur  (children's  best  interests/public  interest
    interface) [2017] UKUT 00014 (IAC).

 8. The Rule 24  reply,  dated  27.11.17,  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal directed itself appropriately and that at [130] and [131]  the
    judge considered the position of each of the children and that the best
    interests were considered, and that adequate findings  were  given  for
    concluding  that  the  child   appellants'   return   was   reasonable,
    notwithstanding the weight accorded at [128] to residence.

 9. The difficulty arises from the failure of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    to refer to Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act
    2009 and to specifically address the best interests of the children  in
    that context. For the Secretary of State, Mr Nath points  to  the  very
    detailed consideration of the circumstances of the child appellants and
    submits that there was, in  effect,  an  adequate  assessment  of  best
    interests of the children. Mr Karim submitted that Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 requires a  free-standing
    assessment of best interests and that this cannot be divined  from  the
    decision.

10. In ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4, the Supreme Court held  that  the  best
    interests of a child must be a  primary  consideration  and  that  this
    means they must be considered first. However, those best interests  can
    be outweighed by the cumulative effect of other factors. This  included
    the public interest and the mother's appalling immigration history. The
    children are not to be blamed for the sins of the parents and  thus  it
    would be wrong to devalue what is in their best interests by  something
    for which they could in no way be held  to  be  responsible.  The  best
    interests must rank higher than other considerations and is not  merely
    one consideration that is to be weighed in the balance alongside  other
    competing factors.

11. In Kaur the President held, inter alia,  that  in  the  proportionality
    balancing exercise, the best interests of a child must be  assessed  in
    isolation from other factors, such as parental misconduct, and that the
    'best interests' assessment should  normally  be  carried  out  at  the
    beginning  of  the  balancing  exercise.  Factors  such   as   parental
    immigration misconduct must not intrude at the stage of assessing  best
    interests, which "have a free-standing character. Avoidance of error is
    likely to be promoted if the best interests assessment is  carried  out
    first." Factors such as immigration status may legitimately  enter  the
    equation at a later stage  of  the  overall  proportionality  balancing
    exercise, at which stage a child's best interests  can  potentially  be
    outweighed by the public  interest  and  the  immigration  history  and
    status of the parents.

12. In Kaur, the President went on to consider the effect of s117B  of  the
    2002 Act on the 'best interests' principles. As drafted the  provisions
    appear to have the effect that whilst a child's best interests have the
    status of a primary consideration, the private lives  of  both  parents
    and  children  developed  during  periods  of  precarious  or  unlawful
    residence in the UK are automatically  and  compulsorily  given  little
    weight. There is no distinction in the statute between a  child  or  an
    adult. However, relying on Rhuppiah v Secretary of  State  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 803, the  President  concluded  that  the  'sins  of  the  parents'
    principle survives s117B, on the basis that the wording of s117A allows
    other considerations which are capable of counterbalancing the  'little
    weight' provisions, and that the 'little  weight'  requirement  may  be
    overridden in an exceptional case by particularly  strong  features  of
    the private life in question, so that it is not appropriate  to  attach
    only little weight to private life in  the  article  8  proportionality
    balancing exercise. The President suggested  that  there  is  therefore
    some flexibility in the 'little  weight'  legislative  instructions  of
    s117B.

13. Of note is that the President cited the judgement of Lord Thomas LCJ in
    Hesham Ali (Iraq) v SSHD [2016]  UKSC  60  Ali,  which  emphasised  the
    importance of making clear findings on material  issues  of  fact.  The
    next requirement on judges is to "set out in clear and  succinct  terms
    their reasoning," Lord Thomas advocating the 'balance sheet'  approach,
    so that First-tier Tribunal Judges set out reasoned conclusions  as  to
    whether the countervailing factors outweigh the importance attached  to
    the public interest.

14. The President concluded, relying on EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA
    Civ 874 and MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, "The best  interests  of
    any affected  child  constitute  a  free  standing  factor  and  should
    properly be assessed before the proportionality balancing  exercise  is
    carried out. This exercise will  be  vulnerable  to  challenge  if  the
    child's best interests have not, first and  foremost,  been  adequately
    and  correctly  assessed.  Any  issues  of   unlawful   or   precarious
    immigration status or parental misconduct have no role to play in  this
    assessment. Such issues do, however, arise at the stage  of  completing
    the "balance sheet" advocated by Lord Thomas (supra).  Issues  of  this
    kind are plainly relevant and they belong to the public  interest  side
    of the balancing equation. It is at this later point  in  the  exercise
    that they enter the stage." Where, at that stage, in  any  given  case,
    the evaluation of parental  immigration  misconduct  in  the  balancing
    exercise contributes to a  conclusion  that  will  involve  the  entire
    family unit departing the UK, this  does  not  amount  to  blaming  the
    children.  "Critically  -absent  some  other  vitiating  factor  -  the
    assessment of the best interests of the  children,  always  most  aptly
    carried  out  at  the  beginning  of  the  overall  exercise,  will  be
    unassailable in law provided that the factor of parental misconduct has
    not intruded at that stage."

15. In the light of the above analysis, I do not accept the submission that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal applying  s117B  penalises  the
    children for their parents' conduct. However, the failure of the First-
    tier Tribunal to make a clearly identifiable  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of the children and to do so at the outset and independent of
    their immigration status or history, falls foul  of  the  guidance  and
    jurisprudence  summarised  above.   Whilst  the  decision  discloses  a
    careful assessment of the circumstances  of  each  of  the  appellants,
    including the children, the decision jumbles effective consideration of
    best interests with the proportionality assessment, so that it  is  not
    possible to establish  what  the  conclusion  was  on  best  interests,
    independent of other countervailing factors.

16. In the circumstances, the decision cannot stand and must be  set  aside
    to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

Remittal

17. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. Where the findings are unclear on a
    crucial issue at the heart of an appeal, as  they  are  in  this  case,
    effectively there has not been a valid determination of those issues.

18. In all the circumstances, I relist this appeal for a fresh  hearing  in
    the First-tier Tribunal, on the basis that this is a case  which  falls
    squarely within the Senior President's Practice Statement at  paragraph
    7.2. The effect of the error has been to deprive  the  appellant  of  a
    fair hearing and that the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding
    which is necessary for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal  with
    cases fairly and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, I  find
    that it is appropriate to remit this appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
    to determine the appeal afresh.

Decision

19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier  Tribunal   in   accordance   with   the   attached
                    directions.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


Consequential Directions

20. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross;

21. The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved;

22. The ELH is 3 hours;

23. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
    exception of Young and Judge Baker;

24. The appellant is to ensure  that  all  evidence  to  be  relied  on  is
    contained within a single consolidated, indexed and paginated bundle of
    all objective and  subjective  material,  together  with  any  skeleton
    argument and copies of all  case  authorities  to  be  relied  on.  The
    Tribunal will  not  accept  materials  submitted  on  the  day  of  the
    forthcoming appeal hearing;

25. The First-tier Tribunal may give such further or alternative directions
    as are deemed appropriate.

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.  However,  the  case  involves  children  so  that  an
anonymity direction is appropriate.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The outcome of the appeal remains to be decided.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


