
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/26455/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 11 February 2015                  |On 16 February 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                               TABISH QURESHI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Javed of Reiss Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this  appeal  but
    in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in
    the First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State
    against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox promulgated  on  24
    October 2014 which allowed the Appellant's appeal.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 19 August 1989 and is a national of Pakistan.

 4. On 9 January 2014 the Appellant applied for a Permanent Residence  Card
    as a family member of [HI] an EEA national.

 5. On  6  June  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons  by  reference
    to Regulation 15 and 10(5) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006:

      a) The Appellant had failed to provide a valid passport or national ID
         card as evidence of the EEA national's identity.

      b) The Appellant had failed to provide evidence of  his  divorce  from
         his EEA spouse.

      c) The Appellant had failed to provide evidence that his  former  wife
         was exercising free movement rights at the time of the divorce.

      d) The Appellant failed to provide evidence that the marriage lasted 3
         years and they lived together for one year in the United Kingdom or
         he had been a victim of domestic violence.

      e) The Appellant failed to provide evidence that since the date of the
         divorce he had been a worker,  self  employed  or  self  sufficient
         other than an undated letter of employment.

The Judge's Decision

 6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Fox ("the Judge") allowed the appeal. The Judge found :

      a)  The  Appellant  was  giving  some  thought  to  patching  up   his
         relationship with his wife who was an Austrian citizen.

      b) The Appellant was 'a regular inconsistent (sic) victim of  domestic
         abuse at the hands of his EEA Sponsor.'

      c) He had difficulty in complying with the 'detailed  requirements  of
         the regulations.'

      d) He produced a photocopy  of  the  EEA  nationals  ID  card  and  an
         original payslip from Assists Recruitment and he was satisfied that
         the EEA  national  was  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United
         Kingdom.

      e) The Appellant had been living with his spouse for more than a year.

      f) The Appellant had secured employment with SSP United Kingdom.

      g) At paragraph 14 he found that 'the Netherlands (sic) qualify for  a
         residence card'  and  at  paragraph  15  'I  am  satisfied  that  a
         Residence Card should not be issued to the Appellant.'

      h) Paragraph 15 he considered the claim under  the  Human  Rights  Act
         1998 and Article 8 and found the United  Kingdom  decision  not  to
         issue the Residence Card was disproportionate.

      i) Paragraph 17 the decision was not in accordance with  the  law  and
         the applicable Immigration Rules.

 7. Grounds of appeal  were  lodged  and  on  2  December  2014  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kelly gave permission to appeal on the basis that it was
    arguable that the Judge failed to state the ground on which the  appeal
    was allowed as between his Treaty Rights or Article  8;  that  he  made
    confused and contradictory findings in that at paragraphs 14 and 15  he
    found both that the Residence Card should, and should not  be  granted;
    failed to consider the basis on which a retained right of residence  is
    acquired in particular whether the marriage was terminated;  failed  to
    consider the requirements for a  permanent  right  of  residence  under
    Regulation 15.

 8. At the hearing I heard submissions from Ms Johnstone on behalf  of  the
    Appellant that in essence:

      a) She relied on the grounds of appeal.

      b) There was a lack of clarity in the Judges findings.

      c) There was a lack of findings in relation to key issues.

      d) The Judge had failed to address the issue of whether  there  was  a
         right of appeal under Regulation 26 although she conceded that this
         was not in the grounds of appeal.

 9. On behalf of the Respondent  Ms Javed submitted that :

      a) The contradictory findings could simply have been  a  typographical
         error.

      b) She conceded that the Judge had failed to make findings in relation
         to whether the marriage in question had been terminated.

Legal Framework

10. The provisions of the 2006 Regulations that were in issue are:

    "Permanent right of residence

         15.      (1)  The following persons  shall  acquire  the  right  to
         reside in the United Kingdom permanently -

                  (f)  a person who -

                      (i)   has resided in the United Kingdom in accordance
                      with these Regulations for  a  continuous  period  of
                      five years; and

                      (ii)  was, at the end of that period, a family member
                      who has retained the right of residence."

    "Family member who has retained the right of residence"

         10.      (1)  In these Regulations, "family member who has retained
         the right of residence" means, subject to paragraph (8),  a  person
         who satisfies the conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

                  (5)  A person satisfies the conditions in  this  paragraph
                  if -

                      (a)   he ceased to be a family member of a  qualified
                      person or of an EEA national with a  permanent  right
                      of residence on the termination of  the  marriage  or
                      civil partnership of that person;

                      (b)   he  was  residing  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
                      accordance with these Regulations at the date of  the
                      termination;

                      (c)   he satisfies the condition  in  paragraph  (6);
                      and

                      (d)   either -

                           (i)      prior   to   the   initiation   of   the
                           proceedings for the termination of  the  marriage
                           or the civil partnership the  marriage  or  civil
                           partnership had lasted for at least  three  years
                           and  the  parties  to  the  marriage   or   civil
                           partnership had resided in the United Kingdom for
                           at least one year during its duration; ...

                           (iv)    the continued right of residence  in  the
                           United Kingdom of  the  person  is  warranted  by
                           particularly difficult circumstances, such as  he
                           or another family member having been a victim  of
                           domestic violence while  the  marriage  or  civil
                           partnership was subsisting.

                  (6)  The condition in this paragraph is that the person -

                      (a)   is not an EEA national but would, if he were an
                      EEA national, be a worker, a self-employed person  or
                      a self-sufficient person under regulation 6; or

                      (b)   is the family member  of  a  person  who  falls
                      within paragraph (a)."

The Law

11.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or  giving
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail  to
    deal with every factual issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
    Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law. Unless an Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have  taken  no  account  of  evidence  that  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration judge concludes that the story told is untrue. If  a  point
    of evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is
    a failure to take into account a material consideration.

Finding on Material Error

13. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made material errors of law.

14. This was an application by the Appellant for a Permanent Residence Card
    underpinned by his assertion that he and his wife had divorced. It  was
    decided in OA (EEA - retained right of residence) Nigeria [2010]  UKAIT
    00003 and Amos v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 552 which the judge was  directed
    to be the Presenting Officer that under Regulation 10 (5)(a) the phrase
    "termination of the marriage ..." can only mean the  lawful  ending  of
    the marriage by  legal  proceedings  (i.e.  divorce);  it  cannot  mean
    "breakdown of the marriage.' The refusal letter set  out  clearly  that
    the Appellant had failed to establish that he was divorced.  The  Judge
    failed to make and finding in relation to this key issue and  this  was
    properly conceded by Ms Javed.

15. The Judge failed to refer to  or  make  findings  in  relation  to  the
    requirement to establish whether the Appellant  and  his  EEA  national
    wife had exercised EEA rights for a continuous period  of  5  years  or
    adequately explain why he accepted one payslip was sufficient  evidence
    in relation to this.

16. There is no clear finding in relation to whether the parties had  lived
    together for a year: there is an assertion that this was the  case  but
    no indication of the evidential basis for that  finding.  Alternatively
    the findings in relation to the Appellant having  been  the  victim  of
    domestic violence were inadequate failed  to  set  the  basis  for  the
    conclusions reached.

17. The Judge made completely contradictory  findings  as  to  whether  the
    Appellant should be granted a Residence Card under the EEA  Regulations
    at paragraphs 14 and 15 and given the confused nature of  his  previous
    findings it is difficult to determine which is correct.  The  confusion
    is further confounded by the fact that even if it were accepted that he
    accepted the appeal should succeed  under  the  EEA  Regulations  there
    would have been no requirement to go on to consider  Article  8  as  he
    did.

18. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to address or determine with any
    or adequate reasoning whether the parties had  been  divorced,  whether
    they had exercised treaty rights for 5 years and lived together  for  a
    year constitute a clear errors of law. The  errors  I  consider  to  be
    material since had the Tribunal conducted  this  exercise  the  outcome
    could have been different. That in my  view  is  the  correct  test  to
    apply. The decision is therefore set aside in its entirety all  matters
    to be determined afresh with none of the findings preserved.

19. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal Practice  Statement
    of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First
    Tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

         (a)      the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
         the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity  for
         that party's case to be put to and  considered  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal; or

         (b)      the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made  is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2,  it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

20. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted because
    there is a complete absence of findings  in  relation  to  any  of  the
    issues in this case.

21. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal sitting
    at Manchester to be heard on the 23 March 2015, before me.

22. I make the following directions for the resumed hearing :

      a. Listed for 2 hours.

      b. No interpreter required.


Signed      Date 14.2.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
