
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers IA/26720/2014
                                                               IA/29452/2014
                                                               IA/26728/2014
                                                           and IA/29453/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3rd June 2015                     |On 22nd June 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES
                                     and
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                                     J G
                                    M G K
                                   D K G A
                                   R A G A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: No appearance
For the Respondent: Mr E Tufan (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants, citizens of Ghana, applied to the  Secretary  of  State
    for leave to remain in the UK outside the Immigration Rules. The  First
    and Second Appellants entered the UK as visitors on different dates but
    then overstayed, the Third and Fourth Appellants were born in the UK in
    2003 and 2009. The applications were refused and the appeals  dismissed
    for the reasons given in  the  decision  promulgated  on  the  30th  of
    December 2014.

 2. In summary it  was  found  that  the  Appellants  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules. The applications had  been  made
    in 2010 and appealable decisions made against the Appellants  in  2014.
    The Judge considered the Appellants' case under article 8 of  the  ECHR
    and found that it would not  be  disproportionate  to  remove  them  to
    Ghana.

 3. The Appellants sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    grounds of the 10th of January 2015. It was argued that the  Judge  was
    wrong to find  that  removal  was  proportionate  even  though  he  had
    expressed regret at the length of time it had taken for the  Respondent
    to consider the Appellants' applications. It was  argued,  particularly
    with reference to the Third Appellant, that given the length of time he
    had been in the UK, and the life that they had established in the UK it
    would not be reasonable to remove them and the Judge erred  in  finding
    that it would be.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin  on
    the 15th of April 2015. He did so and rejected the suggestion that  the
    Judge erred in not considering the applications by reference to the new
    rules. It was arguable that the Judge erred in relation to  section  55
    of the 2009 Act and failed to have regard to the guidance of the  Court
    of Appeal in EV (Philippines) EWCA Civ 874.

 5. The Appellants did not  attend  the  hearing  and  requested  that  the
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal be conducted  on  the  basis  of  the
    submissions that had been made. We have had regard to  the  grounds  of
    application submitted by the  Appellants  and  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    papers. Brief submissions were made by Mr Tufan in  which  he  observed
    that the original applications had been refused in 2010, the delay  was
    with regard to the removal directions, the  Third  Appellant  made  his
    application on the 28th of July 2012 and the  decision  was  after  the
    rules had been amended. We indicated at the hearing that we found  that
    there was no material error in the decision and that the appeals  would
    be dismissed for reasons that would be given later.

 6. The Third Appellant's application was made on the 27th of July 2012 and
    so came under the new rules and paragraph 276ADE in particular. However
    the rules to be applied are those at the date  of  the  decision  being
    made,  Odelola  [2009]  UKHL  25,  and  by  then  the  requirement   of
    reasonableness had been added to the consideration of a  removal  of  a
    child who had been in the UK for 7 years or more.

 7. The grounds do not make  any  reference  to  the  cases  of  either  EV
    (Philippines) or Zoumbas [2013]UKSC 74. Both  cases  involved  families
    with poor immigration histories and children who had lived  in  the  UK
    for over 7 years. In both it was  found  that  the  children  could  be
    removed, it was not for the UK to educate them or to provide them  with
    healthcare even though objectively their best interests could  be  said
    to entail remaining in the UK. Neither assists the Appellants  in  this
    case.

 8. Paragraph 276ADE is predicated on the basis that whilst  in  the  UK  a
    child will form a family life with the parents  and  any  siblings  and
    will probably form a private life centred around their school  and  any
    clubs or societies they join and any  religious  activities  that  they
    follow. The added requirement of  unreasonableness  must  mean  that  a
    private and family life that is within the  bounds  of  what  would  be
    expected is insufficient to justify a finding a  child  should  not  be
    removed, if not all children would succeed after 7 years residence come
    what may.

 9. The decision of Judge Cooper does not show any factors  that  could  be
    said to be unusual in the circumstances of the Appellants and there  is
    nothing about the situation which they have created  which  would  make
    their removal unreasonable. Albeit not a material error the  Judge  was
    wrong to find that there had been a delay in the consideration  of  the
    First  and  Second  Appellant's  case,  the  first  refusal  of   their
    applications was in May 2010, the delay came  in  giving  them  an  in-
    country right of appeal. In that time they chose to remain  in  the  UK
    illegally, there may have been no attempt to remove them but  that  did
    not alter their obligations to comply with the rules that apply to them
    and they chose not to. In that time they continued to receive  benefits
    such as their children's education to which they were not entitled.

10. The Judge had explicitly considered the position of the Third Appellant
    in paragraph 41 of the decision. He noted that  he  was  approaching  a
    natural break in his education and that his integration to Ghana  would
    be with the assistance of his  parents.  There  was  nothing  in  these
    circumstances that warranted his being permitted to remain and none  of
    the others had an independent right to remain in the UK.

11. Whilst there might have been a reference to other case law we find that
    there  is  no  error  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Accordingly the decision of Judge Cooper stands as the disposal of  the
    Appellants' appeals.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

We do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

We continue that order (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award

In dismissing the appeals we make no fee award.



Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 18th June 2015
