
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/26912/2014
     IA/26933/2014
     IA/26935/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 February 2015                           |On 23 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             GANNESWAREE NARAYYA
                              Manishrao Narayya
                              nagesrao narayya
                         (ANONYMITY orders not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms C Fielden, Counsel, instructed by Raj Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Majid promulgated on 12 November 2014   allowing  each  of  the  linked
    appeals of Mrs Narayya, Mr Narayya and their son Master Narayya against
    decisions of the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  dated  18
    June 2014 to remove them from the United Kingdom.

2.   Although before me the Secretary of State  is  the  appellant  and  the
    Narayyas are the respondents, for the  sake  of  consistency  with  the
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter  refer  to
    the Narayyas as the Appellants  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    Respondent.

Background

3.   The Appellants are nationals of Mauritius.  The  First  appellant,  Mrs
    Ganneswaree Narayya was born on 21 July 1970; the Second Appellant, her
    son, Manishrao Narayya,  was  born  on  4  July  2003;  and  the  Third
    Appellant, Mr Nagesrao Narayya, the husband of the First Appellant  and
    father of the Second Appellant, was born on 14 November 1965.

4.   The Appellants arrived in the United Kingdom  on  15  March  2004.   At
    that time in addition to the three named Appellants, two other children
    of the family also travelled to the United Kingdom.  I  am  told  today
    that  of  those  two  children  one  of  them  returned  to   Mauritius
    approximately five years ago, and the other is present  in  the  United
    Kingdom awaiting a decision from the Respondent in respect of  his  own
    immigration status.

5.   Having  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  March  2004,  the  Third
    Appellant applied for leave to remain as a student on  12  August  2004
    which was granted on 15 October  2004  until  30  November  2005.   The
    papers on file make reference to an application having been made by the
    First Appellant and  her  children  for  further  leave  to  remain  as
    visitors.  Be that as it may, when  the  Third  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for further leave to remain as a student in November  2005  the
    First  Appellant  and  the  three  children  were  included   in   that
    application as dependants.  Leave was granted,  and  indeed  successive
    leaves were granted until 31 March 2009.

6.   On 30 March 2009 an application was made on  human  rights  grounds  in
    the name of the  Third  Appellant,  with  his  wife  and  two  youngest
    children included as dependants.  This  was  refused  on  23  September
    2009.  Although the documents before the  First-tier  Tribunal  do  not
    reveal the intervening immigration  history,  it  has  become  apparent
    today that in or about that time there was an appeal before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

7.   Mr Bramble has been able to produce from the  Respondent's  file  today
    documents relating to linked appeals  under  the  references  IA/30193/
    30195/ 30196 and 30197/2010, being appeals  in  respect  of  the  three
    Appellants before me and one other of the children, heard on 9 November
    2010 at Taylor House.  Those  appeals  were  dismissed  on  immigration
    grounds and on human rights grounds in a  decision  promulgated  on  17
    November 2010. An application for permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was refused in the first instance by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Spencer and in due course by Upper Tribunal Judge Warr on 11 May 2011.

8.   Those appeals were not overtly apparent in  the  documents  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal - although there was a reference to the  Appellants
    having become 'appeal rights exhausted' in May 2011, which should  have
    indicated to a reader of the  Respondent's  bundle  the  likelihood  of
    earlier appeal proceedings.

9.   Notwithstanding the  adverse  decision  in  their  appeals,  the  First
    Appellant made an application for leave to remain with her husband  and
    youngest child as dependants on 11 September  2012.   That  application
    was refused on 18 July 2013 but no appealable immigration decision  was
    made at that time.

10.  There then followed judicial review  proceedings  under  the  reference
    CO/15751/2013 lodged on 18 October 2013, which resulted  in  a  Consent
    Order on 7 March 2014 to the effect  that  the  Respondent  would  give
    further consideration to the cases and if making  an  adverse  decision
    would make a decision that attracted a right of appeal.  It is in those
    circumstances that the Respondent reached decisions on the  Appellants'
    cases expressed through a 'reasons for refusal' letter  ('RFRL')  dated
    16 June 2014, and issued Notices of Immigration  Decision  on  18  June
    2014 that  the  Appellants  be  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom  in
    consequence of the rejection of their application.

11.  The Appellants appealed to the  IAC.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    allowed the appeals for reasons set out in his decision.

12.  The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Astle on 5 January 2015.

Consideration

13.  I have no real hesitation in concluding that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge should be set aside for error  of  law.  Indeed  Ms
    Fielden in written submissions prepared for today's hearing states  "It
    is difficult to oppose the  Respondent's  arguments",  and  essentially
    focuses in her written submissions on the merits of the  case  and  the
    potential relevance of new evidence in the event of a rehearing.

14.  In her oral observations today Ms Fielden indicated that  she  did  not
    have express instructions to concede the issue of error of law, but she
    declined to advance any submissions  resisting  the  substance  of  the
    Respondent's challenge.

15.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge errs in the following respects:

    (i)  No proper engagement with the facts of the appeals is discernible;



    (ii) There is no reference to or attempt to consider the  cases  within
         the framework of the Immigration Rules, which are  'in  play',  and
         should form a starting point for any consideration  of  the  issues
         relating to human rights;

    (iii)    Insofar as the Judge has conducted a  freestanding  Article  8
         assessment there  is  no  identification  of  the  public  interest
         considerations;

    (iv) The Judge has misdirected himself as to the role  of  the  welfare
         and best interests of children.

16.  It is not necessary for me to expand on the  second  and  third  points
    that I have just identified: they  are  readily  discernible  from  any
    reading of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.  I merely  observe
    in this content that the concluding sentence of the  substance  of  the
    determination at paragraph 25 is in these terms:  "I am persuaded  that
    the Appellant [sic.] comes within the law  and  can  benefit  from  the
    relevant Immigration Rules as amended and the protections of the ECHR".
     This passage leaves it unclear whether the Judge is allowing the  case
    under the Rules or under the ECHR outwith the Rules. The  body  of  the
    determination in no way enlightens the reader in this regard.

17.  In respect of the apparent failure properly to engage with  the  facts,
    I  note  the  following.   Although  the  decision  is  littered   with
    references to having read the  materials,  having  had  regard  to  the
    applicable law and it not being necessary to  give  reasons  for  every
    finding  of  fact  "and  waste  paper  in  detailing  obvious  reasons"
    (paragraph 6), such comments do not obviate the Judge from  needing  to
    demonstrate an engagement with any  controversial  issues  and  explain
    with clarity the key reasons for reaching  a  decision.   The  decision
    herein is patently lacking in this regard.

18.  In a decision of approximately five pages the only readily  discernible
    case specific passages, that is to say passages that address the  facts
    of the particular case, are as follows:

    (i) At paragraph 7, when recording the evidence of the First Appellant:

         "She further emphasised that the Second  Appellant,  her  son,  has
         spent all of his life in the UK. In the previous 11  years  he  has
         developed his friendships and had his  schooling  here.   His  best
         interests require that he should not be removed to Mauritius  which
         is a totally alien country to him."

    (ii) At paragraph 10, the Judge says this in the context  of  the  best
    interests of the Second Appellant:

         "After perusing the statement of the  Appellant  dated  24  October
         2014 carefully, I can say that the "best interest"  of  the  Second
         Appellant (the  biological  son  of  the  Principal  Appellant)  is
         paramount in this case and to remove him to Mauritius he should not
         be separated from his mother.  Further, he has spent all of the  11
         years of his life in this country and his removal  will  bring  him
         serious hardships in schooling etc."

    (I shall comment further in regard to  the  reference  to  paramountcy.
    Over and above that, it is unclear what the Judge means in  the  phrase
    "to remove him to Mauritius he should not be separated from his mother"
    in circumstances where it is proposed that the Appellants be removed as
    a family unit.)

    (iii) At paragraph 12 of the decision in respect of the submissions:

         "Mr Harris agreed with the Presenting Officer that in  this  appeal
         the second Appellant (11 years old boy) is the crucial Appellant in
         this case; if the boy's appeal is successful then the  mother  will
         automatically succeed."

    (iv) At paragraph 23 the Judge states:

         "Powerful factors are outlined in  respect  of  this  Appellant  in
         paragraph 10 above"

         (which I have already quoted above).

    (v) At paragraph 24 the Judge states:

         "The rule of law should benefit these Appellants  -  the  Principal
         Appellant can benefit logically with the  lawful  consideration  of
         the "best interest" of the second Appellant.  I must say  that  the
         "father" [sic] of  the  child  can  also  benefit  from  his  son's
         interest being supreme."

19.  It may be seen that each of those passages really say more or less  the
    same thing, and it  is  no  more  than  to  identify  that  the  Second
    Appellant has spent  a  considerable  period  of  time  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  This is far from a proper rehearsal of  all  relevant  facts,
    and far from a proper engagement with all relevant issues.  Whilst  the
    Judge asserts that he has "outlined  the  evidential  elements  of  the
    evidence adduced on behalf of the Appellant which are relevant  to  the
    fair disposal of this appeal" (paragraph 8), in my judgement it is  not
    evident to the reader that the Judge has done so.

20.  In respect of the role of welfare and/or 'best interests',  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge repeatedly refers to the interests  of  the  Second
    Appellant as being paramount rather than being a primary consideration.
     See, for example, at paragraph 10 (from which I  have  already  quoted
    above), but also: at paragraph 15, "The "best interest" of the child is
    paramount in this case";  paragraph 17, "the Supreme Court  unanimously
    held that the best interests of the child  had  to  be  considered  and
    given paramount weight as part of  the  assessment  of  proportionality
    under Article 8 ECHR"; and paragraph 24, where in the quotation already
    given above the Judge refers to the "son's interests being supreme".

21.  Whilst the Judge makes appropriate references at paragraphs 18  and  19
    of the determination to welfare and best interests, it is not  apparent
    in light of the other references to paramountcy that he has  understood
    or applied the appropriate jurisprudence. This is particularly so given
    the fact that the quotation from ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 reproduced
    at paragraph 18 is preceded by the assertion at paragraphs 17 that "the
    Supreme Court unanimously held that the best  interests  of  the  child
    have to be considered and given paramount weight...".

22.  In the circumstances  I  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was significantly and seriously flawed  for  a  material
    error of law and must be set aside.

23.  The decision in the appeal accordingly needs to be  remade.   It  seems
    to me that both  parties,  that  is  to  say  the  Appellants  and  the
    Secretary of State, have been denied a fair hearing in respect  of  the
    First-tier proceedings which leans heavily in  favour  of  this  matter
    being remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

24.  As Mr Bramble identifies,  there  is  no  factual  matrix  of  findings
    discernible on the face of the determination from  which  the  Tribunal
    can go forward  to  re-evaluate  the  Appellants'  case.   It  is  also
    significant, it seems to me, that it is only today that it  has  become
    clear that there were earlier appeal proceedings in  2010;  necessarily
    neither representative had turned their mind  to  the  significance  of
    those proceedings in the context of a proportionality  test  -  whether
    that is by reference to the concept of reasonableness  under  paragraph
    276ADE in respect of the Second Appellant or in the wider context of  a
    freestanding Article 8 consideration.

25.  It also may be the case that further  consideration  will  need  to  be
    given to the position of the other two children (now  adults),  one  of
    whom awaits a decision from the Respondent and one of whom has returned
    to Mauritius, in so far as it relates to any issues  of  reasonableness
    and/or proportionality.

26.  In all of those circumstances in my judgement this case should go  back
    for reconsideration with all issues  at  large  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

27.  The Appellants in particular should be aware  that  they  may  need  to
    address the issue of reasonableness and/or proportionality in light  of
    their electing to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  notwithstanding  the
    dismissal of the earlier appeals  referred  to  in  the  body  of  this
    decision.

Notice of Decision

28.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of
    law and is set aside.

29.  The decision in the linked appeals is to be remade  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal before any judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Majid with all issues at large.




    The above represents a corrected transcript of an  ex-tempore  decision
    given at the hearing on 17 February 2015.



Signed        Date: 21 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

