
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/26742/2014
                                                               IA/29821/2014
                                                               IA/29818/2014
                                                               IA/29816/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 February 2015                  |On 23 February 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             OLUFUNMILOLA OGANLA
                        ABDUL AZEEZ OLADIPUPO OGANLA
                       MOHAMMED FARRUK ATOLANI OGANLA
                     OYINKANSOLA MOFISAT FEYISAYO OGANLA
                         (ANONYMITY orders not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr J Waithe of Counsel, instructed by Raj Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS



1.   These are linked appeals against the decisions of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lal promulgated on 11 November 2014 allowing each of the  appeals
    of Ms Olufunmiloa Oganla, Mr Abdul Azeez Oladipupo Oganlo, Mr  Mohammed
    Farruk Atolani Oganla, and  Ms  Oyinkansola  Mofisat  Feyisayo  Oganla,
    against the decisions of the Secretary of State for the Home Department
    dated 6 January 2014 to remove them from the United Kingdom.

2.   Although before me the Secretary of State  is  the  appellant  and  the
    Oganlas are the respondents, for  the  sake  of  consistency  with  the
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter  refer  to
    the Oganlas as the  Appellants  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    Respondent.

Background

3.   The Appellants are nationals of Nigeria.  They are  a  mother  and  her
    three children with the respective dates of birth of 8  June  1966,  17
    September 1992, 14 January 1996 and 19 April 2004.

4.   The immigration histories of the appellants are helpfully  set  out  at
    paragraphs 1 and 2 of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  in  the
    following terms:

         "The Appellants entered the UK on 15 July 2006  on  visitor  visas.
         The Second and Third Appellants were 14 and 13 years of age and the
         Fourth Appellant was 2 years of age at the time of entry. They have
         not held any other form of leave.  It appears that  an  application
         was made in March 2010, which was refused  in  June  2010  but  the
         matters were not taken to appeal."

          (I pause to interject that it appears that there may have been  no
         appealable decision at that time.)

         "On 24 September 2010 Greenland Lawyers asked for the matter to  be
         reconsidered.  The Respondent was "chased" by way of letter  on  11
         January 2012 to which they replied by  way  of  response  dated  20
         January 2012 stating that  they  will  do  everything  possible  to
         consider this.  A further chaser letter was  sent  on  26  February
         2013 and the current refusal is dated 6 January 2014."

5.   The Secretary of State's removal decisions  were  necessarily  informed
    by the reasons given in the 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') of  6
    June 2014.  That letter is a matter of record on file and is  known  to
    the parties and it is unnecessary for me to rehearse its content  here.
    Suffice to say that it is a  letter  that  goes  into  some  detail  in
    attempting to set the individual circumstances of  each  of  Appellants
    within the  framework  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  in  particular
    Appendix FM  and paragraph 276ADE.

6.   The Appellants appealed to the  IAC.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    allowed the appeals for reason set out in his decision.

7.   The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Astle on 5 January 2015.

8.   The Appellants have filed a Rule 24 response under cover  of  a  letter
    dated 20 January 2015 resisting the Secretary of State's challenges  to
    the decision of Judge Lal.

Consideration

9.   The First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision  addresses  the  Appellants'
    cases in the following way.   As  already  indicated  the  opening  two
    paragraphs refer to the  immigration  histories;  the  third  paragraph
    records that there was no dispute as  to  the  chronology  between  the
    representatives - both of Counsel - who appeared for the parties before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

10.  The Judge then summarised the basis of the refusal making reference  to
    the  decision  letter  and  its  reference  to  the  Immigration  Rules
    (paragraph 4 of the determination).  At paragraphs 5-8 the  Judge  sets
    out in brief  summary  the  evidence  that  he  heard  at  the  hearing
    including, it is to  be  noted,  evidence  from  the  Fourth  Appellant
    (paragraph  7),  and  also  made  reference  to   supporting   evidence
    (paragraph 8).  The Judge then makes reference to  the  submissions  of
    the parties (paragraphs 9 and 10), and then comes on to  the  substance
    of his decision.

11.  At paragraph 11 the Judge states:

         "The Tribunal first  approached  the  matters  by  considering  the
         Rules. It is satisfied that the First, Second and Third  Appellants
         cannot satisfy the Rules and indeed Mr Oke [who  appeared  for  the
         Appellants before the First-tier Tribunal] accepted that  this  was
         the  case.   In  respect  of  the  Fourth  Appellant  neither  side
         disagreed that the Fourth Appellant did qualify but the  issue  was
         one whether it was reasonable for her to go back."

12.  The concession in respect of the Rules for the First, Second and  Third
    Appellants is also repeated at paragraph 15, and I will come on to this
    in due course.

13.  So far as the Fourth Appellant is concerned, the  terminology  used  by
    the Judge is slightly confusing in that the phrase "did qualify"  might
    be read as being equivalent to 'met the requirements of'.  In  context,
    of course, this cannot be what the Judge meant because he  went  on  to
    consider the question of reasonableness.  There  is,  however  running,
    through this decision a degree of confusion as to  exactly  what  Rules
    were applicable if any, and why.

14.  Be that as it may, at paragraphs 12 and 13  of  the  determination  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  addresses   the   circumstances   of,   in
    particular, the Fourth Appellant in the context of  the  reasonableness
    of expecting her to return to Nigeria, and reaches a conclusion set out
    at paragraph 14 in her favour.  It is in respect of paragraphs  12  and
    13 that the Respondent focuses her challenge before the Upper Tribunal.



15.  The Judge continues with his determination from paragraph  15  -  as  I
    said previously, repeating the concession in respect of the  Rules  for
    the First, Second and Third Appellants - and  thereafter  going  on  to
    conduct a freestanding Article 8 evaluation with reference to the  test
    in Razgar, and in due course concluding  that  the  First,  Second  and
    Third Appellants should all succeed under Article 8.

16.  The Respondent challenges  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    essentially on  the  basis  that  the  Judge  erred  on  the  issue  of
    reasonableness in respect of the Fourth Appellant, and necessarily that
    the Article 8 assessment in respect of  the  First,  Second  and  Third
    Appellants was, as it were, 'infected' by the error in respect  of  the
    Fourth Appellant.

17.   The  grounds  essentially  plead  two  matters   on   the   issue   of
    reasonableness, identified at paragraphs 1(b) and 1(c) of the  grounds.
    Paragraph 1(d) is a more  generalised  criticism  of  the  approach  to
    reasonableness which in many respects,  as  acknowledged  by  Mr  Nath,
    encompasses the more specific challenges pleaded at  subparagraphs  (b)
    and (c).  The other paragraphs are essentially by way  of  setting  the
    scene and/or making a final assertion as to error: it is in respect  of
    subparagraphs 1(b) and 1(c) that the  Respondent  is  specific  in  the
    challenge to the Judge's assessment.

18.  The challenge at paragraph 1(b) of the grounds is in these terms:

         "The  SSHD  respectfully  submits  that  the  FTJ's  assessment  of
         reasonableness is misguided: the FTJ finds that in the  absence  of
         support it would be unreasonable  for  [the  Fourth  Appellant]  to
         return to Nigeria, but does  not  consider  the  support  that  her
         immediate family could give her nor why her father's  family  would
         be unable to offer support."

19.  In my judgement that ground is not well-founded.  It seems to me  clear
    that at paragraphs 12 and 13 the Judge expressly turned his mind to the
    issue of support both more generally in Nigeria from the  wider  family
    and also from the immediate family.

20.  I note the following at paragraph 12:

         "The Tribunal accepts the account that this particular family  unit
         has no wider or extended family support in Nigeria because of  this
         history. There is no evidence to suggest anything else."

21.  I also note the following at paragraph 13:

         "The Tribunal is satisfied that on the  facts  of  this  particular
         case it would be unreasonable to expect  the  Fourth  Appellant  to
         leave the UK in the absence  of  any  wider  or  other  support  in
         Nigeria and even if returned with her immediate family."

22.  On the face of it the judge has expressly  turned  his  mind  to  those
    matters that it is suggested in paragraph 1(b) of the grounds  that  he
    disregarded.   In  those  circumstances  I   reject   that   particular
    challenge.

23.  Paragraph 1(c) of the grounds is in these terms:

         "The FTJ also finds that there are scales as to  how  'Nigerian'  a
         family may be, but does not establish why this family is  any  less
         'Nigerian' than other Nigerian families - it is submitted that  the
         FTJ has relied on an unsound premise to establish  unreasonableness
         without evidence or authority."

24.  Paragraph 13 is relevant in this regard.  I have already  quoted  above
    one passage from it but the paragraph in its full terms is as follows:

         "The Tribunal notes that any assessment of cultural mores  is  fact
         specific.  Some Nigerian  families  may  be  more  "Nigerian"  than
         "British" in terms of outlook and association and vice versa.   The
         Tribunal is satisfied from the oral and documentary  evidence  that
         the Appellants and in  particular  the  Second,  Third  and  Fourth
         Appellants are well integrated into British life.  It is not just a
         calculation  of  the  number  of  years  but  whether  those  years
         encompass the formative and devopmental periods in the  life  of  a
         young person in respect of their own  identity.   The  Tribunal  is
         satisfied that on the facts of this particular  case  it  would  be
         unreasonable to expect the Fourth Appellant to leave the UK in  the
         absence of any wider or  other  support  in  Nigeria  and  even  if
         returned with her immediate family.  The Tribunal has at all  times
         considered this issue with  regard  to  Section  55  and  the  best
         interests of this child in any event."

25.  It is plain within that paragraph  that  the  Judge  had  in  mind  the
    decision in the case of Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 197.  It is perhaps in
    those circumstances inappropriate for the Secretary of State to suggest
    that  the  Judge  has  not  had  reference  to  appropriate  authority,
    notwithstanding that the case is not cited by name.  Equally  it  seems
    in my judgement that the Judge adequately  explains  why  he  concludes
    that the Fourth Appellant  in  particular  was  "well  integrated  into
    British life" by reference to the circumstances  of  her  having  spent
    eight years in the United Kingdom, from the age of 2 until the  age  of
    10, and also by referencing the evidence that he had  heard.   In  this
    context paragraph 7 of the decision is germane, where the judge  refers
    to the oral evidence given by the Fourth Appellant - who indicated that
    she was head girl at her primary school and looking forward to going to
    senior school.

26.  I find in those circumstances, notwithstanding  the  submission  by  Mr
    Nath today that the Judge's reasoning in this  regard  was  not  clear,
    that adequate reasons were provided by the Judge, and  this  is  to  be
    considered in the context of the Respondent not being able to  identify
    any countervailing factors to show that a  child  such  as  the  Fourth
    Appellant could not be characterised as  being  'well  integrated  into
    British life'.

27.  For completeness it should be noted that  at  paragraph  14  the  Judge
    also has regard to the element of delay in the process of reconsidering
    the Appellants' applications pursuant to the request so to do  made  in
    September 2010 - which did not result in an appealable  decision  until
    June 2014. The Judge refers to this as a relevant factor in considering
    the reasonableness of the Fourth  Appellant's  return  at  the  present
    time.

28.   Accordingly  in  those  circumstances  I  also  reject  the  challenge
    contained at paragraph 1(c) of the Respondent's grounds.

29.   It  does  seem  to  me  that  essentially  the  grounds  amount  to  a
    disagreement with the conclusions of the Judge and do not identify  any
    express errors of law.  The Secretary of State's challenge  as  pleaded
    therefore fails in respect of the Fourth Appellant.

30.   In  respect  of  the  other  Appellants,  as  I  have  indicated,  the
    Respondent's challenge to the assessment of  Article  8  is  very  much
    premised on the claimed error in respect of the Fourth  Appellant.   In
    this context it is appropriate to note  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge does identify at paragraph 20 features of the  Appellants'  cases
    that might be considered to be exceptional.  In particular he  mentions
    the circumstances of their departure and arrival, which is a  reference
    to the demise of the First Appellant's husband, the father of the other
    Appellants, after their arrival in the UK as visitors.  He also  refers
    to the level  of  integration,  and  the  delay  on  the  part  of  the
    Respondent.

31.  Accordingly I also reject the challenge raised  in  the  grounds  under
    Article 8 in respect of the First, Second and Third Appellants.

32.  That said, there is a matter that has caused some consternation  during
    the course of the  hearing  and  discussion  with  the  representatives
    today, which I have adverted to in my earlier observations, and that is
    in regard to the applicability or otherwise of the Immigration Rules.

33.  The Judge states at paragraph 14 that  the  Fourth  Appellant's  appeal
    was to be allowed under the Immigration Rules, but  does  not  identify
    which Rule. It seems likely that he had in mind paragraph 276ADE of the
    Immigration Rules, although it is not abundantly  clear;  if  so  -  as
    seems likely - his particular focus was on 276ADE(1)(iv).

34.  However, it is not entirely clear to me  why  it  was  considered  that
    this Rule was applicable bearing in mind that there  is  a  requirement
    that the applicant have been living continuously in the UK for at least
    seven years at the date  of  the  application.  The  only  identifiable
    application in these proceedings is that made in March  2010  at  which
    point the Appellants would have been in the United  Kingdom  for  fewer
    than four years.

35.  Equally it is confusing in that, although the Judge  acknowledges,  and
    indeed the parties' representatives appear  to  acknowledge,  that  the
    Rules were engaged in respect of the Fourth Appellant, it was  conceded
    by the representatives - and the concession accepted  by  the  Judge  -
    that the Rules did no apply in respect of the First, Second  and  Third
    Appellants.  It is difficult to see why, if the Rules  applied  to  the
    Fourth Appellant, her mother could not have benefited from the  'parent
    route' under the Rules.  Indeed, in the RFRL the only reason  that  the
    mother did not  succeed  under  the  'parent  route'  was  because  the
    Respondent considered  the  removal  of  the  Fourth  Appellant  to  be
    reasonable.  Necessarily once that premise is eroded by reason  of  the
    Judge's favourable findings, insofar as the Rules were applicable there
    was no obstacle to the mother satisfying the requirements.

36.  In the event, however, it seems to me ultimately this is  a  matter  of
    form rather than substance. Moreover these issues proceeded by  way  of
    agreement between the parties before the First-tier Tribunal,  and  yet
    further the Secretary of State has  not  made  any  challenge  in  this
    regard in the grounds, and there has been no cross-challenge  that  the
    Rules should have applied to the mother or any of the other Appellants.

37.  In those circumstances I am not minded to interfere in the decision  of
    the  First-tier   Tribunal   on   that   basis,   notwithstanding   the
    consternation as to the lack of clarity  as  to  the  actual  framework
    within which the appeal was being considered, and why.

Notice of Decisions

38.  The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal contained  no  material  error
    of law and therefore stand. The challenge of the Secretary of State  is
    dismissed.

39.  Each of the appeals IA/26742/2014,  IA/29816/2014,  IA/29818/2014,  and
    IA/29821/2014, remain allowed.

40.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



    The above represents a corrected transcript of an  ex-tempore  decision
    given at the hearing on 18 February 2015.



Signed        Date: 23 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

