
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26272/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 May 2016                                 |On 29th July 2016             |
|Prepared 4 May 2016                           |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                           Jahangir Alam Chowdhury
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Hamid of Clapham Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Bangladesh, date  of  birth  4  May  1976,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision to make  removal  directions
    on 10 June 2013 following the service of form IS151A on  10  June  2013
    and the refusal to grant indefinite leave to remain  on  the  basis  of
    long residence in the United Kingdom.

2.   The appeal against the Secretary of State's decision came before First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Andonian who, on 14  March  2014,  promulgated  the
    decision which allowed the  appeal on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds.   The
    claim having been dismissed under the Immigration Rules then in force.

3.   As a result of a finding of an error of law  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    King on 25 July 2014 the matter was returned to the First-tier Tribunal
    to consider the Article 8 ECHR claim.  Upper Tribunal Judge King  found
    that the Appellant had not met at relevant dates either requirements of
    the  old  Immigration  Rules  or  those   which   had   been   amended.
    Nevertheless Upper Tribunal Judge King returned the matter to the First-
    tier Tribunal to be remade again on Article 8 ECHR grounds. The  matter
    was then remade by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cockrill (the  judge)  who
    promulgated his decision on 12 March 2015.

4.   In a decision promulgated on 30 October 2015 for  reasons  given  in  a
    decision of that date I found that there had been a failure to  provide
    sufficient or adequate reasons as to why the  Appellant's  removal  was
    disproportionate.

5.   At the resumed hearing on 4 May 2016 the parties addressed  me  on  the
    issues and for the avoidance of doubt because  Ms  Hamid's  submissions
    were not entirely clear I set out my conclusions  in  relation  to  the
    Immigration Rules.  First,  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  with
    reference to paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules as at the date  of
    decision was correct: The Appellant had not the required period of long
    residence he having served a sentence of imprisonment which reduced the
    period of time he had been in the United Kingdom.  More importantly  it
    is clear that the Appellant could not establish that he was lawfully in
    the United Kingdom.  He was convicted on 25 October  2007  at  a  Crown
    Court by jury of possession of false or  improperly  obtained  identity
    documents on 31 July 2007 for which he was  sentenced  to  six  months'
    imprisonment.  At the material date, the conviction was not  spent  for
    the purposes of calculating his time spent  in  the  UK.   Further  the
    Secretary of State had a proper basis for  refusal  with  reference  to
    paragraph 276D with reference to paragraph 276B (i), (b),  (iii),  (iv)
    of the Immigration Rules HC 395 as amended (the Rules).

6.   It was also clear that the Appellant could not succeed  with  reference
    to paragraph 276ADE of the Rules because he had not been in the  United
    Kingdom for the required period.  Further on the  information  provided
    by the solicitors' representatives and  the  Appellant  in  making  the
    application in July 2012 the Appellant had no  "partner"  albeit  on  8
    August 2012 it appears he went through a religious ceremony of marriage
    in an arranged marriage which led to his  "wife"  cohabiting  with  him
    from about that date.  Whilst they were not married for the purpose  of
    UK law the position was that she did not fall to be considered even  at
    that date of decision as a  spouse  or  partner  for  the  purposes  of
    Appendix FM.  At that  date  they  had  not  cohabited  together  in  a
    relationship akin to marriage for at least two years prior to the  date
    of application.

7.   In those circumstances therefore there was no  basis  to  remain  under
    the partner route in Appendix FM nor  under  paragraph  276ADE  nor  in
    relation to the application made.

8.   At the  hearing  before  me  time  was  spent  with  reference  to  the
    Appellant's ability to rely on the issue of Article 8 on the fact  that
    the Appellant was not able to meet the partnership  requirements  under
    the Rules.   I  heard  those  submissions  simply  in  the  context  of
    considering whether (a) they amounted to exceptional  circumstances  in
    considering the matter outside of the matter of the Rules; and, (b)  in
    connection with whether or not their circumstances as a married  couple
    militated in favour of him remaining on the basis that the Respondent's
    decision was disproportionate in terms of a breach of Article 8.

9.   The following matters were submitted by Ms Hamid  to  support  a  claim
    that Article 8 was engaged.   In  no  particular  order  they  were  as
    follows:  First, the length of time  the  Appellant  had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom since entering the UK in 1998 when he was  22  years  of
    age.  Secondly, the length of time that he had  been  living  from  the
    outset with his sister, her husband and their children that there was a
    very close family relationship with impact of his removal on his nieces
    and nephews as well as other relatives in the United Kingdom.  Thirdly,
    he had not worked nor complied with immigration requirements, albeit it
    is clear that his criminal conviction, attempt to open a  bank  account
    were part and parcel of a forlorn attempt to commence work.   Fourthly,
    such was the passage of time that he  had  now  lost  social,  cultural
    family ties with Bangladesh which  meant  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    such a return.  Fifth, the  Appellant  now  having  married  a  British
    national, of Bangladeshi origins through her parents, wished to  remain
    in the United Kingdom and did not wish to go and live in Bangladesh.

10.  Although it was not  articulated  as  such  I  infer  from  Ms  Hamid's
    remarks that she relied upon the fact that the Appellant cannot succeed
    under the Rules on any basis to remain in the UK.   I  have  considered
    those reasons in the context of the written and oral evidence which was
    tested by some cross-examination.

11.  It is noticeable that there was no reference in about July of  2012  to
    his marriage to Rashida Khanom until some correspondence which  appears
    to be in early 2014.  The matter was referred to  in  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian in 2014.

12.  The  witness  statements  came  from  Abdul  Latif,  a  nephew  of  the
    Appellant, Thakwa Abdul, nephew of the Appellant, Farlin Abdul a  niece
    of the Appellant, Rashida Khanom the Appellant's wife, Abdul  Mohith  a
    brother-in-law of the Appellant, Nazim Akter Chowdhury, a sister of the
    Appellant,  the  Appellant  himself,  Sadiq  Abdullah  nephew  of   the
    Appellant.  It appears that  both  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  live
    together at the same address being a  two  bedroomed  flat  at  [London
    address].  I heard oral evidence from the  Appellant,  the  Appellant's
    sister Nazim Chowdhury, Rashida Khanom, Mr Mohith, Farlin Abdul, Facqua
    Abdul, Abdul Latif, all of whom live at [London address].   I generally
    found the Appellant's sister and family reliable witnesses of  fact.  I
    found the Rashida Kanom generally reliable  but  I  did  not  find  her
    reason for not returning to Bangladesh was her preference to remain  in
    the UK rather any real assessment of a life she could have had there. I
    take into account that she is a  young mother, who has been brought  up
    in a protective family situation, with little experience of travel away
    from her family, who has not worked in the UK or had any life in  which
    she has been a decision maker. I find  it  unsurprising  that  she  has
    wanted to consider change and following her  husband to Bangladesh. The
    Appellant's evidence is  generally  reliable  but  I  find  he  too  is
    unwilling to consider return as a matter of choice rather than for  any
    good reason.  I have seen no evidence which suggested he  is  unfit  or
    unable to work or that his language skills and UK experience would  not
    stand him in good stead.

13.  Without doing injustice to the extensive family  evidence  I  summarise
    it as follows.  First, each family member wishes the  Appellant  as  an
    uncle or a brother to remain.  Each of the witnesses in which I include
    the Appellant and his wife wish him to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.
    The witnesses other than the Appellant and his wife regard  him  as  an
    integral part of their family and they would be greatly upset  were  he
    to be removed.  It appears that the Appellant has over the  years  been
    helping within his sister's home at their flat and has  cared  for  the
    children, taken them to school, run errands, done cooking, tidying  and
    generally making himself useful.   He  thus  has  had  a  long-standing
    relationship with those nieces and nephews.  The Appellant, as does his
    wife, wish to remain in  the  UK.   Although  he  is  not  particularly
    forthcoming about the matter it is plain that he has had a real part to
    play as the children of his sister that is Abdul Latif, Sadiq Abdullah,
    Farlin Abdullah and Facqua have grown up.  The  child  Thakwa  was  not
    born until after the Appellant's arrival.  She is now 13 years of  age.
    The Appellant says that his mother and father are no longer alive.   He
    has no family left in  Bangladesh.   He  plays  a  continuing  role  in
    accompanying one of his nieces to college  during  term  times  and  he
    wishes as a man in his later 30s to remain with his sister, her husband
    and their family.

14.  The family lives at [London address] would be upset  at  his  departure
    and he too would be upset by being separated from them.  Rashid  Khanom
    indicated that she has only made one short visit to Bangladesh and  did
    not enjoy either the experience or the way of life there or the role in
    which she would be cast as a woman in Bangladesh.   The  evidence  does
    not suggest nor was it  argued  that  the  Appellant's  or  his  wife's
    relatives would not help him to get started on a return to Bangladesh.

15.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller was reliant upon the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter
    of June 2013 and by reference to the facts argued  that  the  Appellant
    could  speak  the  language  of  Bangladesh,  understood  its  cultural
    context, the heritage and insofar as he has  a  British  national  wife
    that is not in any sense a legitimate reason why he should  not  return
    to Bangladesh; bearing in mind the Appellant's wife is from a family of
    Bangladeshi origin now settled in the UK.

16.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller said that the Appellant's wife has the  reasonable
    possibilities of employment  in  Bangladesh,  they  are  both  in  good
    health, the skills they  have  acquired  through  time  in  the  United
    Kingdom are transferrable.  Accordingly it was said by  Ms  Brocklesby-
    Weller that removal is compliant with Article 8 ECHR and  certainly  is
    not disproportionate.  She also submitted with reference to the case of
    Nagre [2013]  EWHC 720  and  Agyarko  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  440  that  the
    Appellant's wife can speak Urdu.  The child would not complicate  their
    return and there was no real attachment to  the  United  Kingdom  other
    than as a fact her family members are here.  Also relied  upon  is  the
    admitted  fact  that  the  Appellant's  wife  knew  of  his  precarious
    immigration status at all times although there was hope that  something
    might resolve itself.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller relies upon the Appellant's
    conviction in 2007  demonstrating  the  public  interest  does  lie  in
    removing him.  There is no general evidence to show what the  Appellant
    has done outside of the sister's household.  It was said that there  is
    no evidence as to why he is not able to relocate to  make  a  life  for
    himself and his wife in Bangladesh.  It was  said  that  there  are  no
    significant obstacles to his removal nor was there any basis to look at
    Article 8 ECHR outside of the Immigration Rules.

17.  Ms Hamid submitted with reference to the time the  Appellant  had  been
    in the United Kingdom, his involvement with his sister and  her  family
    the presence of a child born to Rashida Khanom in 2016, who may well be
    a British national  should  be  taken  into  account:  were  compelling
    circumstances. Plainly their child is very young only a few months old.
     There is no reason given why she could not accompany her mother, if Ms
    Khanom removed to Bangladesh  to  be  with  her  husband.   Ms  Hamid's
    submissions were in effect to maintenance of  the  status  quo  in  the
    sense of the Appellant being within the United Kingdom and living  with
    family members.  In my judgment neither the matters M Hamid raised  nor
    from the evidence more widely, shows these circumstances are compelling
    or very compelling or exceptional. I find  them  commonplace  and  such
    delay, as there has been by the Respondent and appeal system, have been
    to the Appellant's benefit.

18.  Looking at all the evidence and submissions in  the  round  I  did  not
    find there were exceptional or compelling circumstances that  justified
    considering Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules.

19.  If I were wrong and it is appropriate to look at  this  matter  outside
    of the Rules, I would accept that  the  Appellant  has  a  private  and
    family life in the United Kingdom and that  his  removal  would  be  an
    interference in his private life with other family members.  His family
    life with his wife and child, assuming she chose not to  accompany  him
    back to Bangladesh.  I do not find there is  family  life  between  the
    Appellant and his nieces, his sister, his nephews and  his  in-laws  so
    much as they are incidental to his private life as he is to theirs.   I
    do not find there is any dependency by them upon him,  over  and  above
    normal family ties.

20.  For the avoidance of doubt I have considered the extent to which  there
    are insurmountable obstacles to inhibit the possibility of  relocation,
    because submissions were made about it, but it seems to me in the light
    of the case of Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ 440 and Singh and Khalid  [2015]
    EWCA  Civ  74  that  any  inability  of  the  Appellant  to  meet   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules is a factor which should be given
    some weight in the assessment of proportionality.

21.  I accept that there will be an impact of upset  upon  his  nephews  and
    nieces and probably his sister and  other  relatives,  and  on  his  or
    Rashida's Khanom family in the sense of him not being around and  being
    of the assistance he has self-evidently been.  Nevertheless I find  the
    Respondent's decision was lawful and properly met  purposes  identified
    by Article 8(2) ECHR.  I find the  public  interest  is  a  significant
    matter and the fact that the Appellant may not be able  to  succeed  in
    making an out of country application copuld not  be  determinative.   I
    fully take into account the wishes of his family in the United  Kingdom
    and the measure of upset which will  be  caused  to  them  through  his
    removal.  Upset of course arises from the Appellant's determination  to
    remain and a course of behaviour through until making  the  application
    to remain in 2012 and thereafter.  I find  the  precariousness  of  his
    position has always been self-evident albeit he  and  others  may  have
    hoped of one day overcoming the  illegality  of  his  presence  in  the
    United  Kingdom  and  to  support  or  foster  his  will   to   remain.
    Nevertheless I do not find that the personal interests of the Appellant
    are of the kind and circumstances to show the Respondent's decision  is
    disproportionate.  Similarly, if Rashida remains in the UK  with  their
    child that will be the Appellant's and her decision.   The  Appellant's
    wife has always known that he no right to remain nor did the Respondent
    hold out any hope the Appellant would be able to do so.

22.  If it was appropriate to consider Article 8 ECHR outside  the  Rules  I
    applied s.117A  and  s.117B(2)-(3)  NIAA  2002.  Rashida  Khanom  is  a
    qualifying partner.  Their child was not on the  information  given  to
    me, a qualifying child.  The Appellant  is  a  foreign  criminal.   The
    information about  the  Appellant's  finances  do  not  suggest  he  is
    financially independent but I make no findings  about  it.   Given  the
    Appellant's unlawful and precarious  presence  s.117B(4)  and  (5)  are
    relevant and I give little weight to them.  No  case  was  argued  with
    reference to the evidence that it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh
    or very significant difficulties for the Appellant his wife  and  child
    or remove to Bangladesh and continue their family  life  together.   In
    the circumstances, the oral and written evidence, my assessment of  it,
    the submissions made, set out above, I did not  find  the  respondent's
    decision to made removal directions was disproportionate  in  terms  of
    family/private life rights.

23.  There was no appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  pursued  before  the
    Original Tribunal.

DECISION
24.  The Original Tribunal's decision on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds  is  set
    aside.  The decision is re-made.
     The Appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds is dismissed.

ANONYMITY
24.  Although there are young persons involved it does not seem to  me  that
    it is  necessary   an  anonymity  order  and  none  was  requested.  No
    anonymity direction is made.

FEE ORDER
25.  The appeal has failed and therefore no order of costs is appropriate.

Signed                                  Date 27 July 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
P.S. I regret the delay in signing the case off but unfortunately  the  file
    was mis-located.

