
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/26409/2012
                                                               IA/26433/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th May 2013                                |On 24th June 2013          |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                     Muhammad Saddique (first appellant)
                      shamshad begum (second appellant)
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Chohan, Counsel instructed by Tramboo & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Pakistan who arrived in the UK  on  11th
    June 2011 when they were given leave  to  enter  as  visitors  for  six
    months.  On 7th December 2011 they  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain as the dependants of their son, the Sponsor Raja Imran Siddique.
     Those applications  were  refused  on  6th  November  2012  under  the
    provisions of the relevant parts of paragraph 317 of the  Statement  of
    Changes in Immigration Rules HC  395.   The  Appellants  appealed,  and
    their appeals were heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Courtney  (the
    Judge) sitting at Hatton Cross on 27th February 2013.   He  decided  to
    dismiss the appeals under the Immigration Rules  and  on  human  rights
    grounds for the reasons given in his  Determination  dated  12th  March
    2013.  The Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and on  10th
    April 2013 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.  In that respect I heard
    submissions from both parties at the hearing.  Mr  Chohan  referred  to
    the grounds and his skeleton argument.  He argued that  the  Judge  had
    erred in law by not dealing with all the grounds raised in  the  Notice
    of Appeal as required by Section 86(2) of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.  In particular, the Judge had failed to deal  with
    a particular ground which was that the Respondent's decision was not in
    accordance with the law because the Respondent had not followed her own
    policy given in chapter 53.7 of the Enforcement Guidance  Instructions.
    He submitted that the policy applied to all elderly  people,  not  just
    those who were illegal entrants or overstayers.  Further, the Judge had
    erred by not applying the test given in MB (paragraph 317:  in  country
    applications) Bangladesh [2006] UKAIT 00091.  The Judge had  considered
    the circumstances of the Appellants as if they were still in their  own
    country not at the date of decision, but if their  circumstances  since
    their arrival in the UK had not changed.  Again, when  considering  the
    provisions of paragraph 276ADE(vi) of HC 395, the Judge had  failed  to
    make clear findings as to the Appellants' social, cultural, and  family
    ties with  Pakistan.   Further,  the  Judge  had  given  an  inadequate
    explanation for his finding that  the  Respondent's  decision  did  not
    amount to a  disproportionate  breach  of  the  Appellants'  Article  8
    rights.

 3. In response, Mr Nath referred to the Rule 24  response  and  said  that
    paragraph 53.7 of the Enforcement Guidance Instructions did  not  apply
    to people like the Appellant who were not at risk of imminent  removal.
    The Judge had correctly applied the provisions of paragraph 276ADE(vi),
    and had made a full assessment of all the factors when carrying out the
    balancing exercise necessary for any assessment of proportionality.

 4. It is true to say that the Judge made no decision  in  respect  of  the
    argument presented to him at the hearing that the Respondent's decision
    as not in accordance with the law as she had failed to comply with  her
    policy  contained  in  the  Enforcement  Guidance  Instructions.   This
    amounts to an error of law.  However, it is not a material error of law
    so that the decision of the Judge should  be  set  aside.   The  policy
    relied upon is not applicable to these Appellants, not because they are
    not elderly or in  poor  health,  but  because  there  is  no  imminent
    prospect of their removal.  The Judge  decided  that  the  decision  to
    remove the Appellants made under Section 47 of the Immigration,  Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006 was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law,  and
    therefore there was no extant removal decision before the Judge.

 5. Otherwise I find no errors of law  in  the  Judge's  decision.   It  is
    apparent  from  what  the  Judge  wrote  at   paragraph   20   of   the
    Determination, and also  later  at  paragraph  24,  that  he  correctly
    applied paragraph 317 of HC 395 in accordance with the decision in  MB.
    I am satisfied that the  Judge  considered  the  circumstances  of  the
    Appellants at the date of decision as if they had remained in Pakistan.



 6. As regards the application of paragraph 276ADE of  HC  395,  the  Judge
    came to a decision which was open to him upon the evidence that he  was
    not satisfied that the Appellants  did  not  have  any  longer  social,
    cultural or family ties with Pakistan.   The  Judge's  explanation  for
    that decision is adequate.

 7. Finally, as  regards  the  Appellants'  Article  8  rights,  the  Judge
    followed the format given by the questions of the late Lord Bingham  in
    R (Razgar) v SSHD  [2004]  UKHL  27.   The  Judge  fully  analysed  the
    relevant evidence and came to the conclusion that the Appellant did not
    have a family or a private life in the UK.   If  he  did  err  in  this
    respect, it is of no consequence as he  went  on  to  consider  in  the
    alternative  whether  the  Respondent's  decision  would  amount  to  a
    disproportionate breach of any Article 8 rights of the Appellants.  The
    Judge demonstrated that he  had  carried  out  the  balancing  exercise
    necessary  for  any  assessment  of  proportionality  and  came  to   a
    conclusion which was open to him on the evidence.

 8. As there was no material error of law in the Judge's decision, I do not
    set it aside.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  find  no
reason to do so.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
