
[pic]
Upper Tribunal                                                       Appeal
Number: IA267602015
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
                                            Decision Promulgated and sent on
                                                               9th June 2017


                          MISS HAJA ALIMATU JALLOH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                            NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL
    (pursuant to rule 17 Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008)


   1. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
      against a decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Twydell  who,  by  a
      decision promulgated on  3  October  2016  dismissed  the  Appellant's
      appeal brought against the  Respondent's  decision  of  17  July  2015
      refusing her a derivative residence card as the primary carer  of  her
      British citizen child. Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Saffer on 27 April 2017.

   2. The appeal came before me for an error of law hearing on 8 June  2017.
      At the outset of the hearing, Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting
      Officer, indicated that the Respondent conceded that the Appellant  is
      entitled to a derivative residence  card  on  the  basis  sought.   He
      therefore gave an undertaking on  behalf  of  the  Respondent  that  a
      residence card would be issued to the Appellant as  soon  as  possible
      and in any event within six months.


   3. On the basis of the undertaking given by the Respondent, Mr Bello, the
      Appellant's representative, indicated that she wished to withdraw  her
      appeal.

   4. Paragraph 17 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
      provides that a party may withdraw its case before the Upper  Tribunal
      only with the consent of the Tribunal. If the Tribunal does so consent
      this would amount to a final disposal of the appeal before  the  Upper
      Tribunal.

   5. The appeal is now academic for the reasons above.  I therefore consent
      to withdrawal of the Appellant's case.  This amounts to final disposal
      of the Appellant's appeal to this Tribunal.
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith                      Dated: 8 June 2017

