

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/26867/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |            Decision & Reasons       |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 12 May 2017                        |            On 15 June 2017          |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL

                                   Between

                               TAHIR UR-REHMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G. O'Ceallaigh, of Counsel, instructed by M & K
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R. Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

Background

1.    This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Spencer (hereafter "the  FtTJ")  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision to refuse him leave to  remain  under
    the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") and outside of the  Rules  contrary
    to Article 8 of the ECHR.

2     The Appellant is a national  of  Pakistan.  He  has  remained  in  the
    United Kingdom since his entry in 2002 as a  student.  He  was  granted
    further leave on the basis of his marriage to an EEA national until  13
    July 2011. On 11 July 2011, he applied for  Permanent  Residence  which
    was refused on 21  October  2011.  A  subsequent  appeal  against  that
    refusal was withdrawn by the Appellant on 8 December 2011 on the advice
    of his then legal representatives. Since 20 December 2011 the Appellant
    made various attempts to regularise his immigration status and latterly
    applied for Indefinite Leave to Remain on the grounds of long residence
    on 2 April 2015. That application was refused on  15  July  2015.   The
    Appellant appealed. Before the FtTJ there was no dispute the  Appellant
    did not meet the requirements of the Rules, but he argued  his  removal
    would be contrary to Article 8 of the ECHR -  private  life  being  the
    focus of the appeal.

3.    Central to the  Appellant's  arguments  on  proportionality  were  his
    claims that, (i) his marriage to an EEA national terminated  one  month
    short of the period required under the 2006 Regulations for him to have
    retained a right of residence and, (ii) that he was lawfully present in
    the United Kingdom for 45 days short of  ten  years'  lawful  residence
    that would have entitled  him  to  settlement  on  the  basis  of  long
    residence - a circumstance brought about  by  an  "historic  injustice"
    when he withdrew his appeal on 8 December 2011 on  the  advice  of  his
    then representatives.

The Decision of the FtTJ

4.    The FtTJ directed himself appropriately (at [15]-[18]);  accepted  the
    evidence of the Appellant and witnesses (at [28])  and  concluded  that
    the Appellant did not meet the requirements of  the  Rules  because  he
    fell 45 days short of  the  ten-year  period.  The  FtTJ  accepted  the
    Appellant had  established  a  private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Further, while the FtTJ accepted the Appellant's case involved a  "near
    miss" in relation to the requirements set out under the Rules, he found
    it was not a "narrow "near miss"",  and  that  there  was  no  historic
    injustice as there could have been plausible legal explanations  as  to
    why the appeal was withdrawn (at [43]). The FtTJ thus found that  there
    were no compelling circumstances not considered by the  Rules,  and  so
    there was no need to consider Article 8 (at [44]). Notwithstanding that
    conclusion, the FtTJ proceeded to consider the proportionality  of  the
    Respondent's decision to remove the Appellant. While the FtTJ  accepted
    that there would be an interference with private life, he  found  there
    were no insurmountable obstacles to his return to Pakistan where he had
    family who could support him, and that, he could maintain contact  with
    his family in the United Kingdom. At [48] the FtTJ said this:

      "I find that there is no evidence that shows that the  Appellant  will
    not be able to conduct a similar private life in Pakistan."

5.    The FtTJ took account of the Appellant's ability to speak English  and
    that he was financially independent,  but  found  that  there  were  no
    exceptional features about his private life,  which  would  reduce  the
    weight to be attached to the "little weight" provision of section  117B
    whilst here with leave on a precarious and then unlawful basis.

6.    The Appellant sought permission to appeal. Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie on 1  December  2016  on
    all grounds.



The hearing before me


7.    At the hearing, Mr O'Ceallaigh amplified the grounds of appeal,  which
      argued that the FtTJ misdirected himself and  that  he  erred  in  his
      assessment of proportionality. Mrs Pettersen made submissions  in-line
      with the Respondent's rule 24  reply  which  essentially  espoused  an
      argument  that  the  Appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  were   a   mere
      disagreement with the FtTJ's decision. After hearing  the  submissions
      of the representatives, I announced my decision that I  was  satisfied
      that the FtTJ materially erred in law. I now give my reasons for doing
      so below.

Error of Law

8.    While I do not agree that the FtTJ erred in the manner  prescribed  in
    some of the grounds, I am satisfied that in an otherwise  comprehensive
    decision that the FtTJ erred in the following material respects.

9.    There is no challenge to the FtTJ's  decision  under  the  Rules.  The
    Rules are said to reflect the Respondent's view of where a fair balance
    should be struck between the right to respect for  private  and  family
    life and public interest considerations relating to the maintenance  of
    an effective system of immigration control. The Rules should be read in
    a way that reflects a proper interpretation of Article 8 of  the  ECHR.
    However, there may some cases where the Rules do not  address  relevant
    Article 8 issues. In such  cases,  it  may  be  necessary  to  consider
    whether there are compelling circumstances to justify granting leave to
    remain outside the Rules: SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA  Civ  387.  The
    FtTJ's application of this principle is set out at [44]. The FtTJ found
    that there were no compelling circumstances to justify a grant of leave
    outside of the Rules and thus concluded that  Article  8  need  not  be
    considered.

 10.  The difficulty with this is that  that  conclusion  is  based  on  the
    FtTJ's finding that a "near miss" under the Rules  was  not  compelling
    because the miss was not "narrow" and there was no historic  injustice.
    In my judgement, the FtTJ erred because there is no  basis  in  law  to
    draw a distinction between a "near miss" and a "narrow near miss",  and
    is a conclusion that could not be rationally drawn from a shortfall  of
    45 days. Further, in my view, the FtTJ failed to recognise  that  there
    is no express mechanism within the Rules for consideration of a private
    life accrued over the course of  15  years  comprising  of  lawful  and
    unlawful residence. The Rules therefore did not reflect every factor of
    relevance in this case and  there  were  clear  grounds  to  justify  a
    consideration outside of the Rules.

11.   While I acknowledge that the FtTJ proceeded  to  consider  the  appeal
    outside of the Rules, I cannot be satisfied that his decision  was  not
    compromised by his view that such an assessment was not warranted  and,
    in  any  event,  I  am  satisfied  that  he  erred  in  assessing   the
    proportionality of the Appellant's removal for the following reasons.

 12.  The FtTJ plainly  erred  in  his  application  of  an  "insurmountable
    obstacles" test to the Appellant's return to  Pakistan.  Mrs  Pettersen
    rightly accepted that the FtTJ was wrong to do so,  and  this  alone  I
    find is sufficient to vitiate  the  FtTJ's  conclusion  in  respect  of
    proportionality.

13.   I am further satisfied, however, that the FtTJ misdirected himself  in
    finding that an interference with private life could  be  justified  on
    the basis that the Appellant had not shown that he could not conduct  a
    similar private life in Pakistan [48]. I agree with Mr O'Ceallaigh that
    this approach is not the correct test. The question to be considered is
    whether any interference with established private  life  was  justified
    and thus proportionate. Further still, I am satisfied that there was an
    inadequate review of the public  interest  considerations  contrary  to
    section 117B(5). While the FtTJ referred to  Rhuppiah  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 803, there was a  failure
    to apply the guidance therein taking  into  account  the  duration  and
    circumstances of the Appellant's lawful presence in the United  Kingdom
    and the extent to which he understood  that  his  time  here  would  be
    comparatively short or would be liable to termination. The FtTJ further
    failed to factor into his assessment a key fact, namely, the extent  to
    which the "near miss" affected the public interest.

14.   While the FtTJ's decision to dismiss the appeal may well  be  correct,
    it is the manner and route by which that conclusion has been reached  I
    find is materially flawed. Consequently, the decision must be set aside
    and remade.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  errors  on
points of law such that the decision  is  set  aside.  Both  representatives
invited me to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal. I agreed to  this
course as a full Article 8 assessment is required taking  into  account  the
unusual features of this case. The appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for a rehearing to be heard by a Judge other than FtTJ J.  Spencer.





Signed                                             Dated: 12 June 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral









