
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26205/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 23rd May 2013                                |On 3rd June 2013           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

                                 AMANAT ALI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed, Counsel, instructed by S.Z. Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Sachs made
    following a hearing at North Shields on 4th February 2013.

 Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 12th September 1980.  On
    13th June 2012 he made a combined application for leave  to  remain  in
    the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant  under  the  points-based
    system and for a biometric residence permit, after arriving in  the  UK
    on 17th February 2010.

 3. He was refused under paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules on  the
    grounds that  he  had  failed  to  disclose  a  material  fact  in  his
    application form.  He had an unspent conviction having answered "no" to
    the question E1 "Has the applicant had any criminal convictions in  the
    UK or any other country (including trafficking offences) or  any  civil
    judgments made against them?"  However on  30th  January  2012  he  was
    convicted of battery at Leeds District Magistrates' Court and was given
    a twelve month conditional discharge. The conviction was not  spent  at
    the time of the application and should have  been  declared.    He  was
    also refused on the basis that he was not in possession of a valid  CAS
    because West Yorkshire College, where he had studied, was not listed on
    the Tier 4 Sponsor Register at the time that the decision was made.

 4. The judge heard evidence from the Appellant.  He said that he was under
    the impression that it was only a  restraining  order  imposed  on  him
    because of a domestic issue with his wife and he believed  that  if  he
    followed the terms of the restraining order he would not be  committing
    any offence, which is why he did not declare the conditional  discharge
    on his application form. With respect to the college,  it  was  on  the
    Tier 4 Sponsor Register at the time of the application and he  had  not
    been  officially advised by the immigration authorities of its removal.
     He argued that he should have been given 60 days' leave in  the  light
    of the judgment in Patel.

 5. The judge found against the Appellant  on  both  issues.   He  did  not
    accept that he was ignorant of the fact that  a  conditional  discharge
    was imposed upon him or of its terms, and he was not satisfied that the
    Appellant could benefit from the decision in Patel in that he had  been
    afforded more than adequate time to vary his application by identifying
    a new Sponsor before the appeal was determined.

The Grounds of Application

 6. The Appellant sought permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    Appellant had explained in detail that he was of the view that  he  was
    conditionally  discharged  and  only  convicted  if   another   similar
    complaint was made against him in the proceeding twelve month and since
    he followed the order he believed that he had not committed any offence
    and therefore declared as such on his form.  The Appellant also  argued
    that the judge had failed to analyse the appeal  on  the  principle  of
    fairness in Patel (India) [2011] UKUT 00211 (IAC).  Finally, the  judge
    had failed to consider the appeal on the basis of Article 8 although it
    had been pleaded in the grounds.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Nightingale on 11 March  2011
    for the reasons stated in the grounds.

Submissions

 8. Mr Ahmed relied on his grounds and the grant of permission  to  appeal.
    He submitted that the Respondent bears the burden of proof to show that
    a false representation had been made and it was the Appellant's genuine
    belief that he had not been convicted of any offence.

 9. The Appellant was not in a position to obtain another CAS  because  all
    of his documents were with the Secretary of State and no college  would
    be able to offer him anything without a letter from the UKBA giving him
    60 days' leave.  He was aware of the removal of the  college  from  the
    register in July 2012 but waited for a decision  by  the  Secretary  of
    State, believing that he would be granted 60 days in order  to  find  a
    new college.  In  not  doing  so  the  Secretary  of  State  had  acted
    inconsistently and unfairly.

10. Finally, with respect to Article 8, he said that the Appellant had come
    to the UK lawfully and applied for an  extension  of  his  visa  within
    time.  It was not his fault that the college had been removed from  the
    register and he had not been  able  to  get  a  proper  return  on  his
    investment.  It would be disproportionate to expect him  to  return  to
    Pakistan at this stage.

11. Mr Diwnycz relied on his Rule 24 reply, and, whilst  he  accepted  that
    the  judge had not dealt with Article 8, there was little to be said on
    the Appellant's behalf save to say that he enjoyed private life here as
    a student.  It should have been plain to him from the  wording  of  the
    form that the conviction for battery should have been disclosed.   With
    respect to the fairness point he said that there was no  obligation  on
    the Secretary of State to track down every applicant in order to  issue
    letters to them. The Appellant had  not  approached  the  Secretary  of
    State although he had had plenty of opportunity to do so.

12. By way of reply Mr Ahmed relied on his previous submissions.

Findings and Conclusions

13. Under paragraph 322(1a), leave to remain in the UK  is  to  be  refused
    where false representations have been made or false documents have been
     submitted (whether or not material to the application and  whether  or
    not to the applicant's knowledge)  or  material  facts  have  not  been
    disclosed in relation to the application.

14. The judge properly considered the Appellant's explanation for the  lack
    of disclosure and rejected it.  He was represented at the hearing  when
    the conditional discharge was imposed upon him and would have  had  the
    effect  explained  to  him  both  by  the  court  and  presumably   his
    solicitors.  He did not accept that the Appellant was ignorant of  what
    it meant.  He therefore correctly addressed himself to the question  of
    whether the Appellant had acted dishonestly  and  he  was  entitled  to
    decide that he had.

15. Similarly, it was  open  to  the  judge  to  find  that  there  was  no
    unfairness in this case.  The Appellant took no steps from  July  2012,
    when he was  aware  that  his  college  had  been  suspended  from  the
    register, until the date of decision in order to try and identify a new
    Sponsor.  As the judge said, it was  for  the  Appellant  to  take  the
    necessary steps to obtain the letter from UKBA and obtain  a  new  CAS.
    The Appellant had four  months  in  order  to  try  to  regularise  his
    position and did absolutely nothing.  The fact that  he  could  not  in
    practice have obtained a further CAS without Home Office  documentation
    does not absolve him from the responsibility of seeking to  identify  a
    new college and making the necessary enquiries  for  himself.   Had  he
    done so he would have been able to then approach the Secretary of State
    who may well have granted him 60 days' leave  in  compliance  with  her
    policy.  As it turns out the Appellant had rather more than 60 days  in
    which to seek to regularise his position.  It is not arguable that  the
    Secretary of State acted unfairly.

16. With respect to Article 8, it is right that the judge did  not  address
    the issue which was pleaded in the original Grounds of  Appeal  and  to
    that extent the decision must therefore be remade.

17. The Appellant has enjoyed private life in the UK as  a  student  for  a
    little over three years and his removal would be an  interference  with
    his private life and his ability to study in the UK.  It would  however
    be lawful and in pursuit of a legitimate aim and proportionate for  the
    following reasons.

18. This Appellant has a conviction of battery as a consequence of domestic
    violence against his wife. He did not seek to ameliorate his  situation
    when his college was suspended from the register by  seeking  to  study
    elsewhere which may cast some light upon his commitment to his  studies
    here.  If he wishes to return to the UK as a student it is open to  him
    to apply for the requisite entry clearance.

Decision

19. The judge's decision with respect to the Immigration Rules contains  no
    error of law and shall stand.  The Appellant's appeal is also dismissed
    on Article 8 grounds.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor





