
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26554/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st December 2015                         |On 18th January 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mr MUHAMMAD SATTAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss E Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr A Rahman, Legal Representative

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  appeal  of  Mr  Muhammad  Sattar,  a
    citizen of Pakistan, born on 2nd January 1980.   For  the  purposes  of
    this decision I refer to the parties as they  were  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The Respondent by notice of decision and letter dated  12th  June  2014
    considered the Appellant's claim as a human rights  claim  and  made  a
    decision to refuse that  claim.   The  Respondent  had  considered  the
    Appellant liable to removal pursuant to Section 10(1)(b)  as  a  person
    who had  used  deception  in  seeking  leave  to  remain.  His  in-time
    application under Appendix FM was therefore treated by  the  Respondent
    as a human rights claim and his appeal against that decision to  remove
    (a human rights claim having been refused).

 3. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI2008/269) I do not make an anonymity order.  No order was  made
    by the First-tier Tribunal and there were  no  issues  before  me  that
    might require such an order.

Background

 4. On 17th June 2011 the Appellant entered the UK as a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant with a visit valid until 23rd September 2014.  On  30th
    May 2013 he married Mrs Waheeda Sattar who is a British citizen born in
    the UK on 2nd July 1976.  In October 2013 when the Appellant had  leave
    to remain, he made an application to be granted leave to remain on  the
    basis of his  marriage.   That  application  was  refused  because  the
    Appellant did not enclose the required  English  language  certificate.
    This is indicated on page  8  of  the  FLR(M)  form  submitted  by  the
    Appellant  subsequently  on  17th  February  2014,  a  second  in  time
    application for leave to remain on the basis of marriage.  There was no
    indication that the Appellant's leave to remain had been  curtailed  or
    that his application on 17th February 2014 was anything other  than  in
    time.

 5. The Appellant applied for leave to remain on the basis of the five year
    route under Appendix FM as he had valid leave to remain which had  been
    granted for more than six months.  The Appellant  provided  details  of
    income and  submitted  various  documents  to  show  cohabitation.   In
    respect of the English language requirement the Appellant  stated  that
    he had passed an English language test provided by an approved provider
    and enclosed  an  original  certificate.  In  respect  of  the  English
    language requirement the Appellant stated that he had passed an English
    language test provided by an approved provider and enclosed an original
    certificate.

 6. This original certificate is a TOEIC Certificate issued by ETS.   There
    are two certificates.  The first is for speaking and writing  in  which
    the Appellant scored 180 out  of  200  for  both  tests  giving  him  a
    proficiency level of 8.  The second certificate is  for  listening  and
    reading.  The certificates indicate that the speaking and writing  test
    was taken on 27th November 2013 and  the  listening  and  reading  test
    taken on 29th November 2013.

 7. In March 2014 the Respondent sent the Appellant a letter  stating  that
    ETS TOEIC qualifications were under  investigation.  As  a  result  the
    Appellant sat the Trinity College London grade 2 GESE qualification  at
    the London Pioneer College (an SSELT centre).  He  was  awarded  an  A1
    certificate with distinction and a certificate was issued  on  2nd  May
    2014.  This was  then  submitted  to  the  Home  Office  prior  to  the
    decision.

 8. The Respondent's letter dated 12th June 2014 refused  the  application,
    concluding that the Appellant does not meet the suitability requirement
    at S-LTR.2.1 of Appendix FM  which  provides  that  an  applicant  will
    normally be refused on grounds of suitability where it  was  considered
    that the Appellant was a person who had sought leave to remain  in  the
    UK by deception.  The Respondent asserted  that  the  validity  of  the
    Appellant's  tests  taken  on  27th  November   2013   could   not   be
    authenticated and his scores had been   cancelled.

 9. The Respondent went on to  consider  the  remaining  issues  under  the
    Immigration Rules but considered that the Appellant did  not  meet  the
    requirements.

10. The appeals came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Davies on 18th
    May 2015. The judge,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  5th  June  2015
    concluded that the Respondent had failed to show that the Appellant had
    used deception in an attempt to stay in the UK.   The  judge  therefore
    concluded that the Appellant did meet the suitability criteria under S-
    LTR.2.2(a).   It was accepted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge that the
    Appellant met the eligibility criteria and did not  therefore  need  to
    rely on EX.1.  The judge  allowed  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

11. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on  two  grounds.
    The first was that the judge had made a material misdirection of law in
    applying an impermissibly high standard of proof  in  determining  this
    deception issue.  Whilst it was acknowledged that the judge  identified
    the requisite burden and standard of proof correctly at paragraph 43 of
    the determination, when considering the evidence it was submitted  that
    the judge applied a more onerous test.  The second ground was that  the
    judge had failed to  provide  adequate  reasons  for  a  finding  on  a
    material matter and it was submitted that  the  judge  had  before  the
    Tribunal witness statements and an extract from a  spreadsheet.   These
    documents evidence the Respondent's case that  the  Appellant  employed
    deception  in  obtaining  his  English   language   certificate.    The
    spreadsheet extract  indicates  that  the  Appellant's  test  had  been
    categorised by ETS as "invalid".  The witness statements from Mr  Peter
    Millington and Mrs Rebecca Collings indicate that tests are categorised
    as invalid when ETS are certain that there is evidence of  proxy  tests
    taking place or impersonation.

12. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted and  the  appeal
    came before me.

13. Miss Savage at the appeal before me initially made an  application  for
    an adjournment of the error of law hearing.  This was on the basis that
    it was Miss Savage's understanding that there was to be a reported case
    on the same issue. In light of the lack  of  any  adequate  information
    that might suggest that this case was on all fours with any  subsequent
    reported case I did not consider that an adjournment  was  appropriate.
    I considered the relevant Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 including the overriding objective to deal with cases  fairly  and
    justly.  Miss Savage did not pursue her adjournment  request  with  any
    great force and I was not satisfied that  any  unfairness  would  ensue
    from proceeding with the case.

Ground 1

14. Miss Savage referred me to paragraph [43] of the judge's  determination
    which did correctly state the burden and standard  of  proof.  However,
    she submitted that this was incorrectly applied.  In particular at [46]
    it was Miss Savage's contention that the judge  was  requiring  further
    evidence, or at  least  attached  weight  to  the  lack  of  additional
    evidence from ETS.  At [45] the judge also noted the lack of  provision
    of any  further  documents.   It  was  Miss  Savage's  view  that  this
    improperly elevated  the  standard  of  proof  beyond  the  balance  of
    probabilities.  It was Miss Savage's submission that there was  witness
    statement evidence which did provide detail  in  relation  to  the  ETS
    consideration.

15. Mr Rahman in reply submitted that the judge was right to conclude  that
    he could not make a safe finding that deception had been used  in  this
    case.  Mr Rahman referred me to  the  judicial  review  of  R  (on  the
    application of) Gazi v Secretary of State for the Home Department  (ETS
    judicial review) [2015] UKUT 00327 (IAC) in which Mr  Rahman  submitted
    the President confirmed that the First-tier Tribunal is best suited  to
    fact finding cases such as these.

16. I am satisfied, reading the decision in its entirety,  that  the  judge
    properly directed himself, both in form and in  substance,  as  to  the
    burden and standard of proof.  Whilst the judge set out  at  paragraphs
    [45], [46] and  [47]  what  information  the  judge  believed  was  not
    provided by the Respondent, this was part of a  rounded  consideration.
    This included, at  [47]  a  consideration  of  paragraph  47  of  Peter
    Millington's witness statement.  The judge came to the view that  there
    was no entry in the spreadsheet line provided by the  Respondent  which
    provides the information Mr Millington  referred  to.   The  judge  was
    therefore not satisfied that the Appellant's test had been  treated  as
    invalid because an imposter took the test, or merely  because  he  took
    his test at a UK testing centre when numerous other results  have  been
    invalidated.

17. Although  Miss  Savage  submitted  in  reply  that  this  was  not  her
    understanding of the statements from Mr Millington and that if  a  test
    was indicated as invalid this meant that deception had been used, I  am
    satisfied that the findings reached by the judge were  ones  that  were
    open to  him.  Ms Savage was unable to  point  to  anything  inherently
    wrong in his analysis of the evidence produced by the Respondent.  Even
    if  the  judge  erred  in  his  analysis  of  paragraph  47  of   Peter
    Millington's witness statement, in the alternative I am satisfied  that
    such is not material as it is clear that the judge carefully considered
    all the evidence, including  the  generic  witness  statement  evidence
    before him and was not  satisfied  that  there  was  adequate  specific
    evidence to conclude that this appellant had used a proxy  test  taker.



18. I am not satisfied that in either noting the failure of the  Respondent
    to provide certain items that the judge was applying a higher test,  or
    that the judge in criticising the evidence from the  Respondent  failed
    to give adequate reasons for so doing.

19. I am satisfied that the judge applied the appropriate standard of proof
    and properly balanced the  generic  evidence  against  the  Appellant's
    evidence.

Ground 2

20. I am satisfied that the judge carefully evaluated all of the  evidence.
    Miss Savage argued that there were  inadequate  reasons  given  by  the
    judge, in particular Miss  Savage  stated  that  [45]  referred  to  no
    documentary evidence of the  administrative  review  process.   However
    Miss Savage indicated  that  there  was  documentary  evidence  of  the
    administrative review process in terms of the witness statements before
    the judge, including of Rebecca Collings.  Miss Savage also referred to
    [46] which indicated that all that had been provided  was  a  one  line
    printout from a spreadsheet.   She  submitted  that  this  was  further
    evidence that the judge had failed to  consider  the  detailed  witness
    statements from Peter Millington and Rebecca Collings  and  that  these
    had not been taken into account.

21. Miss Savage referred to the fact that the judge, at  [51]  records  the
    difficulties of the Appellant giving evidence in English and  the  fact
    that he had obtained a very high result of 180 out of 200 in his  TOEIC
    score report.  The judge noted that this was a very high level and  was
    difficult to reconcile with the oral evidence from the  Appellant.   In
    light of this it was Miss Savage's view that  the  judge  had  provided
    inadequate reasons.

22. I do not share that conclusion; Judge Davies gave detailed reasons  and
    examined  all  the  evidence  before  him  thoroughly,  both  from  the
    Respondent and from the Appellant.  The judge carefully considered  and
    weighed his concerns, at [51] and [52] in relation to his difficulty in
    reconciling the Appellant's  oral  evidence  and  his  scores  and  was
    entitled to reach the conclusion  that  he  did  that  on  balance  the
    respondent had not discharged the burden of proof.

23. In relation to the witness statements from, Michael  Sartorious,  Peter
    Millington and Rebecca Collings, the judge set out details  from  these
    statements including  at  [29],  [30],  [45],  [46]  and  [47]  of  his
    decision. The judge notes that these were 'generic  statements  setting
    out in some detail the history of  the  ETS  investigations'.    It  is
    clear that the judge considered the  generic  evidence  of  the  review
    process.  There was no error  in  the  judge  finding  that  there  was
    nothing specific in these witness statements relating to the Appellant,
    other than the Appellant's name  and  date  of  birth  and  certificate
    number in Annex A.

24. In finding that deception had not been established the judge also  took
    into consideration  that  the  Appellant  provided  a  further  English
    language test referred to at [49] of the  decision.   The  judge  noted
    that there was no reference to the Respondent considering  the  results
    of this test despite the fact that the Appellant had passed  A1  level.
    The judge considered this a relevant factor to take into  account  when
    deciding whether or not to  conclude  the  ETS  test  was  obtained  by
    deception.   This  again  was  a  finding  properly  open  to  him,  on
    consideration of all the evidence. At [49] the judge pointed  out  that
    there was a  real  possibility  that  ETS  can  make  mistakes  in  its
    verification  process  and  relied  on  the  witness  statement  of  Mr
    Millington in this  regard.   The  judge  was  of  the  view  that  the
    Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law as  it  failed
    to appear to have given consideration to the possibility  of  mistakes,
    particularly in the context of an Appellant who subsequently  passed  a
    further test about which there were no concerns  raised,  rendered  the
    Respondent's decision not in accordance with the law.

25. I am satisfied that in preferring the evidence of  the  appellant,  the
    judge reached a conclusion  open  to  him  on  the  evidence  and  gave
    detailed and adequate reasons for his findings. I do not find merit  in
    either of these grounds which amount to little more than a disagreement
    with the judge's conclusions.

Notice of Decision

26. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law and shall stand.



Signed                                  Date:  15 January 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson



























