

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26898/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 22nd May 2013                            |On: 3 June 2013              |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                          rhonna cervantes serrano

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Rashid Ahmed, instructed by Dias Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Philip Mangion of the Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   Miss Serrano has an exemplary work record as  an  employee  of  Cumbria
    County Council, most recently as a Family Placement  Officer  in  their
    Adoption and Support Services  Team.   She  came  to  this  country  in
    October 2006 to take up work permit employment, and in October 2011 she
    applied for indefinite leave to remain, which is normally granted after
    five years in work permit employment.   Her  application  was  refused,
    however, on 8th February 2012, because by then a requirement  had  been
    inserted into all Parts of the Immigration Rules that an applicant  for
    indefinite leave should have no  unspent  convictions.   Unfortunately,
    Miss Serrano did have an unspent conviction.  In July 2010 she had been
    convicted by Keswick Magistrates of certain motoring offences.

2.    These offences can  certainly  be  regarded  as  'technical'.   Before
    coming to this country Miss Serrano had been working in  Massachusetts,
    and had acquired three driving licences - a Filipino one,  an  American
    one and an international one.  She assumed that she would  be  able  to
    drive in the United Kingdom without taking  a  further  test,  and  she
    applied for motor insurance on the basis that she was entitled  without
    more to drive on British roads.  (An international licence  would  only
    let her do this for one year.)  She duly obtained the insurance, and it
    was only when she was caught speeding that it came to  light  that  she
    was not licensed to drive in the United Kingdom, and that she had  been
    wrong to tell Swinton Car Insurance that she  was  so  licensed.   Miss
    Serrano pleaded guilty to these offences,  for  which  she  incurred  a
    fine.  Her crime was scarcely heinous, but  the  Immigration  Rules  at
    that time made no distinction between one  offence  and  another.   Any
    unspent  conviction  was  treated  as  blocking  an   application   for
    settlement.

3.   Two appeals to the First-tier Tribunal ensued.  The first  was  allowed
    by Judge Balloch, to the limited extent that the matter was  'remitted'
    to the Secretary of State for a proper exercise of the discretion under
    paragraph 395C of the Immigration Rules.  Another decision was taken on
    14th November  2012,  but  the  application  was  again  refused  under
    paragraph 134(vii) of the Immigration Rules, and a concurrent  decision
    was taken to remove the appellant under section 47 of  the  Immigration
    Nationality and  Asylum  Act  2006.   The  latter  decision  was  ruled
    unlawful by Judge Mark-Bell on the  second  appeal,  and  there  is  no
    dispute about that.  What caused the matter to come  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal was his decision to 'remit' Miss Serrano's case again  to  the
    Secretary of State for a proper exercise of  her  discretion  to  grant
    leave, this time outside rather than within the Immigration Rules.

4.   On behalf of the Secretary of State, Peter  Deller  of  the  Specialist
    Appeals Team drafted grounds on which leave to appeal  was  granted  by
    Designated Judge Wilson.  (Miss Serrano is thus the  respondent  before
    the Upper Tribunal, but  for  convenience  I  have  kept  the  original
    designations as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.)  Mr Deller's
    grounds were drafted with his customary acuity, and were rebutted in  a
    Rule 24 Reply settled by Mr Ahmed, but at the hearing it was agreed  on
    all hands that there was a way round the problem.   While  Judge  Mark-
    Bell was wrong to 'remit' the matter to the Secretary of State for  her
    to exercise her discretion outside the Rules (a discretion which is not
    reviewable by the Tribunal), there was a discretion  inside  the  Rules
    which should have been exercised in Miss Serrano's  favour.   Paragraph
    134 is couched in discretionary terms ~ "indefinite leave to remain may
    be granted" ~ and so it would be open to  the  Tribunal  under  section
    86(3)(b) of the 2002 Act to find that the decision on  the  application
    should have been exercised differently.

5.   I am  grateful  to  both  representatives  for  their  co-operation  in
    achieving what is so obviously a fair outcome to  this  appeal.   Judge
    Mark-Bell did make an error of law which requires the Upper Tribunal to
    re-make his decision on the appeal against the  refusal  of  indefinite
    leave.  Given the lack of any mens rea on the part of Miss  Serrano  in
    an offence of strict liability, and given also that the requirement  to
    have no unspent convictions was  deleted  from  the  Immigration  Rules
    shortly after the decision in the instant case, the appeal falls to  be
    allowed outright.




     DECISION

     The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed to the limited  extent  that
    the First-tier Tribunal erred in purporting to 'remit' the decision  on
    Miss Serrano's application for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom.
    A fresh decision is  substituted,  allowing  her  appeal  against  that
    decision, with a direction that indefinite leave to remain be granted.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                               22nd May 2013



