
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26105/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 April 2013                              |On 12th August 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG



                                   Between

                              MISS WEI FENG LIN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Lam, Counsel, instructed by Fletcher Day LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, who was born on 1 October 1975, is  a  national  of  The
    People's Republic of China.  She appeals, with permission, against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker, who  in  a  determination
    dated 17 January 2013 and promulgated shortly thereafter,  following  a
    hearing at Hatton Cross on 14 January 2013, had  dismissed  her  appeal
    against the respondent's decision refusing her application for leave to
    remain outside the Rules and under Article 8.  As summarised  by  Judge
    Walker at paragraph 2 of his determination, the  appellant  claimed  to
    have arrived in the UK either in 2006 or 2007 concealed in the back  of
    a lorry.  It is her case, which does not seem to be disputed,  that  in
    China the appellant had had a relationship with a  Mr  Fenglin  He,  by
    whom she had had two children, a son born in 1994, and a daughter  born
    in 1996.  Mr He then came to this country in May 2000, where he claimed
    asylum, which claim was refused.  It was accepted before  Judge  Walker
    that it could not properly be argued now that Mr He could not return to
    China for the reasons put forward in support of his asylum application.



 2. As already noted, in about 2006, the appellant also  travelled  to  the
    UK, leaving her children in the care of Mr He's parents in  China.   At
    no time did she have any legal right to be in this county.

 3. Shortly after arriving in this country the appellant became engaged  in
    persistent criminal offending, and has amassed a number of convictions.
    It seems she  earned  her  living  by  selling  counterfeit  DVDs,  and
    persisted in this conduct  in  breach  of  conditional  discharges  and
    community orders and also following prison sentences.  Despite amassing
    a number of convictions before this date, it was  not  until  14  March
    2009 when the appellant was served with an IS151A notice  as  a  person
    liable to detention and removal as an illegal  entrant.   On  the  same
    day, she claimed asylum, but her application was treated  as  withdrawn
    on 31 March 2009 after she failed to attend  an  interview.   It  would
    appear that she failed to attend this interview because she feared that
    if she did she would be removed from  this  country.   As  recorded  by
    Judge Walker at paragraph 12 of his determination, she failed to report
    as required.

 4.  Despite being arrested subsequently, it seems that the respondent  did
    not appreciate, or was  not  notified,  that  the  person  subsequently
    arrested was the same person who had failed to honour  her  requirement
    to report, because no further steps were taken to remove her.  This may
    be because, as found by Judge Walker at paragraph 45, she had  given  a
    false name when arrested or interviewed.

 5. Even though Mr He was considered not to be entitled  to  asylum,  under
    the policy then operated by the respondent, he was  granted  indefinite
    leave  to  remain  on  13  September  2010.   The  couple  then  almost
    immediately had another child,  because  a  little  after  nine  months
    later, on 25 July 2011, their  son,  Junxian  was  born.   Because  his
    father by this time had ILR, and was  accordingly  settled  here,  this
    child is entitled to British citizenship, and he was  registered  as  a
    British citizen very shortly after.

 6. Almost immediately following the birth of Junxian and his  registration
    as a British citizen, on 29 September  2011  this  appellant  made  the
    application which is now the subject of this appeal.

 7. The application was refused by the respondent on 30 October 2012.   The
    refusal letter is dated the same date, and  was  served  the  following
    day.  The appellant was also notified that subsequent to the service on
    her of the notice of her liability to detention and removal on 14 March
    2009, a decision had been taken to remove her from the UK.

 8. The appellant appealed against this decision  and  it  is  this  appeal
    which was dismissed by Judge Walker.

 9. Judge Walker made a number of adverse findings of fact and  credibility
    against the appellant, which will be discussed below.

10. As I indicated during the hearing, the findings which Judge Walker made
    were open to him, and there is no reason why this Tribunal  should  set
    them aside. However, Judge Walker's consideration  of  the  appellant's
    claim that her removal would be in breach of her Article 8  rights  was
    founded upon his finding, at paragraph 38, that "as far as her youngest
    child is concerned, I find that it would be quite reasonable to  expect
    such a young child to leave the UK with  the  appellant".   It  is  the
    challenge to this aspect of Judge Walker's determination which  is  the
    foundation of this appeal.

The Hearing

11. At the hearing, I heard submissions on behalf of both parties. As these
    submissions are set out fully in the Record of Proceedings in  which  I
    attempted to record contemporaneously everything said during the course
    of the hearing, I shall only set out below what is  necessary  for  the
    purposes of this determination.   I  have,  however,  considered  fully
    everything which was said to me during the course  of  the  hearing  as
    well as all the documents contained within the  file.   I  should  also
    record my thanks to both Mr Lam and  Mr  Wilding  for  their  eloquent,
    concise and persuasive submissions, which have greatly assisted me.

Error of Law

12. At the outset, I found, as accepted on behalf of the  respondent,  that
    Judge  Walker's  failure  to  consider  the  effect  of  Ruiz  Zambrano
    (European  citizenship)  [2011]  EUEC  Case  c-34/09OJ  [2011]  C130/2,
    Omotunde (Best interests - Zambrano applied -  Razgar)  Nigeria  [2011]
    UKUT 00247, and Sanade and Others (British citizen - Zambrano - Dereci)
    [2012] UKUT 00048, was a material error of law, such that his  decision
    must be remade.  I record that it was agreed on behalf of both  parties
    that I did not need to hear any further evidence, and that I also  told
    the parties that I intended to retain the findings of  fact  which  had
    been made by Judge Walker.  Neither party dissented from this approach.



Respondent's submissions

13. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Wilding agreed that  in  light  of  the
    authorities (which had not been referred to in Judge Walker's decision)
    the Tribunal could neither expect  nor  require  that  the  appellant's
    youngest child, Junxian, would go to China. The respondent's  case  was
    very narrow, and it was that, in all the circumstances  of  this  case,
    separation was appropriate. The appellant was clearly not  entitled  to
    remain under the Rules; the suitability criteria were not satisfied  as
    there had been no challenge to what  was  said  about  the  criminality
    findings.  Accordingly the sole basis of appeal was that the removal of
    this appellant would be in breach of her Article 8 rights.

14. The respondent did not seek to persuade the Tribunal that it was not in
    the best interests of this child that he should be brought up with  his
    mother.  (In this regard, I note that Judge Walker had so found, albeit
    in the context that there was no legitimate reason why all  the  family
    could not return to China together.)  Mr Wilding accepted that this was
    a primary consideration, but it was not the only consideration.

15.  The issue in this appeal was whether  or   not  the  separation  which
    would  follow  if  the  mother  but  not  the  child  was  removed  was
    proportionate or not.  Judge Walker  had  made  unimpeachable  findings
    with  regard  to  the  appellant's  criminality,  and  it   was   quite
    extraordinary that it was now argued on behalf of  the  appellant  that
    she did not present an ongoing risk  when  not  only  did  she  have  a
    lengthy criminal record but she and her partner  had  given  discrepant
    evidence before the Tribunal.  One glaring example was the  failure  to
    disclose until these proceedings that the couple had  two  children  in
    China, which ultimately Judge  Walker  had  found  was  an  attempt  to
    deceive the Tribunal; otherwise, why should this have been hidden? (see
    paragraph 26 of Judge Walker's determination).

16. The reason why there was this discrepant evidence was because  the  two
    children in China had applied for entry clearance. There was  still  no
    decision on their appeal but the hearing was apparently listed for May.
     The applications had presumably been made when both the children  were
    under 18; the oldest had been born in 1994.  The  failure  to  disclose
    this application begged the question of what else the appellant had not
    disclosed, but it was accepted that this  was  a  case  where,  if  the
    appellant was removed, she would be separated from her young son  here.



17. When considering the effect of the decision in Sanade, it was important
    to note that although that was a deportation case, this also was a case
    where removal was justified by the risk of further offending.  Although
    the respondent had not made a deportation order, it was a factor  which
    was relevant.  The removal was not just for the purpose of  maintaining
    the economic wellbeing of  this  country  by  maintaining  a  fair  and
    effective system of immigration control.  It was important to note also
    that in Sanade, two of the three appeals had failed, and removal of two
    of the applicants found to be proportionate, even  though  these  would
    involve separation from their families.  In  other  words,  there  were
    circumstances where the weight of public interest  could  outweigh  the
    Article 8 rights of an appellant, and in this case the Article 8 rights
    of her child aswell.

18.  In  this  case,  removal  would  be  proportionate,  because  of   the
    appellant's immigration history, coupled with her  criminality.   Also,
    she knew the precariousness of her status  when  her  relationship  was
    rekindled with her partner.  Other than for the interests and rights of
    her child, there was absolutely no reason why she should be allowed  to
    remain.  The child was British but had a primary carer, the father, and
    so this was on all fours with the two applicants whose appeals had been
    dismissed in Sanade.  There was no suggestion  here  that  without  the
    appellant being present the ongoing circumstances of the child would be
    so degraded that he would descend into poverty.  There was no reason to
    think that the child would be disadvantaged in terms  of  education  by
    his mother not being here. Ultimately, the strength of public  interest
    in removing her outweighed the Article 8 rights of the child.

19. The interests of the children in China were a relevant factor,  because
    although Section 55 would not directly apply to a child overseas,  when
    considering the effect of the UN Convention, these factors were of some
    significance, although it was accepted that the interests of the  child
    present in this country had much more weight.

20. It was also relevant that after the  appellant  had  been  served  with
    removal directions, she had absconded.

Appellant's submissions

21. On behalf of the appellant, Mr  Lam  reminded  the  Tribunal  that  the
    interests of the appellant's child was a weighty consideration,  albeit
    not the only consideration, and although it would probably have counted
    in her favour had the fact that she had had two children in China  been
    disclosed earlier, the Tribunal should note that it was the sponsor who
    had disclosed the existence of  these  children.   Also,  the  Tribunal
    should not come to the conclusion that they had had a child  simply  in
    order to improve their immigration position.  The Tribunal should  also
    note, as stated in ZH (Tanzania), that the child should not  be  blamed
    for the mother's poor immigration history.  If  the  Tribunal  accepted
    that the child's best interests was to be with his mother, he could not
    be blamed for her  bad  behaviour.   If  one  looked  at  the  criminal
    behaviour of the two applicants in Sanade who had lost  their  appeals,
    their criminal  behaviour  had  been  much  worse  than  that  of  this
    appellant.  Very strong reasons would need to be shown to  justify  the
    separation of a child from his mother. Although one could  not  approve
    of selling counterfeit DVDs, this criminality  was  much  less  serious
    than the kind of cases contemplated in Sanade or Omotunde.

22. It would be difficult for this Tribunal to take  any  consideration  of
    the position  of  the  two  other  children  in  China,  because  their
    position was currently uncertain. In any event, the  interests  of  the
    very young child had to be given much  greater  weight.   The  Tribunal
    must also have in mind that current EU Regulations provided that  third
    country national carers of British children must be allowed to stay  if
    the children would otherwise have to leave the  territory  of  the  EU,
    although Mr Lam did not seek to argue that in this case the child could
    not stay here with his father.

23. The question the Tribunal had to consider in this case was whether  the
    appellant's behaviour, coupled with her immigration history  outweighed
    the interests of her child in her remaining.  Also, although  this  had
    less weight, the Tribunal should also take account of the interests  of
    the appellant's partner, who was a British resident, with a stable job.
     Also, if the appellant was granted leave to remain, this was likely to
    be discretionary, and it  might  be  difficult  to  argue  against  her
    removal were she to offend again. But at the present time, the Tribunal
    had just enough room to allow her appeal.

Discussion

24. The principle to be derived from the cases of Omutunde  and  Sanade  is
    that a Tribunal cannot expect a British child to leave this country  as
    a result of a removal decision made  in respect of that child's parent.
     The family as a unit cannot be required to  relocate  outside  of  the
    European Union and nor can the Secretary of State submit  it  would  be
    reasonable for the family so to move.

25. I also take account of the various authorities, in particular the House
    of Lords decision in Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 and the  Court  of
    Appeal decision in Hayat v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1054, from which it  is
    clear that where the main reason for removal is  because  an  applicant
    should make the application under Article 8 from his or her home state,
    that reason will usually not  be  sufficient  on  its  own  to  justify
    removal. I set out the summary of the  principles  involved  (following
    analysis of previous  decisions)  from  the  judgment  of  Elias  J  at
    paragraph 30 of Hayat as follows:

         "30.     In my judgment  the  effect  of  these  decisions  can  be
             summarised as follows:
             (a)  Where  an  applicant  who  does  not  have  lawful  entry
                  clearance pursues an Article 8 claim, a dismissal  of  the
                  claim on the procedural ground that  the  policy  requires
                  that the applicant should have made the  application  from
                  his home state may (but not necessarily will) constitute a
                  disruption of family or private life sufficient to  engage
                  Article  8,  particularly  where  children  are  adversely
                  affected.
             (b)  Where Article 8 is engaged, it will be a disproportionate
                  interference with family or private life to enforce such a
                  policy unless, to use the language of Sullivan  LJ,  there
                  is a sensible reason for doing so.
             (c)  Whether it  is  sensible  to  enforce  that  policy  will
                  necessarily  be  fact  sensitive;  Lord  Brown  identified
                  certain potentially relevant factors  in  Chikwamba.  They
                  will  include  the  prospective  length  and   degree   of
                  disruption of family life and whether other members of the
                  family are settled in the UK.
             (d)  Where Article 8 is  engaged  and  there  is  no  sensible
                  reason for enforcing the policy, the decision maker should
                  determine the Article 8 claim on its  substantive  merits,
                  having regard to  all  material  factors,  notwithstanding
                  that the applicant has no lawful entry clearance.
             (e)  It will be a very rare case where it is  appropriate  for
                  the  Court  of  Appeal,  having  concluded  that  a  lower
                  tribunal has disproportionately interfered with Article  8
                  rights in enforcing the policy, to  make  the  substantive
                  Article 8 decision  for  itself.  Chikwamba  was  such  an
                  exceptional case. Logically the court  would  have  to  be
                  satisfied that there is only  one  proper  answer  to  the
                  Article 8 question before substituting its own finding  on
                  this factual question.
             (f)  Nothing in Chikwamba was intended to alter  the  way  the
                  courts should approach substantive  Article  8  issues  as
                  laid down in such well known cases as Razgar and Huang.
             (g) Although the cases  do  not  say  this  in  terms,  in  my
                  judgment if the Secretary of State has no sensible  reason
                  for requiring the application to be  made  from  the  home
                  state, the fact that he has failed to  do  so  should  not
                  thereafter carry any weight in the substantive  Article  8
                  balancing exercise."

26. It is clear from this decision that if the  only  or  main  reason  for
    requiring this appellant to leave this country now was because  it  was
    considered more appropriate  for  her  to  make  her  application  from
    outside the country, there would have to be a sensible  reason  for  so
    requiring, especially  bearing  in  mind  the  disruption  which  would
    inevitably be caused to the  family  life  of  the  appellant  and  her
    family, including her young son, as a result.

27. Accordingly, my primary function must be to  consider  the  appellant's
    Article 8 claim on its merits, in accordance with usual principles.   I
    consider the appeal on the basis, as it was put to me on behalf of  the
    respondent, that if this appellant is removed, she  will  be  separated
    from her partner and young son, and they will be  separated  from  her.
    They cannot be either required or expected to leave this  country  with
    her.

28. Obviously, the interests of Junxian, the appellant's young son,  is  of
    primary importance, to which great weight must be  attached.   However,
    as was made clear by the House of Lords in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4,
    while the interests of  a young child are primary, in that  these  must
    be considered first, those interests are not necessary determinative of
    the appeal. Baroness Hale put  it  this  way  at  paragraph  33  of  ZH
    (Tanzania):

         " In making the proportionality assessment  under  article  8,  the
         best interests of the child must be a primary  consideration.  This
         means that they must be considered first. They can, of  course,  be
         outweighed by the cumulative effect  of  other  considerations.  In
         this case, the  countervailing  considerations  were  the  need  to
         maintain firm  and  fair  immigration  control,  coupled  with  the
         mother's appalling immigration history and  the  precariousness  of
         her position when family life was created."

29. In ZH (Tanzania) itself, the facts  were,  as  subsequently  stated  by
    Baroness Hale in the same paragraph, that  "the  inevitable  result  of
    removing [the children's] primary carer would be that that they had  to
    leave with her",  and,  "as  the  Tribunal  rightly  pointed  out,  the
    children were not to be blamed" for the actions  of  their  mother  (as
    this Tribunal was reminded by Mr Lam, as noted  above).   However,  the
    situation in this case is different, because  there  is  no  suggestion
    here that in consequence of the removal  of  this  appellant,  her  son
    would have to leave with her.  As Mr  Wilding  put  it,  there  was  no
    suggestion in this case that without the appellant  being  present  the
    ongoing circumstances of the child would be so degraded that  he  would
    descend into poverty.  The evidence from Junxian's father  is  that  he
    has �20,000 in savings, and it is not suggested that he  would  not  be
    capable of looking after the child. Nor  is  it  suggested  that  there
    would need to be any involvement from social services. In this case, on
    the evidence before me, I find that while the  best  interests  of  the
    child would be better served if his mother remained  in  this  country,
    because it will almost always be better for a child to grow  up  in   a
    family with both parents, there  is  no  reason  why  apart  from  this
    separation, he should not be able to enjoy  his  rights  as  a  British
    citizen fully if he is brought up by his father.  Obviously this is not
    an ideal situation, but it is not disastrous,  in  the  sense  that  it
    would have been for the children being considered by Baroness  Hale  in
    ZH (Tanzania).  Whereas in that case the children  would  have  had  no
    real alternative other than to leave with their mother, who  was  their
    primary carer, that is not the situation here.

30. Although I indicated during the hearing that it was my provisional view
    that I would be unlikely to find that the appellant's motive in  having
    her son, Junxian, was to bolster her claim to  be  allowed  to  remain,
    having considered the evidence fully in the round, I have  been  forced
    to conclude that it was.  Having kept out of the way of the authorities
    as best she could, and not having had  any  more  children  during  the
    entire time when neither she nor Mr He had any right  to  remain  here,
    almost immediately after Mr He had been  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain, she became pregnant with Junxian, who was then registered as  a
    British citizen without any delay at all.  Then, immediately  following
    Junxian's birth and registration as a British  citizen,  the  appellant
    made the present  application.  The  overwhelming  inference  from  the
    timing of these events is that the primary purpose of the appellant  in
    becoming pregnant was in  order  to  enable  her  to  make  a  stronger
    application to be allowed to remain and I so find, on  the  balance  of
    probabilities.

31. When considering the effect on Junxian of separation from his mother, I
    take account also of the fact that the appellant's  previous  behaviour
    as a mother has been reprehensible.  Even though she had absolutely  no
    legal right to be in this  country,  the  appellant,  as  noted  above,
    travelled to this country leaving her older children, then  aged  about
    10 and 12, in the care of their grandparents.  At that  time,  she  was
    their primary carer, Mr  He  having  come  to  this  country  when  the
    children were respectively aged about 4 and 6, and having remained even
    after the failure of  his asylum claim.  In my judgment, the actions of
    the appellant, first in abandoning  her  older  children  and  then  in
    having  another  child  for  the  primary  purpose  of  improving   her
    immigration position, have shown that she has regularly  been  prepared
    selfishly to put her own interests first, and  those  of  her  children
    some considerable distance behind.

32. I have to take account also of the  appellant's  appalling  immigration
    history, coupled with her persistent offending.   This is a case  where
    the public interest in removing this appellant would be  not  just  for
    the purpose of the economic  wellbeing  of  the  country,  through  the
    maintenance of immigration control, but  also  for  the  prevention  of
    crime and disorder.  In light of her immigration record and history  of
    persistent offending, I find that this appellant is likely to  continue
    offending and that this aspect of the public  interest  is  accordingly
    also made out.

33. In my judgment, having considered all the factors in the round, this is
    one of those relatively rare cases where the best interests of a  young
    child are outweighed by other factors and where removal will  still  be
    proportionate  despite  those  best  interests.  This   appellant   has
    persistently chosen to break the law and cynically done everything  she
    can in order to evade proper immigration control.   Not  only  did  she
    commence her family life in this country  in  the  knowledge  that  her
    situation was precarious, but as I have found, the decision to have her
    most recent child was  taken  specifically  because  her  position  was
    precarious and she considered  it  likely  that  it  would  thereby  be
    improved.

34. Although this is a relatively minor factor and my decision that removal
    would be proportionate has been made without taking  this  factor  into
    account, it can also be noted that one effect of removing the appellant
    to China is that she can be re-united with her other children, now aged
    about 17 and 19, whom she had abandoned  in  the  hope  of  enjoying  a
    better economic future for herself in this country.

35. Asking myself the questions posited by Lord Bingham in Razgar,  I  find
    that the appellant does enjoy family life in  this  country,  and  that
    there would be a disruption to her family life, and the family life  of
    her partner and child who are here, such that her Article 8 rights  are
    engaged.  Nonetheless, her removal would be both lawful  and  necessary
    for the purposes as set out above, and, for the reasons I  have  given,
    would also be proportionate.   It  follows  that  her  appeal  must  be
    dismissed, and I so order.

Decision

I set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  containing  a
material error of law, and substitute the following decision:

The appellant's appeal is dismissed, on human rights grounds, Article 8.




Signed:                                 Date: 27 July 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig
