
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26249/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5 December 2014                         |On 15 December 2014            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

                                Daniel Oppong
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Oji, Counsel instructed by Messrs VLS
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant, a citizen of Ghana born  on  4  May
    1985, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal who,  sitting  at
    Richmond Magistrates' Court on 29 January 2014 and in  a  determination
    subsequently promulgated on 18 February 2014, dismissed the  appeal  of
    the Appellant against the decision of the Respondent dated 11 June 2013
    to refuse the Appellant a residence card as confirmation of a right  of
    residence as a  family  member  of  an  EEA  national  because  it  was
    concluded that he had failed to produce a valid marriage certificate as
    evidence that he was related as claimed to the EEA national and that in
    consequence he did not have a basis of stay in the United Kingdom under
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

2.   The Appellant had applied  as  a  non-EEA  national  family  member  of
    Esther Afriyie Oppong, an EEA national claiming to be exercising treaty
    rights in the United  Kingdom.   In  support  of  his  application,  he
    submitted his Ghanaian passport, his EEA  Sponsor's  Austrian  National
    Identity Card, his Ghana customary marriage certificate  and  statutory
    declaration and evidence of his EEA Sponsor's employment.  In order for
    the Appellant to qualify for a residence card, Regulation  17(1)(b)  of
    the 2006 EEA Regulations required him to provide evidence that  he  was
    related as claimed to his EEA national Sponsor.  Regulation  7  defined
    who was considered as a direct family member of an EEA  national,  such
    as spouse.

3.   As evidence of this,  the  Appellant  submitted  a  Ghanaian  customary
    marriage certificate and stated that he was married to the  Sponsor  in
    Ghana on 12 July 2012 by proxy and that  the  marriage  was  registered
    with the District Registrar on  26  July  2012.   Further  a  statutory
    declaration dated 26 July 2012 had been provided from  the  Appellant's
    father and his EEA Sponsor's father in regard to consent of marriage by
    proxy in his absence.

4.    As  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  recorded  in  his  determination
    (decided, at the Appellant's request, on the papers) the Respondent did
    not accept that there was any evidence to show that the  Appellant  had
    registered his marriage in accordance with the requirements of Ghanaian
    law, namely the Customary Marriage and Divorce (Registration) Law  1985
    and as such it was not accepted that the marriage certificate  produced
    had been lawfully issued and constituted evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    relationship and consequently the Appellant  had  failed  to  meet  the
    requirements of Regulation 7 of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

5.   The Respondent further considered the Appellant's  application  on  the
    basis of his being an  unmarried  partner  of  an  EEA  national  under
    Regulation 8(5) as an extended family member, but it was  not  accepted
    that he was in a durable relationship with an EEA  national.   In  that
    regard the Appellant had failed to provide sufficient documentation  to
    show that he was in such a relationship.

6.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the decision of  the  Tribunal
    in NA (Customary marriage and divorce - evidence)  Ghana  [2009]  UKAIT
    00009 which held  inter  alia,  that  the  onus  of  proving  either  a
    customary marriage or  dissolution  rested  on  the  party  making  the
    assertion and that under the Immigration Rules it was for the Appellant
    to prove that the marriage was valid.

7.   In this regard the First-tier Tribunal Judge  at  paragraph  7  of  his
    determination had this to say:

         "The only evidence before me in respect of the  customary  marriage
         of 12 July 2012 which was said to be registered  on  26  July  2012
         relates to  the  documents  that  the  Appellant  produced  in  his
         covering letter of 6 January 2014 entitled 'evidence in support  of
         appeal'.  The statutory declaration is dated 19 December  2013  and
         clearly is not the same statutory declaration of 26  July  2012  in
         which the Appellant's place of residence was not  included  in  the
         declaration.  The document signed by  the  Second  Deputy  Judicial
         Secretary is not a document showing registration  of  the  marriage
         and neither is the certificate that the name of the  notary  public
         whose name appears on the statutory declaration of 19 December 2013
         is a notary public of Ghana.  The Second Deputy Judicial  Secretary
         states in his certificate that he only attests to the signature  of
         the notary  public  and  not  to  the  contents  of  the  statutory
         declaration of 19 December 2013.  The document from the Ministry of
         Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration merely confirms  that  the
         signature of the Second Deputy Judicial Secretary  is  a  true  and
         certified  signature.   Put  simply,  none   of   these   documents
         constitute evidence that a valid customary marriage took place".

8.   In consequence, the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  not  satisfied  that
    there was credible evidence that the Appellant  entered  into  a  valid
    customary marriage by proxy in Ghana and that  the  marriage  had  been
    registered in Ghana as required by the laws of the country.   He  found
    in accordance with the decision in NA that the Appellant had failed  to
    prove that he entered into a  valid  customary  marriage  in  Ghana  by
    proxy.

9.   The Judge continued that since there was no evidence that the  marriage
    had been registered, he found that the Respondent was

         "correct to reject the Appellant's application under  Regulation  7
         of the 2006 Regulations because of a lack of evidence that he is  a
         family member of an EEA national, in this case a spouse".


10.   The  Judge  further  found  that  in  terms  of  the  requirements  of
    Regulation 8(5) he was not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  was  in  a
    durable relationship with an EEA national as an extended family member.

11.  The Appellant  made  an  unsuccessful  application  for  permission  to
    appeal that decision when it was noted that the first  grounds  seeking
    permission contended that the First-tier Judge erred in law in that  he
    proceeded on the basis that  registration  of  customary  marriages  in
    Ghana was mandatory as opposed to optional.  The First-tier  Judge  who
    refused such permission, considered that although such a contention was
    arguable, the application nonetheless failed in relation to  which  she
    gave the following reason:

         "The EEA national to whom the Appellant is purportedly  married  is
         Austrian.  In the case of Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law)  [2014]
         UKUT 24 at paragraphs 16, 17 and 18 it is stated:


             'Spouses' rights of free movement and  residence  are  derived
             from a marriage having been contracted and depend on  it.   In
             light of the connection between the rights  of  free  movement
             and residence and the nationality laws of the  Member  States,
             we  conclude  that,  in  a   situation   where   the   marital
             relationship is disputed, the question of whether there  is  a
             marital relationship is to be examined in accordance with  the
             laws of the Member State from which the Union citizen  obtains
             nationality and from which therefore that citizen derives free
             movement rights.'

         There was no such evidence before the  FTJ  as  to  the  applicable
         Austrian law and therefore any appeal has no realistic prospect  of
         success".

12.   Subsequently,  however,  following  the  Appellant's  application  for
    Judicial Review Mrs Justice Lang by order dated  4  July  2014  decided
    that it was appropriate to grant permission  "on  procedural  grounds".
    Her Ladyship continued:

         "The important case of  Kareem  v  SSHD  ...  confirming  that  the
         starting  point  was  whether  the  marriage  was   contracted   in
         accordance with the  national  law  of  the  member  state  of  the
         qualifying person, was only promulgated by the Upper Tribunal on 16
         January 2014.  Understandably it was not referred  to  at  the  FTT
         hearing on 29 January 2014 and is  not  part  of  the  reasons  for
         dismissing the appeal.   But  it  was  relied  upon  by  the  Upper
         Tribunal when refusing permission to appeal despite the  fact  that
         the Upper Tribunal found that the claimant's first ground of appeal
         (registration of customary marriages in Ghana  not  mandatory)  was
         arguable.  It seems to me that the claimant ought to  be  given  an
         opportunity to address the issues which arise under Kareem both  in
         evidence and law".

13.  In consequence of that decision the Upper Tribunal in a decision  dated
    14 August 2014 granted the Appellant permission to appeal.

14.  Thus the appeal came before me on 5 December 2014 when  my  first  task
    was to determine whether the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Judge
    contained an error or errors on a point of law that may have materially
    affected the outcome of the appeal.

15.  Having heard the parties' submissions I was able to inform them that  I
    was satisfied that the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    did not disclose errors of law material to the outcome  of  the  appeal
    for reasons which I now set out below.

Assessment

16.  I begin by acknowledging that  the  First-tier  Judge  failed  to  take
    account of the guidance in Kareem which indeed was a  matter  that  led
    Lang LJ  to  grant  permission  "on  procedural  grounds"  in  that  in
    consequence it was not part of the Judge's reasons for  dismissing  the
    Appellant's appeal.

17.  This was a matter noted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Coker  when  she  had
    earlier refused renewed permission to appeal  in  a  decision  dated  8
    April 2014, in which she too had recognised that although  the  grounds
    submitted were arguable the grant of permission was in her view

         "otiose because the appeal would fail in any event in the light  of
         Kareem.  Although the grounds to  the  UT  submit  that  they  were
         unaware of the case law even had  they  been  aware  there  was  no
         evidence to that effect and thus  the  appeal  would  fail  in  any
         event".

18.  Indeed, UTJ Coker's observation properly reflected the fact that  there
    was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal Judge that the  Austrian
    authorities would accept that the Appellant's customary proxy  marriage
    was valid.

19.  This reflects in particular paragraph 14 of Kareem where the  following
    is stated:

         "Whilst considering the issue of evidence of  marriage,  we  remind
         ourselves that the proof of  the  law  of  another  country  is  by
         evidence, including proof of  private  international  law  of  that
         other country.  Such  evidence  will  not  only  have  to  identify
         relevant legal provisions in the other  country  but  identify  how
         they apply in practice.  A lack of evidence of relevant foreign law
         will normally mean that the party with the  burden  of  proving  it
         will fail".

20.  Such was further reflected at head note (g) of Kareem that inter alia:

         "It should  be  assumed  that,  without  independent  and  reliable
         evidence about the recognition of the marriage under  the  laws  of
         the EEA country and/or the country where the marriage  took  place,
         the Tribunal is  likely  to  be  unable  to  find  that  sufficient
         evidence has been provided to discharge the burden of proof".

21.  This decision was reinforced by the Tribunal in TA and  Others  (Kareem
    explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 316 (IAC) in which the head note stated as
    follows:

         "Following the decision in Kareem (proxy marriages - EU law) [2014]
         UKUT  24,  the  determination  of  whether  there  is   a   marital
         relationship for the purposes of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations
         2006 must always be examined in accordance with  the  laws  of  the
         Member State from which the Union citizen obtains nationality".

22.  It is apparent that the evidence before the First-tier Judge  was  that
    there was no evidence that this marriage was recognised in Austria  and
    therefore the Judge's failure to consider Kareem is not  in  the  above
    circumstances one that helps this Appellant.

23.  I was informed by Ms Oji that there was now a letter from the  Austrian
    authorities  that  was  Kareem-compliant  but  as  Mr  Wilding  rightly
    submitted, if that was the position advanced then,  that  evidence  was
    not before the First-tier Judge. It was his further submission that the
    letter was not Kareem-compliant because it did  not  certify  that  the
    marriage in question was recognised by the Austrian authorities  or  as
    to how it was recognised (see my reference to head note (g)  of  Kareem
    above.

24.  Mr Wilding submitted that "a party has to go  to  the  EEA  country  in
    question to adduce evidence that they are  married  and  ask  that  EEA
    state to accept that relationship".

25.  Whilst it is regrettable that  the  First-tier  Judge  failed  to  take
    account of or was unaware of the guidance  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Kareem, notwithstanding that its promulgation predated  the  First-tier
    Judge's decision, the fact remains that he could only decide the appeal
    on the basis of  the  evidence  before  him  and  in  that  regard  the
    Appellant chose to have the matter determined on the papers.

26.  Notably Ms Oji realistically accepted that "the necessary evidence  was
    not before Judge Khan" and  as  I  reminded  her,  a  Judge  cannot  be
    regarded as having erred in  law  for  failing  to  take  into  account
    evidence that was not before him.  If there was now evidence  that  was
    considered by the Appellant to  be  Kareem-compliant  then  it  was  of
    course always open to him to make a fresh application on that basis.

Conclusion

27.  I find that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  properly  identified  and
    recorded the matters that he considered to be critical in his  decision
    on the material issues raised before him in this appeal.  The  findings
    that he made were  clearly  open  to  him  on  the  evidence  and  thus
    sustainable in law.

Decision

28.  The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of no error on a point of law and I order that it shall stand.

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 11 December 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein


