
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26915/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 29th September 2015                        | On 11th December 2015        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                         ms Osarieme Elizabeth Iyamu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O L Atuegbe, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 27th October  1984.   The
    Appellant's immigration history is set out in  considerable  detail  at
    paragraph 3 of  the  Secretary  of  State's  Notice  of  Refusal.   The
    Appellant first entered the United Kingdom on 25th December 2001  under
    a valid visit visa.  The appeal that comes before me originates from an
    application made by way of letter dated 29th October 2011  asking  that
    her case be considered pursuant to the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.  That application was ultimately refused by a Notice of Refusal
    dated 9th June 2014.  In reaching such decision the Secretary of  State
    when considering the Appellant's family life accepted that she had been
    in a genuine and subsisting relationship for at  least  two  years  but
    that the person with whom she was in the relationship, Mr Isichei,  was
    neither a British citizen nor a person settled in  the  United  Kingdom
    with  refugee  or  humanitarian  protection  leave  and  therefore  the
    Appellant failed to meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Consideration was also given to the Appellant's family life as a parent
    in the United Kingdom under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and to
    her private life.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Parker sitting at Manchester on 18th September 2014.   In
    a determination promulgated on 2nd October 2014 the Appellant's  appeal
    was allowed both under the Immigration Rules and pursuant to Article  8
    of the European Convention of Human Rights.

 3. On 9th October 2014 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal  to
    the Upper  Tribunal.   Those  grounds  contended  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal materially misdirected itself in law and that  there  were  no
    compelling  circumstances  in  the  case  that  are  not   sufficiently
    recognised under the Rules and that grant of leave  outside  the  Rules
    are reserved for the most exceptional cases and should not be used as a
    means to  circumvent  the  requirements  of  the  Rules  which  are  in
    themselves a complete code.  It was  consequently  submitted  that  the
    Tribunal had erred in law in allowing the appeal under  Article  8  and
    that the decision was not in accordance with the law.

 4. On 5th December 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grimmett  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Grimmett notes there  are  errors  in  the
    Grounds of Appeal.  Firstly the grounds wrongly suggest there are three
    Appellants and secondly the Respondent asserts that the judge erred  in
    failing to consider  whether  there  were  arguably  good  grounds  for
    considering Article 8.  Judge Grimmett points out that such a  test  is
    not however required referring to the authority of R (MM and Others)  v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985.

 5. However, Judge Grimmett went on to note that  the  application  by  the
    Respondent as to whether the judge was  wrong  to  go  on  to  consider
    Article 8 was arguable as at paragraph 18  the  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant did not meet the requirements of the Rules but  at  paragraph
    20 of his determination found that she did.  There did not appear to be
    any Rule 24 response served in reply on behalf of the Appellant.

 6. The matter first appeared before me therefore for consideration  as  to
    whether there was a material error of law on 16th April 2015.  I  noted
    that the principal thrust effectively of both legal representatives was
    that there was a conflict in the determination at paragraphs 18 and 20.
     Effectively the Appellant's legal representative stated that that  was
    not a material error of law but that the Secretary of  State  considers
    that it was.  To a certain extent this is an extension of the manner in
    which the Grounds of Appeal are set out.  However I was persuaded by Mr
    McVeety's arguments that  the  determination  was  flawed.   There  are
    considerable contradictions to be found in  paragraph  18  particularly
    the fact that there is a finding that the  Appellant  has  no  ties  to
    Nigeria when there has been no prior reference within the determination
    to ties and ties seem  to  be  somehow  inextricably  linked  with  the
    medical evidence.  The conflict between the two paragraphs is  critical
    to the determination and as Judge Grimmett states in paragraph 4 of his
    grant of permission contradictions in findings at paragraphs 4, 18  and
    20 in my view contained not just an error of law but a  material  error
    of law making the decision unsafe.

 7. In such circumstances  the  correct  approach  was  to  set  aside  the
    decision and to give directions  for  the  rehearing  of  this  matter.
    However, I  was  persuaded  by  both  legal  representatives  that  the
    findings of fact should stand save for the evidence with regard to ties
    and in such circumstances the correct approach was for me to retain the
    matter within the Upper Tribunal and to ask the administration to  list
    the matter for  rehearing  before  me  on  the  first  available  date.
    Directions were attached regarding that rehearing.

 8. The directions I gave were that whilst the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal contained a material error of  law  and  was  set  aside,  the
    findings of fact were to  stand  save  for  evidence  relating  to  the
    Appellant's ties to Nigeria and that there be leave to the  parties  to
    submit further witness evidence solely relating to this fact  and  that
    the Appellant and the Sponsor do  attend  for  the  purpose  of  cross-
    examination.  I further directed that  save  for  evidence  given  with
    regard to the issue of the Appellant's ties to Nigeria  the  matter  be
    addressed by way of submission only.

 9. It is on that basis that the appeal comes back for me for rehearing.  I
    am considerably assisted in that the representatives from  the  parties
    are those that appeared before me on the hearing of the error  of  law.
    In addition I note that there is a further witness statement  filed  in
    accordance with my directions by the Appellant dated  14th July  2015.
    The Appellant attends court, confirms and adopts that witness statement
    as her evidence-in-chief.

Evidence

10. Ms Iyamu confirms that she is the only child of her  parents  and  that
    she never knew her biological father and that she  was  raised  by  her
    mother and stepfather.  She appears to have had a  difficult  childhood
    and has not seen her mother since 1997.  She entered the United Kingdom
    in December 2001 at the age of 17 along with her stepfather as visitors
    and he then left her to the care of his friend whom she had  never  met
    prior to that time.  Her stepfather returned to Nigeria without telling
    her, leaving a message that he had terminal cancer and that  he  wished
    to leave the Appellant in the UK in a secure environment.

11. It was against  that  tragic  background  that  the  Appellant's  later
    teenage years passed.  She advises that her stepfather passed  away  at
    some point and her host in the United Kingdom relocated to  the  United
    States after she had lived with  him  for  two  years.   The  Appellant
    however settled into education  and  completed  a  nursing  course  and
    eventually met her partner Mr  Victor  Bailey  Isichei  in  2008.   The
    Appellant and Mr Isichei had two children who are now respectively aged
    5 and 3.  Further her partner has a son who  is  aged  2  from  another
    relationship.  She advises that since she came to the United Kingdom in
    2001 she has never returned to Nigeria and that  she  has  no  friends,
    family or relatives there.   She  states  she  has  no  bank  accounts,
    businesses, properties or remembrance of any location  in  Nigeria  and
    that she has no ties of any forms there.  She advises her ties  are  in
    the United Kingdom around her children, her partner, her partner's  son
    and her friends and church.  She states she  has  been  here  for  over
    fourteen  years  and  this  is  where  she  attended  high  school  and
    university and where she made friends.  She comments  that  the  little
    she remembers of Nigeria gives her trauma and the  flashbacks  she  has
    makes her depressed for the majority of the time.

12. She is aware that this appeal centres on whether or not she has ties to
    Nigeria but states that even if she did have relatives there, it  would
    be very difficult to integrate into that society, pointing out that she
    was made an object of ridicule when she was in Nigeria.  She states she
    has lived almost half her life in the United Kingdom and it was not her
    own choice to enter this country.  She comments that  she  was  brought
    here with a legitimate expectation that this was a new  start  and  her
    new home and states that it would be unfair to uproot her from this and
    to take her back to a past that still haunts her.  She  further  points
    out that her daughter J has medical problems and that her partner has a
    son who depends and relies on him for daily support.  She asks that the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge be upheld.

13. In cross-examination Mr McVeety inquires  as  to  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant or her partner are working and is advised that they are  not.
    She states that the only ties that either of them have to  Nigeria  are
    those of Mr Isichei's mother who lives there and is over  70  but  that
    neither he nor she have any other friends or contacts in  that  country
    and that he has not been to Nigeria  since  he  first  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom.  She states that he speaks to his mother once or  twice
    a month.

14. She states that she has no family in Nigeria,  that  she  was  an  only
    child and that while she has socialised with  people  with  a  Nigerian
    background in this country, they are all people who were born here.

15. Mr Isichei  attended  to  give  evidence  and  relies  on  his  witness
    statement from 8th August 2014 which he confirmed and adopted  as  his
    continuing evidence-in-chief.  He too confirmed that neither he nor the
    Appellant were working.  Reference was made both to the  Appellant  and
    to Mr Isichei to a bank statement entry.  The references  are  to  bill
    payments marked "reference for Ruben".  Mr Isichei advises  that  these
    payments are made by a friend called George who  lives  in  Bolton  and
    that they are not business transactions.  He states that  he  pays  the
    money because he is a close friend who is self-employed with a shop and
    that he had advised him that  from  time  to  time  he  could  help  to
    financially to assist Mr Isichei and his family.

16. When questioned as to whether  he  has  any  brothers  and  sisters  in
    Nigeria he states that he does not and that he was an  only  child  and
    that the only person he contacts in Nigeria is his mother who is in her
    70s and is not working.  She is apparently supported by the  community.
    He states that she is not in the best of health and that if he were  to
    return to Nigeria she would not be in a position to assist him.

17. Under cross-examination for Mr McVeety, Mr Isichei advises that  he  is
    aged 35 and points out that he  has  three  children  to  support.   Mr
    McVeety  in  quite  vehement  cross-examination  points  out  that   Mr
    Isichei's bank account details suggest that he receives more money than
    he does in a month.  Mr Isichei responds that he  receives  money  from
    the church and from friends.  Mr McVeety substantially  challenges  the
    sources of Mr Isichei's finances  suggesting  that  he  imports  goods.
    This is refuted by Mr Isichei who states that money was transferred  to
    him but they were charitable gifts from his friends' bank accounts  and
    that he does not have a savings account.   An  analysis  is  thereafter
    given of Mr Isichei's finances and of his outgoings and income  and  he
    claims that he is supported by cash donations from his  church  who  he
    says are sympathetic to his position.  He acknowledges that  he  is  an
    overstayer.  When asked as to why he appears to have been given �900  a
    month, Mr Isichei's comments are that he is some three months behind in
    his rent and his bills and that he needs to be in a position  by  which
    he can seek employment.  He states when challenged that  he  cannot  go
    back to Nigeria due to his ties over here and acknowledges he does  not
    pay any medical bills for his daughter.

18. In re-examination he confirms he has support from his church  and  that
    he is behind in the payment of his  bills  because  he  does  not  have
    enough money.

Submission/Discussion

19. Mr McVeety starts with the previous decision made by Immigration  Judge
    Simpson and in strong submission points out he is constantly amazed  by
    parties who attend before him expecting the UK state system to pick  up
    the tab for their support.  He submits it is not the role of the NHS to
    pick up the child J's medical bills and he submits that  the  testimony
    of Mr Isichei lacks any credibility.  The idea  that  he  is  supported
    solely by charity and the church is he submits untenable and  the  fact
    that he has savings and current  bank  accounts  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's opinion show that Mr Isichei is working and he asks me to  make
    that such conclusion.  He points out this goes to  the  credibility  of
    his account and that this is a person who has shown he had nothing  but
    contempt for the Immigration Rules and  that  the  previous  judge  had
    found that he was working illegally.  He therefore asks me to find as a
    starting point that Mr Isichei's testimony is not credible and  reminds
    me that the natural mother of  his  son  has  not  turned  up  to  give
    support.

20. He asks me to find that there are ties to  Nigeria  and  that  some  of
    these ties may well be cultural.   He  comments  that  there  are  four
    people in receipt of public funds here and that this is a claim outside
    the Immigration Rules.  He points  out  that  these  public  funds  are
    meeting the parties' education, special educational needs  and  medical
    needs when there is no entitlement for them.  He submits the burden  of
    proof is on the Appellant that her daughter has special needs and  that
    no evidence has been produced.  He comments that the family unit  would
    return together and he asks me to give no weight to the fact that there
    is a British child who would be staying with his  mother.   He  submits
    that under any proportionality exercise the odds are against the family
    and that there is no up-to-date medical evidence and no  evidence  that
    the child, J, could not be treated in Nigeria.  He reminds me that  the
    family do not have any lawful status in the UK and asks  me  to  return
    them to Nigeria which he submits would be a proportionate decision.

21. Mr Atuegbe takes me to his skeleton and points out that it is  ties  to
    Nigeria that is the issue here and that the facts-finding of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge stands.  He takes me to paragraph 30 of Immigration
    Judge Simpson's determination, pointing  out  that  the  Appellant  has
    private life and that things have moved on from then and that there  is
    a statement available from Manchester City Council with regard  to  the
    needs of the child J and these needs cannot  be  met  in  Nigeria.   He
    submits it makes logical sense for J to remain in the  United  Kingdom.
    Whilst accepting that she is not a British citizen he submits it  would
    not be right to uproot her.  So far  as  Mr  Isichei  is  concerned  he
    submits that a credible explanation has been  given  as  to  where  the
    funds have come from as set out within his bank statement.  He asks  me
    to sustain the findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

Findings

22. It is important in this appeal to look  carefully  at  the  basis  upon
    which it is taking place.  To that end it is necessary to  consider  my
    findings in the error of law determination and my directions.   It  was
    accepted that the findings of fact of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    were to stand save for the evidence relating to the Appellant's ties to
    Nigeria.  Indeed Mr McVeety emphasised that point to me at the start of
    this hearing.  It is against that background I make findings.  The main
    thrust of Mr McVeety's vehement submissions, are  a  criticism  at  the
    very highest level of Mr Isichei.  He  points  out  that  Mr  Isichei's
    evidence was not found to stand up before Immigration Judge Simpson and
    that there is nothing that has changed since then that would alter that
    finding,  indeed  he  considers  that  Mr  Isichei's  evidence  remains
    completely untruthful.  He points out the  amount  of  income  that  Mr
    Isichei is receiving and failure  to  disclose  fully  bank  statements
    relating to his evidence.  He contends it is  completely  inconceivable
    that Mr Isichei who is an overstayer is being funded by his church  and
    by friends  to  the  extent  that  he  says  he  is  and  submits  that
    effectively Mr Isichei is working illegally and that the family unit is
    taking benefit, health and education from the state when they  have  no
    entitlement to.  He asks me to find that Mr Isichei is not credible.

23. I acknowledge there are failings in the testimony of Mr Isichei.  I  am
    not persuaded that his evidence is credible.  However that is  not  the
    basis upon which this appeal alone stands.   It  is  not  Mr  Isichei's
    appeal it is that of  the  Appellant.   I  found  her  evidence  to  be
    truthful with regard to her history and indeed that was  not  a  matter
    that was subject to challenge by the Secretary of State,  the  findings
    of fact of Immigration Judge Parker being accepted.

24. The situation therefore is that this is an Appellant whose testimony is
    credible, who has two children in the UK and the  only  issue  that  is
    outstanding relates to whether or not she has  ties  to  Nigeria.   Had
    Immigration Judge Parker addressed those issues at first instance  then
    this appeal would not be  taking  place.   There  is  not  a  shred  of
    evidence given or challenged  by  the  Secretary  of  State  that  goes
    against the finding that the Appellant has no ties with  Nigeria.   The
    historical basis of how she arrived in this country  and  how  she  has
    remained here now for some fourteen years is not challenged.   As  long
    ago as the decision of Immigration Judge Simpson she was found to  have
    private life in the UK.  It is not challenged that she has two children
    by Mr Isichei nor that they  live  in  a  family  unit.   However  much
    criticism can be made of her partner (and I have no doubt  a  lot  can)
    this appeal turns on whether or not she has ties with Nigeria.  For all
    the reasons given, namely the manner in which she came to the  UK,  the
    fact that she has no family in Nigeria, is an only child and  that  she
    has no contact with anyone in Nigeria, I am satisfied that she  has  no
    ties.  I acknowledge that she has some cultural ties in that she  mixes
    with Nigerian people in the UK.  That in itself, I am quite  satisfied
    is insufficient to show that she would have  ties  to  Nigeria  if  she
    returned.  If every person who mixed with someone from  their  original
    home country were to be found as a  result  of  such  contact  to  have
    cultural ties to the extent that they need to return  to  that  country
    then nobody would succeed on this ground.

25. It has to be remembered that this is not an appeal by  Mr  Isichei.   I
    acknowledged any finding in Ms Iyamu's favour  may  ultimately  benefit
    him but that is not the issue that is before the Tribunal.   The  issue
    is actually quite a narrow one.  In such circumstances I find  for  all
    the above reasons that the Appellant does not have  ties  with  Nigeria
    and in such circumstances I find that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was correct and I remake  the  decision  allowing  the  appeal
    pursuant to Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.

Decision

The Appellant's appeal is allowed pursuant to  Article  8  of  the  European
Convention of Human Rights.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee award.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
