
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/26771/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |        Decision & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 23 November 2017                    |        On 4 January 2018            |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                                     PQ5
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Alam of Counsel by Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble of the Specialist Appeals Team



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 17 September  1981.   She
    has two children both born in the United Kingdom, aged 7 and  5.   They
    are citizens of Nigeria.  The Appellant  married  to  their  father  in
    Nigeria shortly before coming to the United Kingdom  as  a  student  in
    2008 but they separated in 2010. They both came from the same  area  in
    Lagos.  The  Appellant  ascribes  their  separation  to  her  husband's
    violence or anger  management  problems.   The  Appellant  claimed  she
    feared her  female  children  would  be  subjected  to  female  genital
    mutilation if returned to Nigeria and also if  she  resisted  this  she
    would be killed by her husband's family.

 2. The Appellant's elder child has experienced  difficulties  with  speech
    development.  By the time of the hearing in the  First  Tribunal  these
    problems had been satisfactorily resolved.

 3. On 24 December 2008 the Appellant  arrived  with  leave  to  enter  for
    twelve months as a student.  She next applied twice  in  2012  together
    with her two children for Residence Cards under the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations  2006.  In  August  2012  both  these   applications   were
    separately refused. On 14 August  2013  the  Appellant  sought  further
    leave on the same basis as  the  application  leading  to  the  present
    decision under appeal. On 11 June 2014 the application was refused. The
    Appellant  brought  proceedings  for   judicial   review   which   were
    compromised on the basis the Respondent would make a fresh decision  on
    the Appellant's application of 14 August 2013. The fresh decision was a
    further refusal made on 9 July 2015 which is the decision under appeal.



The Secretary of State's Decision

 4. The Appellant was refused as a parent under  the  five  year  route  to
    settlement because she had on  occasion  been  present  in  the  United
    Kingdom for more than 28 days without leave.  Further, her children did
    not meet the relevant conditions in Section EX of Appendix  FM  to  the
    Immigration Rules.  For a similar reason she was  refused  leave  as  a
    parent under the ten year route.  The Respondent noted that neither  of
    the Appellant's children had at the date of the application for further
    leave lived in the United Kingdom for at least seven years.

 5. The Appellant was refused  leave  by  way  of  reference  to  paragraph
    276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules.  She did not meet any of  the  time
    critical requirements and there were no very significant  obstacles  to
    her integration on return to Nigeria.

 6. Both children were refused in line and on the basis that although  they
    had lived all of their lives in the United Kingdom, at the date of  the
    application neither of them had been here for at least seven years  and
    it was reasonable to expect them to return to  Nigeria  of  which  they
    were citizens.  There were no exceptional circumstances and  on  return
    they would be able to enter the Nigerian education system and  continue
    to enjoy family life with each other and with their mother.

The Original Grounds of Appeal and the First-tier Tribunal hearing

 7. On 24 July 2015 the Appellant lodged Notice of Appeal under Section  82
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  as  amended.   The
    appeal was lodged under her own name.  The grounds refer to the  length
    of time the Appellant and her children had lived in the United Kingdom,
    the  fear  that  the  children  would  be  abducted  by  their  father.
    Following a hearing at which  the  Appellant  was  represented  at  the
    hearing  by  Counsel,  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  A   Khawar
    promulgated on 13 January 2017 his decision dismissing  the  appeal  on
    all grounds, having made an adverse  credibility  finding  against  the
    Appellant.

 8. On 27 July 2017 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Doyle  refused  the
    Appellant permission  to  appeal.   She  renewed  her  application  for
    permission to the  Upper  Tribunal  and  on  20 September  2017  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Plimmer granted permission on the basis it was  arguable
    the First-tier Tribunal had failed to attach significant weight to  the
    length of the children's length of the elder child's residence pursuant
    to the guidance in R (MA (Pakistan) and Others) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ.
    705.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 9. The Appellant attended but took no active part in the proceedings.

10. For the Appellant Mr Alam submitted that at the date of the hearing  in
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Appellant's  eldest  child   had   been
    continuously present in the United Kingdom for at  least  seven  years.
    Both children were in full-time education.  It was  accepted  that  the
    elder child no longer had any speech problems.

11. The Judge had not adequately considered the presence for at least seven
    years of the elder child and the  reasonableness  of  the  decision  to
    refuse the Appellant further leave which would result in  her  children
    also having to leave.  He referred to paragraph 46 of the judgment in R
    (MA (Pakistan)).  He had also not considered the children's ties to the
    United Kingdom.  He accepted that the only evidence of such ties was in
    the Appellant's statement of 18 July 2016.  The Judge had not conducted
    a balancing exercise and had not given weight to the length of time the
    eldest child had been in the United Kingdom.  Where a  child  had  been
    present for at least seven  years  strong  reasons  were  required  for
    removal.  The Judge had materially erred in law and his decision should
    be set aside.

12. For the Respondent, Mr Bramble  relied  on  the  Respondent's  response
    under Procedure Rule 24 although references to paragraph 276ADE of  the
    Immigration Rules should be replaced by references to  Section  EX1  of
    Appendix FM.

13. The response correctly noted that at the date of  the  application  the
    requirements of Section EX1 had not been  met  and  in  particular  the
    eldest child had not been present in the United Kingdom  for  at  least
    seven years at the date  of  the  application.   The  Judge's  findings
    whether the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1) were  met  covered  the
    same ground as the issues referred to in s.117B(vi) of  the  2002  Act.
    The Judge had considered the best interests of  the  children  and  had
    correctly  taken  into  account  the  wider  public  interest  in   the
    maintenance of proper immigration control.

14. Mr Bramble reiterated that the Appellant's eldest child  did  not  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The Judge  had  been  given
    very limited information about the children and had principally to base
    his decision on  the  assertions  contained  in  the  Appellant's  2016
    statement.  He had sufficiently dealt with  the  circumstances  of  the
    children at paragraphs  33-36,  40  and  41  of  his  decision  and  at
    paragraph 49 had noted the Appellant had been unlawfully in the  United
    Kingdom since 2009.  Although the Judge had not referred  expressly  to
    s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act, these paragraphs in his decision  adequately
    dealt with the children's interests and  the  factors  required  to  be
    considered by Section 117B(6).

15. In response, Mr Alam submitted the Judge  should  have  considered  the
    appeal by way of reference to s.117B(6) and he had not.   His  approach
    to the assessment of the reasonableness of the decision was  wrong  and
    his assessment of the evidence flawed  because  he  had  not  made  any
    mention of the length of time the eldest child had been in  the  United
    Kingdom and the reasonableness of the  removal  of  the  children.   He
    repeated that the decision should be set aside.  Mr Bramble pointed out
    that at para 31 of his decision the Judge had accepted the eldest child
    had at the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing been in  the  United
    Kingdom seven years.  Mr Alam added that the Judge had  not  considered
    the ties to the United Kingdom which the  children  had  developed.   I
    reserved my decision.

Consideration

16. The Judge had made  findings  of  fact  about  the  Appellant  and  her
    children which have not been  challenged.   He  correctly  applied  the
    provisions of Section EX1, noting that at the date of  the  application
    neither child had lived in the United Kingdom continuously for at least
    seven years  as  required  by  Section  EX.1(cc).   He  then  expressly
    directed himself  that  nevertheless  he  still  had  to  consider  the
    position at the date of the hearing, noting by which  time  the  eldest
    child had lived continuously in the United Kingdom for at  least  seven
    years.

17. In this appeal the crucial factor identified by s.117B(6) of  the  2002
    Act is in sub-section (b), whether it would not be reasonable to expect
    the children to leave the United Kingdom.   While  the  Judge  did  not
    expressly refer to s.117B or Part VA of the 2002 Act, he  assessed  the
    best interests of the children and referred extensively to the criteria
    identified in EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ. 874.

18. I refer to paras 5 and 22 of the judgment in R (MA (Pakistan)) in which
    Elias LJ stated that the application of the reasonableness test is  the
    same as for s.117B(6) and paragraph 276ADE(1).  The Judge assessed  the
    reasonableness of return in the course  of  his  consideration  of  the
    relevant factors identified in EV (Philippines) and generally at  paras
    32 following of his decision.

19. The Appellant has not made out that there was a material error  of  law
    on the part  of  the  Judge  which  was  the  sole  ground  upon  which
    Permission to Appeal was granted.  The consequence is that the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand and the appeal of the  Appellant
    is dismissed.

ANONYMITY

20. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order although the appeal was
    dismissed.  There were no representations made in the Upper Tribunal on
    anonymity and in the circumstances I continue the anonymity  direction.
    .



NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain an error of law
    and therefore it shall stand.

Signed/Official Crest                                          Date:  03.01.
2018



Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




