
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26624/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th September 2015                        |On 01st October 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                          Mr Mohmmed Tahir Chaudhry
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. Richardson of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 12th August 1971 is a citizen of  Pakistan.   The
    Appellant had made application to remain in the United Kingdom  outside
    of the Immigration Rules.  The Respondent had refused that  application
    on 12th June 2014.  The Appellant had appealed that  decision  and  his
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Morris sitting at  Taylor
    House on 20th February 2015.  The judge had dismissed the appeal.

 2. Grounds of Appeal were contained within an application  for  permission
    to appeal dated 6th March 2015.  Permission to appeal  was  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer on 28th April 2015.  It was  found  to
    be arguable that the judge should have considered Article 8 outside  of
    the Immigration Rules  in  this  case.   The  Respondent  opposed  such
    application by letter dated 22nd May 2015.  Directions were issued  for
    the Upper Tribunal to firstly decide whether an error of law  had  been
    made or not and the matter comes before me  in  accordance  with  those
    directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 3. It was submitted that there had  been  an  insufficient  assessment  of
    Article 8, the decision simply contained within one paragraph.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 4. Mr Tarlow submitted there were no errors of law made by the judge.

 5. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to consider the documents  and
    submissions raised.  I now provide that decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 6. The judge had set out in  detail  the  Appellant's  case  and  evidence
    presented by both himself and witnesses.   The  judge  had  also  taken
    account of all the documentary evidence.  He  had  correctly  initially
    considered whether the Appellant met any of  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 7. It was noted by the judge at paragraphs 16 to 17 that the Appellant did
    not have family life in the UK and it was conceded by his  own  Counsel
    that he could not meet the requirements of Appendix FM.  The  Appellant
    did not meet the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE.   The  Appellant's
    Counsel's submissions essentially were that  it  could  be  argued  the
    Appellant had not entered the UK illegally.   Further,  that  paragraph
    276ADE did not take account of the potential strength of a private life
    and that whilst it was acknowledged that  Section  117B  stated  little
    weight should be given  to  private  life  built  up  when  in  the  UK
    unlawfully, the Section did not say no weight.

 8. The judge had made very clear his findings upon the credibility of  the
    Appellant at paragraph 24.  In short he had concluded the Appellant was
    devoid of any credibility.  That conclusion was entirely  open  to  the
    judge and a reasonable conclusion.  The judge had examined the  central
    plank to the Appellant's claim to  be  allowed  to  remain  permanently
    based on his private life, that being his relationship  with  a  female
    British citizen and her 10 year old  child.   At  paragraph  28  having
    examined the evidence in that respect the judge  found  no  credibility
    attaching to that central point of  the  Appellant's  case.   All  that
    remained of the Appellant's claim to enjoy a private life in the UK was
    that he had made some friends and did work at a mosque.  The judge  had
    correctly found the Appellant  did  not  fall  within  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 9. At paragraph 33 the judge concluded, having examined all  the  evidence
    that there was nothing not already  adequately  considered  within  the
    terms of the Immigration Rules that could lead to a successful  Article
    8 claim.  He was perfectly entitled to reach  such  a  conclusion.   SS
    Congo [2015] notes that there must be exceptional circumstances  for  a
    consideration of Article 8 ECHR outside of the Rules where the claim is
    based on private life developed where immigration status is unlawful or
    precarious or the case involves deportation.  The Appellant had entered
    the UK unlawfully and frankly his immigration  history  was  appalling.
    There was nothing  exceptional  in  the  Appellant's  circumstances  as
    carefully examined by the judge to suggest that those same facts needed
    to be considered over again outside  of  the  Rules  under  Article  8.
    Indeed  the  judge's  phraseology  at  paragraph  33  suggests  a  less
    stringent test applied than that within SS Congo.

10. In any event, even if the plethora of case law in this  area  suggested
    that the judge might have looked at the case outside of the Rules under
    Article 8 then any starting point would have been Section 117B  of  the
    2002 Act when considering the issue of  proportionality  under  Razgar.
    The facts and findings in this case  demonstrate  that  extremely  poor
    immigration history and an individual who fails  each  and  every  test
    within Section 117B of the 2002 Act and whose private life, upon  which
    any credibility could be placed, was extremely limited.  This is a case
    where no reasonable judge would have  concluded  other  than  immediate
    removal was not disproportionate.  Accordingly therefore in  any  event
    there would have been no possibly different outcome  and  therefore  no
    material error of law.

Notice of Decision

11. There was no material error of law made by the judge in this case and I
    uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
