
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26035/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 3 December 2015                   |On 14 December 2015                  |

                                   Before

                       THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                ZAHEER POCHEE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Cutting Solicitor of Slough Immigration Aid
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. On 14 October 2015 the Upper Tribunal  conducted  a  Case  Management
       Review Hearing at which the terms of the Court of Appeal order  dated
       8 July 2015 were reviewed. Directions were given to enable the  Upper
       Tribunal to further consider the Appellants challenge to the order of
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands.

    2. In the interim the Respondent  has  received  additional  information
       from HMRC and on the basis of that information issued the Appellant a
       Residence Card on 27 November 2015.

    3. We set aside the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Rowlands
       aside on the basis the Judge has, arguably, failed to  give  adequate
       reasons for findings  made,  failed  to  make  findings  on  all  the
       available evidence and, through no fault of his own, made an error of
       fact in the assessment of the evidence.

    4. We grant permission  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to  withdraw  the
       decision to refuse the application for a Residence Card in  light  of
       the recent developments.

    5. There remains nothing before us upon which we are required to make  a
       decision.

Decision

    6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. We  set  aside
       the decision of the original Judge.

    7. We grant permission to the Respondent to withdraw the decision  under
       challenge as a result of which there is nothing extant before us upon
       which we are required to make a decision.

  Anonymity

    8. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

    9. We make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

  Fee Award

  Note: this is not part of the determination.

   10. We have considered whether to make a fee award (rule 23A  (costs)  of
       the Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005  and
       section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007).

       We have had regard to  the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note:  Fee
       Awards in Immigration Appeals.

       We make no fee award.

       Reasons:    The Appellant succeeded in his application on  the  basis
       of material not before the decision maker but  received  subsequently
       from HMRC. There was no obligation upon the Respondent to obtain such
       evidence although she did so voluntarily. Amos v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ
       552 considered.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 3 December 2015
