
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/26245/2012
     ia/26250/2012
     ia/26253/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 June 2013                                |On 4 July 2013               |
|Prepared on 23 June 2013                      |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG



                                   Between

                          Mr MANISH HARSHAD HARPALE
                          MrS AMRUTA MANISH HARPALE
                           Mr VARUN MANISH HARPALE

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Burrett, Counsel, instructed by Singhania & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The  first  appellant  was  born  on  27  September  1970,  the  second
    appellant, his wife, was  born  on  29  December  1977  and  the  third
    appellant, their son, was born on 26 October 1990.   The appellants are
    all Indian citizens.  The first appellant applied for leave  to  remain
    as a Tier  1  (General)  Migrant,  with  his  wife  and  child  as  his
    dependants, but this application was refused by the respondent in April
    2012 under paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules on the basis that
    forged  bank  statements  had  been  submitted  in   support   of   the
    application.  The application  was  also  refused  on  the  basis  that
    sufficient evidence had not been provided to  satisfy  the  maintenance
    requirement under the Rules.

 2.  Subsequently,  the  respondent's  decision  was  withdrawn   and   the
    application was sent back for reconsideration, but it was again refused
    on the same grounds.  The refusal letter is dated 31 October 2012.

 3. The appellants appealed against this decision,  and  also  against  the
    respondent's  decision,  made  contemporaneously,  to  remove  all  the
    appellants under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006.

 4. These appeals were heard before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  M  A  Khan,
    sitting at Hatton Cross on 5 February 2013, but in a decision which  is
    not dated,  and  was  promulgated  some  time  afterwards,  Judge  Khan
    dismissed the appeals, both  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  Although at paragraph  36,  Judge  Khan  states
    that he finds that "the respondent's decision to set removal directions
    is unlawful" this finding is  not repeated within the decision.

 5. The appellants appealed against this decision, on a number of  grounds,
    but were originally refused permission on  all  grounds  by  Designated
    First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Baird, who, when stating the reasons  for
    refusing to grant permission, stated (at paragraph 4) that  Judge  Khan
    had been "entitled to reach the  conclusion  he  did  on  the  evidence
    before him".

 6. The appellants renewed the application for permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal and were eventually  granted  permission  to  appeal  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley, but only under Article  8.   Having  set
    out his reasons for refusing permission  on  all  other  grounds,  when
    stating his reasons for granting permission, Judge Chalkley  stated  as
    follows  at paragraph 4:

         "I agree that the judge's dismissal of the  appellants'  Article  8
         appeal appears to 'rubber stamp' the respondent's consideration  of
         the appellants' Article 8 rights. The judge does not appear to have
         properly considered and applied Razgar v Secretary of State for the
         Home Department [2004]  UKHL  27.   On  this  issue  only  I  grant
         permission."

 7. Before me, on behalf  of  the  appellants,  Mr  Burrett  accepted  that
    insofar as the decision was based  upon  the  provisions  of  paragraph
    322(1A) of the Rules, this could not be overturned, but he still wished
    to re-argue the grounds with respect to that aspect  of  the  decision,
    even though permission had not been granted to do so,  because  it  was
    important  to  these  appellants  for  the  future  that  the   adverse
    credibility findings should be overturned.  It was the appellants' case
    that Judge Khan had misunderstood the evidence before him.  It was  the
    first appellant's case that he had handed his genuine  bank  statements
    to an agent and it was the agent who had committed the fraud.  Although
    it was accepted that the application must fail under paragraph  322(1A)
    by reasons of the agent's fraud, it was  important  that  the  Tribunal
    found that he had not been personally dishonest.   The appellants  were
    seeking a finding that the first  appellant  had  not  been  personally
    dishonest.

 8. Mr Burrett's full submissions are set out in the Record of Proceedings,
    and  need  not  be  repeated  verbatim  in  this  determination.    The
    application to this Tribunal to allow the appellants  to  re-argue  the
    grounds on which Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley had  refused  permission
    was opposed by Ms Holmes on behalf of the respondent.

 9. In my judgment, there is no proper basis upon which I should now  grant
    permission to appeal on grounds  other  than  those  upon  which  Judge
    Chalkley had granted permission.  Judge  Chalkley  had  looked  at  the
    determination of Judge Khan closely, and at all the material  facts  in
    this case and had given detailed reasons for refusing permission on all
    grounds other than under Article 8.  Essentially, Judge Khan  had  been
    right to find that applicants should be held responsible for  the  acts
    of their agent.  Judge Chalkley was entitled to  refuse  permission  to
    appeal on all except the Article 8 grounds,  and  there  is  no  proper
    basis upon which I should reopen that decision.

10. With regard to the appeal under Article 8, Mr Burrett accepted that  in
    the course of making his submissions to reopen the other  grounds,  the
    power of the arguments with regard to Article 8  had  been  diminished,
    but  he  still  submitted  that  there  appeared  to  be  a   lack   of
    consideration of the impact of removal on the third appellant.

11. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Holmes submitted that at paragraphs  32
    and 33, Judge Khan had dealt almost entirely with the situation of  the
    young child (the third appellant) and although Razgar was not mentioned
    specifically, the judge had covered everything he had to cover.

Discussion

12. It is quite clear from paragraphs 32 and 33 of his  determination  that
    Judge Khan considered the position of the third  appellant  with  care.
    Although he did not mention Razgar by name, it is  clear  that  he  did
    consider properly the questions posited by Lord Bingham in  that  case.
    He found that the appellants did have private life, and also considered
    the interests of the third appellant by reference to Section 55 of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, in light of the guidance
    given by  Lady  Hale  in  ZH  (Tanzania).    He  found  in  terms  that
    notwithstanding the private life the appellants had in this country the
    respondent's decision was "lawful, justified and proportionate  in  the
    circumstances of the case" (paragraph 35).  That decision was  open  to
    him, and the failure to mention the case of Razgar in terms clearly did
    make a material difference to the outcome.

13. It  follows  that  the  appellants'  appeals  against  the  substantive
    decision must be dismissed.

14. However, Judge Khan's failure specifically to allow the appeal  against
    the removal decision to the  extent  that  that  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law,  for  the  reasons  he  properly  set  out  at
    paragraph 36 of his determination, was a material error  of  law,  such
    that this part of his decision must be remade.  Accordingly, I shall so
    find.

Decision

The determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  M  A  Khan  contained  a
material error of law  insofar  as  Judge  Khan  did  not  decide  that  the
decision to remove these appellants was not  in  accordance  with  the  law,
such that the decision must be remade by the Upper Tribunal.   I  substitute
the following decision:

The appellants' appeals against the decision of the respondent  refusing  to
grant them leave to remain are dismissed under  the  Immigration  Rules  and
under Article 8.

The appellants' appeals against the decision to remove  them  under  Section
47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 are  allowed  to  the
extent that this decision was not in accordance with the law.





Signed:                                 Date: 3 July 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


