
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/26491/2013
     ia/26524/2013
     ia/26529/2013
     IA/26536/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10 April 2014                                |On 28th April 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                               MR JUSTICE BEAN
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                   mrs nI
                                   mr fnb
                                  miss mrb
                                  miss srb
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr A Burrett, Counsel, instructed by Bukhari
Chambers Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The four appellants before the First-tier Tribunal in this case  are  a
    married couple and their two children.  In view of the  involvement  of
    the children we consider that it is a proper case  for  anonymity.   We
    shall refer to them as the appellants although this is the Secretary of
    State's appeal.

 2. The appeal is brought  from  the  determination  of  Immigration  Judge
    Samimi sitting in the First-tier Tribunal.  The determination  followed
    a hearing at Hatton Cross on 20 January 2014 and was promulgated on  20
    February.  The appellants had applied for variation of their  leave  to
    remain in order to enable them all to remain  in  the  UK  rather  than
    being returned to Pakistan.   For  reasons  which  were  given  in  the
    refusal letter from the UK Border Agency dated 10 June  2013  they  did
    not have any right to remain under the Rules.  The  decision  sets  out
    the requirements for obtaining leave to remain under  what  is  briefly
    referred to as the partner route and the parent route  and  also  dealt
    with paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  under  the  heading
    "Decision under Private  Life".   Even  under  that  last  heading  the
    appellants did not meet the requirements of the Rules at  the  date  of
    application.

 3. At paragraph  8  of  his  determination  Judge  Samimi  noted  that  Mr
    Richardson, Counsel for the appellants before the First-tier  Tribunal,
    accepted that the appellants could not meet the  Immigration  Rules  in
    this case at the date of application and the only outstanding issue  in
    the  proceedings  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  related   to   the
    appellants' Article 8 rights.  The judge referred to the observation of
    this Tribunal in Izuazu (Article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT 00045 (IAC)
    that "the uniform  application  of  the  Immigration  Rules  is  not  a
    legitimate aim in itself justifying interference with Article 8 rights"
    and that "therefore the fact that a person cannot meet the requirements
    for leave under HC 914 dos not mean that the Secretary of State can for
    that  reason  alone   demonstrate   a   proportionate   and   justified
    interference to prevent disorder".

 4. The judge went on to make findings of fact which are not challenged  on
    appeal,  as follows:

         "The appellants are a Christian family who have adapted to life  in
         this country and whose children have settled both at school as well
         as in terms of their activities with the  church.   The  appellants
         have resided in the United Kingdom for nine years, we  add  in  the
         case of the adult  appellants,  which  is  a  consideration  period
         having regard to the fact that the children were  born  and  raised
         here.  The elder child has been born and living here for  the  last
         seven years.  The appellants have  complied  with  the  Immigration
         Rules at all times and for the majority of the nine years have been
         here with lawful leave.   I  accept  that  the  appellants  have  a
         supportive network of  family  and  friends  and  have  financially
         supported themselves since their arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom.
         The appellant has clearly contributed to the economic wellbeing  of
         the country."

 5. The judge said that in the circumstances of this case he found that the
    principal  appellant's  removal  from  the  UK  would   constitute   an
    interference with her family and private  life.   He  found  that  such
    interference was  disproportionate  to  the  interests  of  immigration
    control.  He  found,  and  again  this  is  not  challenged,  that  the
    appellants' children in particular have been brought up to  speak  only
    English which would clearly cause difficulties if they are uprooted  to
    Pakistan in order to resume  their  education  and  that  the  family's
    religious life would be adversely affected because  of  the  increasing
    level of discrimination against Christians as set out in the Country of
    Origin Information Report on  Pakistan.   The  judge  referred  to  the
    decision of the House of  Lords  in  Razgar  and  the  five  well-known
    questions formulated by Lord Bingham of  Cornhill  which  we  need  not
    repeat  in  this  judgment.  He  continued  with  further  findings  in
    paragraph 11 as follows:

         "In carrying out the balancing exercise, I have regard to the  fact
         that the appellants have established a private and family life over
         the course  of  the  last  nine  years,  which  does  amount  to  a
         substantial period of time  during  which  the  appellant  and  her
         husband have had two children who have in their own right not  only
         strengthened the appellant's  ties  to  the  community  and  family
         members but  have  developed  their  own  routes  and  connections.
         Although I find that the children are young enough to adjust  to  a
         new life in Pakistan, I find on the totality of  the  circumstances
         in this case that there are factors that cumulatively do render the
         respondent's decision  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the
         appellant and her family's private life.  These  include  the  fact
         that the appellant's elder child has spent seven years of her  life
         in the UK and both children are well-settled in school.  They  have
         been christened at the Church  of  England  Church  and  have  been
         actively involved in church activities.  The family  attend  church
         on a regular basis.  The appellant has studied and worked in the UK
         and has contributed to the economic wellbeing of this  country.   I
         do find that the removal of the appellants and her  children  would
         cause a disproportionate interference to  the  strong  family  ties
         that the appellants have built."

    There then follows paragraph 12 which, with respect, contains one error
    of wording and one reference to the case of EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41,
     which seems to us  to  be  irrelevant,   but  this  paragraph  is  not
    material to the decision.

 6. At paragraph 13 the judge continued:

         "I find there are reasons  to  believe  that  the  removal  of  the
         appellants would cause an adverse effect on the  wellbeing  of  the
         appellants and in particular the life of the two  children  of  the
         family.  I find that in  the  circumstances  of  this  case  it  is
         unreasonable to expect the appellants and  their  two  children  to
         continue their family and private life in Pakistan where the family
         and  in  particular  the  children  have  no  social,  cultural  or
         religious links.   There  are  factors  that  would  undermine  the
         ability of the appellants to resume their life and  care  of  their
         children in Pakistan.  I have  regard  to  EA  (Article  8  -  best
         interests of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00315 (IAC)."

 7. The judge then went on to refer as this Tribunal did in the case of EA,
     to the leading case of  ZH  (Tanzania)  and  the  emphasis  placed  by
    Baroness Hale on the best interests of the child - see paragraph 29  of
    her judgment in that case.  The judge's conclusion was that there  were
    factors as set out above that render removal  "unjustifiably  harsh  in
    this case as set out in Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new  Rules  -  correct
    approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC)".

 8. The grounds of appeal lodged by the Secretary of State and the basis on
    which permission was given to her to appeal to this Tribunal  was  that
    although the judge in the very last  paragraph  of  the  judgment  made
    brief reference to Gulshan, the judgment did not  follow  the  guidance
    given in Gulshan as to a structured approach to a decision in a case of
    this type, namely to consider first whether there are or  are  arguably
    good grounds for granting leave to remain outside the Rules and then to
    go on to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling  circumstances  not
    sufficiently recognised under the Rules.

 9. We note that this Tribunal  in  Gulshan,  having  set  out  the  proper
    approach, went on to say about  the  case  before  them  that  "on  the
    judge's own findings this was a very run  of  the  mill  case  with  no
    compelling circumstances" and set out the facts which led them to  that
    conclusion.  This Tribunal found there were no insurmountable obstacles
    to family life in Pakistan and  no  unjustifiably  harsh  results  from
    removal.

10. Mr Walker realistically accepts before us that  it  is  not  the   case
    that, where a judge has omitted to structure his or  her  determination
    in the way which this Tribunal in Gulshan said it should be  structured
    before deciding in an appellant's  favour  on  Article  8  grounds  the
    determination must automatically be set aside.  In  our  judgement   it
    depends on the facts and in particular whether the  failure  to  follow
    the structured approach was material to the outcome.  The real question
    in the present case was whether it was open to the  judge  to  conclude
    that removal of this family to Pakistan would  be  unjustifiably  harsh
    and amount to a disproportionate interference with the private lives of
    the four members of  the  family  bearing  in  mind  his  findings,  in
    particular that the children were born and raised here  and  the  elder
    child has now lived here for seven years.  They have been brought up to
    speak only English, are well-settled at school and have no cultural  or
    religious  links  with  Pakistan.    They   are   Christians,   regular
    churchgoers and involved in church activities and as the  judge  noted,
    there is evidence of increasing difficulties  faced  by  Christians  in
    Pakistan and the family have strong community ties here  and  have  led
    law-abiding lives.

11. In Mukarkar v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2006]  EWCA
    Civ 1045 Lord Justice Carnwath as he then was with whom  Lord  Justices
    Auld and Sedley said:

         "Factual judgments of this kind are often not easy,  but  they  are
         not  made  easier  or  better  by  excessive  legal  or  linguistic
         analysis. It is of the nature  of  such  judgments  that  different
         tribunals, without illegality or irrationality, may reach different
         conclusions on the same case. The mere fact that one  Tribunal  has
         reached what may seem an unusually generous view of the facts of  a
         particular case does not mean that it has made an error of law,  so
         as to justify an appeal under the  old  system,  or  an  order  for
         reconsideration under the new. Nor does it create any precedent, so
         as to limit the Secretary of State's right  to  argue  for  a  more
         restrictive approach on a similar case in the future."

12. We are grateful to Mr Walker  for  his  responsible  stance  upon  this
    appeal.  We consider that on the facts of this case the judge's failure
    to follow the guidance in Gulshan did not amount to a material error of
    law vitiating his conclusion. Although the  judge's  conclusion  as  to
    proportionality may be regarded by some  as  generous  it  was  not  so
    generous as to amount to an error of law.  By way of footnote we  would
    add that we are fortified in our view of the judge's conclusion  as  to
    proportionality by the fact that the elder child has now lived  in  the
    UK continuously for seven  years  and  that  accordingly,  if  a  fresh
    application were to  be  made,  the  family's  prospects  of  making  a
    successful application within the Rules would be greatly improved.   Be
    that as it may, for the reasons we have given, we dismiss the appeal.






Signed                          Date

For and on behalf of the Honourable
Mr Justice Bean sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

