
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26801/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 22nd May 2014                              |On 21 July 2014              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                SAMEER THAPAR
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: No appearance.
For the Respondent: Miss Isherwood - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge NM Paul promulgated on the 11th February 2014  in  which  the
        Judge dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
        refusal to vary his leave to remain in the United Kingdom.


     2. Permission to appeal was sought although initially refused  by  the
        First-tier  Tribunal.  It  was,  however,  granted  on  a   renewed
        application by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley.


     3. Notice of the place, date, and time of the hearing before the Upper
        Tribunal was sent  to  the  Appellant  and  his  representative  in
        accordance with the Procedure Rules; although the Appellant  failed
        to attend the  hearing.  The  Tribunal  received  a  fax  from  his
        nominated representatives on the day of the hearing  stating  their
        client had not  contacted  them  for  a  fortnight  and  that  they
        understood he had, in fact, withdrawn his instructions for them  to
        attend the hearing.  They also asked to be removed from the record.


     4. The notice of hearing was sent to the Solicitors and  Appellant  in
        person at his last known address  for  service  and  has  not  been
        returned as having not been delivered by  the  Post  Office.   Miss
        Isherwood handed the Tribunal a  copy  of  an  additional  item  of
        correspondence  written  to  the  Appellant  by   Eaton   House   -
        Immigration (Voluntary Departure Team) thanking him  for  providing
        them with details  for  his  departure  arrangements.   The  letter
        confirms how he may collect his passport and the fight  number  and
        flight time of a flight departing from Heathrow  Airport  to  India
        the day before the hearing. All the  evidence  indicates  that  the
        Appellant  has  agreed  to  return  to  India,   his   country   of
        nationality, and is likely to have done so although Miss  Isherwood
        was unable to obtain confirmation as a result of  technical  issues
        that he had actually boarded the plane and left the United Kingdom.


     5. If the Appellant  has  left  the  country  he  is  deemed  to  have
        abandoned his appeal and there is nothing extant before  the  Upper
        Tribunal upon which I am required to make a decision.   If  he  has
        not left the United Kingdom he has failed to attend the hearing and
        failed to adduce any evidence in support of his assertion that  the
        First-tier Judge has made a material legal error.


     6. Although there is a strong indication the Appellant  has  left  the
        United Kingdom, this has not been confirmed. I find  however,  even
        if he has not, that he has failed to discharge the burden of  proof
        upon him to the required standard to show any legal error  material
        to the decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  has  been  made  in  the
        determination.

Decision

     7. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


     8. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
        2005. I make no such order.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 17th July 2014



