
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/26161/2012
      IA/26160/2012
      IA/26162/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 June 2013                                |On 4 June 2013               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?

                                   Between

                           Mrs NASRIN AKTER KHANAM
                          Mr MOHAMMAD ASSADUJJAMAN
                                 Master AFJ
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           SECRETARY OF STATE FOR
                             THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellants:    Mr D Coleman, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mrs S Vidyadharan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Background

1.    These appeals come before me following  the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal by Designated First Tribunal Judge Garratt on 15 April 2013.

2.    The appellants are a Bangladeshi family consisting  of  husband,  wife
    and son. There is an additional child to whom I shall refer  as  AFJ  2
    (his initials being the same as his brother)  who  has  never  had  any
    leave to enter or remain. Their dates of birth are 21  September  1978,
    23 April 1973, 15 March 2007 and 13 September 2011. The first appellant
    arrived here on 25 October 2003 as a student  and  was  joined  by  her
    spouse on 30  December  2004.  Their  children  were  both  born  here.
    Although the first appellant sought an extension as a Tier  4  Migrant,
    that was refused by the respondent on  30  October  2012,  and  it  was
    conceded at the hearing that the  appellant  could  not  bring  herself
    within the terms of the Immigration Rules. The appeal of  the  youngest
    child was found to be invalid by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Borsada  on
    23 November 2012 (IA/26164/2012) and so he is  not  a  party  to  these
    appeals. The respondent withdrew the section 47 removal  directions  at
    the hearing and the appeals proceeded on Article  8  grounds  only.  It
    should be noted that essentially the appellants argued that  the  first
    appellant should be allowed to remain to complete her  studies  because
    she had invested time and money in them and that her family would  kill
    her if she returned without having done so. The appeals were  dismissed
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Harrington by way of a joint determination
    promulgated on 25 February 2013.

3.    Permission to appeal was sought and granted  on  the  basis  that  the
    judge arguably failed to  give  adequate  consideration  to  Article  8
    issues including the best interests of the minor children.

4.    At the hearing before me on  4  June  2013,  I  heard  submissions  on
    whether or not the First-tier Tribunal Judge made an error of law.

5.    Mr Coleman argued that there had been an inadequacy of  reasoning  and
    a paucity of findings, no consideration of the appellants  individually
    and no due weight given to the length of  their  lawful  residence.  He
    submitted that the main appellant  wished  to  stay  and  complete  her
    studies and that it would be open to make up her mind about the  future
    once she had completed her studies.

6.    In response, Mrs Vidyadharan relied  on  the  decisions  in  MK  (best
    interests  of  child)  India  [2011]  UKUT  00475  (IAC)   and   Shizad
    (sufficiency of reasons: set  aside)  [2013]  UKUT  00085  (IAC).   She
    submitted that the appellant had accepted she could not  succeed  under
    the rules due to her lack of progress and the Article 8 case  had  been
    properly addressed by the judge. She took me through the  determination
    pointing out sections where the judge  had  considered  the  appellants
    individually and where the best interests of the  child  appellant  had
    been taken into account. She submitted that apart from the  appellant's
    studies no other bases of private life had been put forward. She argued
    that brevity of reasoning was not an error  of  law  and  urged  me  to
    uphold the determination.

7.    In reply Mr Coleman submitted  that  brevity  should  not  affect  the
    adequacy of reasoning and that in a case such as  this  more  reasoning
    was required on the family life aspect of the appeal.
8.    At the  conclusion  of  the  hearing  I  indicated  that  I  would  be
    upholding the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and I now  give
    my reasons for so doing.

Findings and Conclusions

9.    The basis of the Article 8 claim is  that  the  respondent's  decision
    interferes with the appellants' private  lives,  each  of  them  having
    rights that must be  assessed  individually.  It  is  argued  that,  in
    respect to the children, the judge failed to consider that "educational
    welfare as part of the UK education system may point strongly to  their
    continued  residence  here  as  necessary  to  promote  those   primary
    interests". The judge is also criticised for failing  to  consider  the
    impact upon the family  individually  and  collectively  if  they  were
    removed to Bangladesh and it is maintained that she did not  take  into
    account the period of lawful residence of the  appellant,  her  husband
    and two children. On the latter  point  I  should  say  here  that  the
    younger child has never had lawful residence. No application  was  made
    to  regularise  his  position  until  the  first  appellant  made   her
    application for an extension.

10.   The difficulty with the grounds is that the  appellant's  evidence  to
    Judge Harrington was that it has always been  her  plan  to  return  to
    Bangladesh after her studies (paragraphs 25(v) and 39(k) and (l) of the
    determination). In light of that, all  arguments  put  in  the  grounds
    about the need for the children to continue  their  residence  here  in
    order to obtain an education and the impact upon them and their parents
    of removal fall away. The appellant  came  here  to  undertake  an  LLB
    degree. Eight years later she has not managed to complete  it,  appears
    to have abandoned that intention  and  seeks  to  remain  to  follow  a
    diploma course instead. It is plain that having conceded that she could
    not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules, she  is  attempting
    to circumvent them by arguing that she should be permitted to  continue
    her studies as part of her Article 8 private life.  No other aspect  of
    private and/or family life was pleaded before the judge.

11.   With respect to the complaint that the interests of the children  were
    not considered, I would refer the appellants to paragraphs 33 and 39(h)
    where this is specifically addressed. It has to be noted that there was
    no attempt by the appellants'  representative  at  the  hearing  before
    Judge Harrington to argue that the best interests of the  children  lay
    anywhere other than being brought up by their parents  (paragraph  33).
    Indeed,  the  first  appellant  comes   from   a   wealthy,   educated,
    professional family and her immediate family as well as  her  husband's
    relatives all remain in Bangladesh. The children would be returning  to
    a comfortable and secure lifestyle with their parents. The youngest  is
    not even two years old. Both would be able to easily adapt.  All  these
    matters  were  properly  considered  and  determined   by   the   judge
    (paragraphs 39(a)-(n)). There were no submissions made to the judge and
    there was nothing in  the  appellant's  oral  evidence  or  indeed  her
    witness statement to indicate that they would face any difficulties  on
    return. In the circumstances I consider the grounds to be fanciful  and
    simply an attempt to circumvent the rules.

12.   Contrary to what the grounds assert, the judge was well aware  of  the
    duration of the appellants' residence here (see  paragraphs  37,  39(b)
    and 39(c)) but apart from a job at Tesco, failed studies and a claim to
    have many friends, none of whom provided any  supporting  evidence  for
    the appeals, no evidence of any ties to the UK was adduced.

13.   The judge came to her conclusions in the context  of  the  appellant's
    evidence that she intended to return to Bangladesh.  In  the  light  of
    that evidence she was entitled to find that Article 8 was not  breached
    by the decision as the transition from the UK to Bangladesh would  have
    to be made for the children at some point and sooner rather than  later
    would be less disruptive (paragraph 39(l)). Additionally,  contrary  to
    the complaints made in the grounds, the judge assessed  the  rights  of
    the appellants as individuals (paragraph 40).

14.   It seems to me  that  in  fact  the  judge  did  properly  assess  the
    evidence and that she did address all the matters  the  grounds  allege
    she disregarded. The claim that the appellant would be  killed  because
    she would be  returning  without  having  completed  her  studies  was,
    unsurprisingly,  not  pursued  at  the  hearing  (paragraph  29).   The
    appellant may feel ashamed  at  returning  after  eight  years  without
    having achieved anything, but that is not  a  basis  for  a  successful
    Article 8 claim. The decision is wholly sustainable.

Decision

15.   The First-tier Tribunal made no error of law. The decision to  dismiss
    the appeals stands.


Signed:



Dr R Keki?
Upper Tribunal Judge
4 June 2013




