
IAC-AH-DP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26349/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th May 2015                      |On 21st May 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                          bhaskar gubbi shivegowda
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Butler, promulgated on 26th January 2015, following a hearing  at
    Birmingham on 14th January  2015.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of Mr  Bhaskar  Gubbi  Shivegowda.   The  Respondent
    Secretary  of  State,  subsequently  applied  for,  and  was   granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of India, who was born on 20th  June
    1982.  He appeals against the decision dated  23rd  June  2014  of  the
    Respondent refusing him leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 1 (General)
    Migrant under the points-based system.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge observed how the Appellant  had  been  refused  points  under
    Attributes because the dividend payments  to  the  Appellant  were  not
    shown as gross and net figures and were not corroborated  by  the  bank
    statements.  The Appellant also was not  provided  any  points  for  UK
    experience because he had not provided sufficient evidence as  required
    by paragraph 245CA(b) of the Rules.

 4. The judge held that it was open to the Secretary of  State  to  contact
    the Appellant in writing and request the correct  documents.   No  such
    request was made in the Appellant's case and the judge held that it was
    not reasonable to do so in  respect  of  the  detail  of  the  dividend
    payments (see paragraph 12).  There had been  directions  given  by  an
    earlier judge (see paragraph 9) and these had not been complied with by
    the Secretary of State, and so  the  information  was  not  before  the
    judge, such that the basis of the refusal could not  be  substantiated,
    so that the appeal had to be allowed.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds  of  application  state  that  the  reality  was  that  the
    Appellant had departed the  UK  voluntarily  on  25th  September  2014.
    Neither the Appellant nor his representative informed the  Tribunal  of
    this prior to the hearing.  As a result, the judge heard  the  case  on
    the papers when the appeal should have  been  treated  as  having  been
    abandoned.  There was no effective appeal before the judge.

 6. On 3rd March 2015, permission to appeal  was  granted  on  two  points.
    First, that this was an application under the PBS and  given  that  the
    Appellant had left voluntarily on 25th September 2014 the appeal  stood
    to be treated as  abandoned.   Second,  the  judge  observed  that  the
    Appellant had produced in his appeal a schedule of gross and net salary
    and gross and net dividends received by  him,  but  he  had  failed  to
    produce these details with his application as required  by  the  Rules:
    see Ahmed [2014] UKUT 365.

Submissions

 7. At the hearing before me on 8th May 2015, the Appellant  was  naturally
    not in attendance and nor was anyone else in attendance on his  behalf.
    Mr Avery, appearing on behalf of the Respondent,  simply  repeated  the
    grounds of application to the effect that if the Appellant had left the
    UK voluntarily then the appeal  was  abandoned.   Reliance  was  placed
    before me on two documents which Mr Avery handed  up  to  confirm  this
    fact.

Error of Law

 8. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

 9. First, I have two different CID notes submitted before me by Mr  Avery.
    The first states that,

         "Subject called requesting  to  voluntarily  depart.   Subject  has
         booked a flight for 25th September  at  1400  hours  from  Heathrow
         Airport, TN5, I have advised subject that a  caseworker  will  call
         him back within 24 hours to discuss a case" (dated 13th June 2014).

10. The second document states that, "departure  confirmed  by  E-Boarders.
    Case closure completed on CID and  database.   E-mailed  caseworker  to
    close H/O file" (see 13th June 2014).

11. Second, in the light of this, it is clear that the Appellant did depart
    and was no longer in the country.

12. Third, it follows from this that under Section 104(4) of the 2002  Act,
    this appeal is  statutorily  abandoned  and  the  judge  below  had  no
    jurisdiction to hear it.  It is unfortunate that  the  matter  was  not
    brought before the judge.

Remaking the Decision

13. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before her, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am dismissing this appeal for the reason that  under  Section
    104(4) of the 2002 Act, this appeal is statutorily abandoned.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original  judge.   I  remake  the  decision  as  follows.   This  appeal  is
dismissed.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        16th May 2015
