
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26998/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th September 2015               |On 23rd October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                        MR. MICHAEL BRYAN ROSAS SURLA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Miss A Fidiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Philippine national who appealed to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the  respondent  dated  11th  June  2014
    refusing him leave to remain in the UK  under  the  immigration  rules.
    The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid on  10th  March
    2015 in the absence of the appellant, and was dismissed for the reasons
    set out in a decision promulgated on 10th March 2015.

 2. Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  13th  May  2015  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lambert who noted:

         "...there is no basis for finding an arguable error of law  in  the
         decision to proceed in his absence.

         The Appellant is unrepresented in this application.  The  remaining
         ground - absence of reference to standard of proof  -  is  arguable
         but sadly inadequate to describe the  catalogue  of  deficiency  in
         this decision. It is  unclear  from  the  decision  what  issue  or
         immigration rule was under consideration, let alone on  what  basis
         the judge dismissed the appeal. The Appellant can,  like  me,  have
         had no idea at all why he had lost. There is  a  total  absence  of
         evidence  related  reasoning,  amounting  to  a  very  obvious  and
         material error of law."

 3. The respondent has filed a Rule 24 response, in  which  the  respondent
    concedes that the determination is wholly unclear as to the issues, and
    as to why the appeal was dismissed.  The respondent suggests  that  the
    matter be set down for a substantive hearing.

 4. I have read the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid promulgated
    on 10th March 2014.  The decision makes reference to  the  respondent's
    refusal letter of  11th  June  2014  and  whilst  the  Judge  notes  at
    paragraph 3 of the decision, that he  shall  bear  in  mind  the  legal
    provisions of the relevant paragraphs  of  the  immigration  rules,  he
    fails to identify the particular rules that he considered, or  were  in
    issue.  Similarly, although at paragraph 8 of  the  decision  he  again
    makes reference to the immigration rules, he again  fails  to  identify
    the relevant rules or the various issues that arise in the appeal.  The
    decision fails to set out the issues, if any, that were  considered  by
    the Judge, or the evidence before the Tribunal.  The decision is devoid
    of any proper reasoning at all, and it is unsurprising  therefore  that
    the respondent concedes the appeal before me.

 5. I have no hesitation in finding that there is an error of  law  in  the
    determination of the First-tier  Tribunal.  The  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the appeal remitted to  be  remade
    entirely de novo in the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

 6. The appeal is allowed and the appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing of the appeal.

 7. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

    TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Whilst the appeal before me has been allowed, the matter has  been  remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing of the appeal and I  make  no
fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

