

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: IA/26374/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 10 July 2017                            |On 18 July 2017                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 AWAIS SHAH
                       (Anonymity direction not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr P Singh Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Miss S Praisoody instructed by Legis Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of
        First-tier Tribunal Judge Maxwell ('the Judge') promulgated  on  25
        November 2016 in which the Judge  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal
        against the refusal of his application for leave to remain  outside
        the Immigration Rules.



Background


     2. AW is a citizen of  Pakistan  born  in  April  1982,  who  appealed
        against a decision to refuse his application for leave to remain in
        the United Kingdom on human rights grounds outside the  Immigration
        Rules.  The Secretary of State alleges the use of deception  by  AW
        in the taking of an English language test by the use  of  a  proxy.
        That test was taken in  February/March  2012.   As  the  result  of
        analysis undertaken by ETS the results of the test were found to be
        invalid.
     3. The Judge sets out findings of fact from [15] of the decision under
        challenge which can be summarised in the following terms:


   i. The Judge was satisfied the Secretary  of  State  had  discharged  the
      evidential burden of proving deception [18].
  ii. AW attended Anglia Ruskin University an institution it  was  found  it
      was improbable would have accepted AW if his command  of  English  was
      poor. AW studied on an MBA on Marketing and Innovation which  required
      a  significant  degree  of  skill  in  communicating  in  the  English
      language. AW's own command of English was  described  as  'colloquial'
      and  he  gave  evidence  'unhesitatingly  and  without  any   apparent
      difficulty in understanding  some  relatively  complex  questions  and
      expressing himself idiomatically when answering' [19].
 iii. The Secretary of State was unable to adduce any  evidence  other  than
      the generic evidence ordinarily relied on a case such as this. It  was
      found that the generic evidence relied upon in  the  present  instance
      was insufficient to discharge the burden of proving, on a  balance  of
      probabilities, the TOEIC was obtained by fraudulent means [20].
  iv. Accordingly, AW was found to meet suitable eligibility requirements of
      Appendix FM. The Judge finds AW ought to have been  granted  leave  to
      remained under the Immigration  Rules  although  acknowledged  it  was
      necessary to look at the appeal in terms of  the  limited  grounds  of
      Article 8 ECHR [21].
   v.  The  Judge  finds  at  [22]  "It  would  be  difficult  to   envisage
      circumstances wherein an  appellant  who  meets  the  requirements  of
      Appendix FM, which is there to  deal  with  applications  relating  to
      family life, could not be regarded as someone whose article  8  rights
      had been interfered disproportionately."
  vi. At [23] "It follows that I  find  the  appellant  does  succeed  under
      Article 8, whether within or outside the Immigration Rules."
 vii. The Judge declares in arriving at  the  decision  that  he  has  taken
      account of the public interest in the balancing exercise, the relevant
      statutory provisions and one quoted decision referred to at [24 - 27].
viii. At [28]:


                  28.  In this instance I have had regard  to  the  need  to
                      maintain effective immigration control but  find  the
                      appellant's circumstances are such that a decision to
                      allow  his  appeal  does  not  have  the  effect   of
                      undermining this aspect as he would have  entitlement
                      under the Immigration Rules. He has demonstrated both
                      his command of English and his ability  to  be  self-
                      sufficient and not a drain on  the  state.  He  is  a
                      party to a stable marriage  with  a  spouse  who  has
                      children who were born in the United Kingdom and  for
                      whom she has a degree of responsibility. Although his
                      life here has been established whilst his immigration
                      leave has been precarious, the diminution  in  weight
                      this attracts does not so undermine his  case  as  to
                      render the interference proportionate.


     4. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was
        granted by another judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  judge
        granting permission notes:


             3.   However, it does seem to me that at least one  strand  of
                  the respondent's grounds is arguable - I refer here to the
                  second  full  paragraph  on  page  2  of  those   grounds.
                  Referring to Chen (Appendix FM  -  Chikwamba  -  temporary
                  separation - proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 000189 (IAC)
                  circulated on 20 April 2015, possibly this is a case where
                  there is apparently no reason why the appellant should not
                  return to his country of nationality (Pakistan)  and  from
                  there make an application to re-enter the UK as a  spouse.
                  On at least  that  basis,  I  consider  that  a  grant  of
                  permission is appropriate at this stage.


     5. The grant of permission is  not  restricted  and  all  grounds  are
        therefore arguable.



Error of law


     6. In R (on the application of Chen) v SSHD (Appendix FM - Chikwamba -
        temporary separation - proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC)
        it was held:


   i) Appendix FM does not include consideration of the question whether  it
      would be disproportionate to expect an individual  to  return  to  his
      home country to make an entry clearance application to re-join  family
      members in the  U.K.  There  may  be  cases  in  which  there  are  no
      insurmountable obstacles to family life being enjoyed outside the U.K.
      but where temporary separation to enable  an  individual  to  make  an
      application for entry clearance may be disproportionate. In all cases,
      it will be for the individual to place before the Secretary  of  State
      evidence   that   such    temporary    separation    will    interfere
      disproportionately with protected rights. It will  not  be  enough  to
      rely solely upon the case-law concerning Chikwamba v SSHD [2008]  UKHL
      40.
  ii) Lord Brown was not laying down a  legal  test  when  he  suggested  in
      Chikwamba that requiring a claimant to make an application  for  entry
      clearance would only "comparatively rarely" be proportionate in a case
      involving children (per Burnett J, as he then was, in R  (Kotecha  and
      Das v SSHD [2011] EWHC 2070 (Admin)).   However, where  a  failure  to
      comply in a particular capacity is the only issue so far as the  Rules
      are concerned, that may well be an insufficient  reason  for  refusing
      the case under Article 8 outside the rules.  By way of example,   in R
      (on the application of Zhang)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2013]  EWHC  891  (Admin)  the  appellant  challenged  the
      legality of paragraph 319C(h)(i) which required an applicant  applying
      for leave as the Partner of a Relevant Points Based System Migrant  to
      have leave in that capacity. Mr  Justice  Turner  held  that  although
      Chikwamba was concerned with the separation of parent and child, there
      was no suggestion that the absence of children  should  mean  that  it
      would only be in rare cases that Article 8 rights would  prevail.  The
      courts have recognised that the application of Razgar  principles,  as
      seen through the lens of Chikwamba, led  to  the  conclusion  that  an
      Article 8 compliant requirement for  an  applicant  to  leave  the  UK
      before making an application was the exception rather  than  the  rule
      (paras 17 - 19, 26 - 37 and 63 - 69). Save  in  particular  cases,  it
      would be rare that the immigration priorities of the state  were  such
      as to give rise to a proportionate  answer  to  Article  8  rights  to
      family life, where requirement (h)(i) was engaged. The application  of
      the blanket requirement to leave  the  country  imposed  by  paragraph
      319C(h)(i) of the immigration rules was unsustainable, albeit that the
      rule was not actually struck out.


     7. Having heard argument by the advocates it was  concluded  that  the
        point identified in  the  grant  of  permission,  relating  to  the
        decision in Chen, was a matter before the First-tier Tribunal  that
        that tribunal were required to properly consider and make  findings
        upon. As no such findings have been made the Upper  Tribunal  finds
        the First-tier Tribunal has erred in law in a  manner  material  to
        the decision to dismiss the appeal as it cannot be  established  at
        this  stage  whether,  if  the  'Chen'  point  had  been   properly
        considered the decision was likely to be the same.
     8. The determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  therefore  set
        aside. The Upper Tribunal  is  able  to  hear  further  submissions
        relating to the remaking of the decision.



Discussion



     9. The dynamics of AW's family unit are noted by the Judge at [14]  of
        the decision under challenge in the following terms:


        "14.      The appellant is married and there are two children  from
             the appellant's spouse's previous marriage who live with their
             father but who spend most weekends with the appellant and  his
             spouse. If the appellant had to live  in  t  would  mean  that
             either the appellant's spouse (who is a British citizen) would
             need to remain in the United Kingdom to continue  the  present
             level of contact with the children or  go  to  live  with  the
             appellant in Pakistan and  significantly  disrupt  her  family
             life with her children."


    10. The above self-direction omits  the  'Chen'  point  which  was  the
        option of AW returning to Pakistan to make an  application  to  re-
        enter the United Kingdom lawfully.
    11. AW's immigration  history  shows  he  entered  the  United  Kingdom
        lawfully as a student of 4 July  2007  with  leave  granted  to  31
        October 2009. Further leave to remain was granted to 30 June  2011.
        AW was without leave before a grant as  a  Tier  1  Highly  Skilled
        Migrant valid from 15 August 2012 to 15 August 2014.  A  subsequent
        application for leave as a Tier 4 student was voided as  AW  sought
        to withdraw the application.
    12. It was not made  out  on  the  evidence  that  AW  has  a  parental
        relationship with a child although it is accepted that AW's partner
        will have a degree of responsibility for her children as  a  result
        of being a parent and also being responsible for the  care  of  the
        children when they stay with her at weekends.
    13. It is found that during the week the needs of the children are  met
        by their biological father with whom they live.
    14. It is accepted that the relationship AW has formed with his partner
        has been established at a time his leave to remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom and status has been precarious and that it is  known  there
        is a strong possibility that he would  have  to  leave  the  United
        Kingdom unless he was able to secure a grant of leave to remain.
    15. It is accepted that AW and his partner  will  have  a  family  life
        together  recognised  by  Article  8  and  that  AW  may   have   a
        relationship with children who, when  staying  with  their  mother,
        will stay within the family unit of which AW forms part, indicating
        that they too may form part of AW's family/private life, and AW  of
        theirs, but only to the  limited  extent  permitted  by  applicable
        circumstances.
    16. In Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ 803 it was held  that  the  concept  of
        precariousness  in  immigration  status  in  section  117B(5)   was
        distinct from the  concept  of  unlawful  presence  in  the  UK  in
        subsection (4). Even if the two concepts could be said to  overlap,
        subsection (5) would be  redundant  if  they  were  the  same.  The
        concept of precariousness extended more widely, to  include  people
        who had leave to enter or remain which was qualified  to  a  degree
        such that they knew from the outset that their permission to be  in
        the UK could be described as  precarious.  The  extension  and  re-
        extension of limited leave to remain did not mean that the person's
        status was not still precarious. In the context  of  section  117B,
        the relevance of  precariousness  of  immigration  status  was  the
        effect it had on the extent of protection which should be  afforded
        to private life for the purposes of the Article  8  proportionality
        balancing exercise. The more that an immigrant should be  taken  to
        have understood that his or her time in the host country  would  be
        comparatively short or would be liable to termination, the more the
        host State was able to say that a fair balance between  the  rights
        of the individual and the general public interest in the  firm  and
        fair enforcement of immigration controls should come down in favour
        of removal when the leave expired (paras 30 - 34).
    17.  In Rajendran (s117B - family life) [2016] UKUT 138  (IAC)  it  was
        held that (i) "precariousness"  is  a  criterion  of  relevance  to
        family life as well as private life cases is an established part of
        Article 8 jurisprudence: see e.g. R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC  720
        (Admin) and Jeunesse v Netherlands, app.no.12738/10 (GC). (ii)  The
        "little  weight"  provisions  of  s.117B(4)(a)  and  (5)   of   the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  are  confined  to  "
        private life"  established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when  their
        immigration status is unlawful or precarious.  However,  this  does
        not mean that when answering the "public interest  question"  posed
        by s117A(2)-(3) a court or tribunal  should  disregard  "precarious
        family  life"  criteria  set   out   in   established   Article   8
        jurisprudence.  Given  that  ss.117A-D   considerations   are   not
        exhaustive, in certain cases it may be an error of law for a  court
        or tribunal to disregard relevant public interest considerations.
    18. It is accepted AW was found to speak good English and to have  been
        self-sufficient but such attributes are neutral in relation to  the
        weight attached to them as part of the proportionality assessment -
        see AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) in which the  Tribunal
        held that an appellant can obtain no positive right to a  grant  of
        leave to remain from either s117B (2) or (3), whatever  the  degree
        of his fluency  in  English,  or  the  strength  of  his  financial
        resources.
    19.  The assertion by Miss Praisoody that  AW  had  married  and  taken
        responsibility for his  wife  and  children  is  found  to  be  too
        generalised a statement if it is meant to infer AW  cares  for  the
        children as if they were living with him in the family  unit  on  a
        permanent basis and he had assumed a key paternal  role  for  them.
        The extent of any connection must be assessed in  relation  to  the
        factual findings that can be properly made concerning the  position
        of the children, as set out above.
    20. It is accepted AW works full-time and his partner  works  part-time
        but it was not made out the partner could not increase her  working
        hours  or  available  income,  especially  she  was   required   to
        demonstrate an ability to satisfy the  minimum  income  requirement
        set out in Appendix FM. It was not made out that any  delay  in  AW
        returning to the  United  Kingdom  whilst  his  partner  made  such
        arrangements would make the decision disproportionate.
    21. It was submitted on AW's behalf there was no guarantee he  will  be
        able to return after a short period of time  but  no  evidence  was
        provided  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  establish  how  long   visa
        applications take to be assessed in Pakistan, although the Tribunal
        has judicial notice that the published targets set out on the  High
        Commission website indicate that a relatively short period of  time
        will be required provided it  is  established  that  the  necessary
        requirements of the Rules have been met.
    22. It was submitted the proposal was not  proportionate  as  the  best
        interests of the children need to be with their mother  and  father
        and stepfather but other than  a  generalised  submission  to  this
        effect no evidence was submitted to show expecting AW to return  to
        make an application, and his not being available for  however  many
        weekends  contact  may  be  required,  was  contrary  to  the  best
        interests of the children who will  still  have  their  mother  and
        father available to them.
    23. It was submitted on AW's behalf that although the  Judge  erred  in
        failing  to  consider  the  Chikwamba  issue,  in  light   of   the
        submissions made, expecting AW to return is not proportionate.
    24. The submission that if AW was sent back to Pakistan  to  apply  his
        partner may have to fall back on  public  funding  for  support  is
        noted. If this is so it may be temporary whilst she establishes the
        minimum level of available income, which would take her off  public
        support as she would earn too much in any event.  It  is  also  the
        case that the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  is  the
        government representative seeking  dismissal  who  is  fully  aware
        there may be a temporary increase in public funds. In this respect,
        such point is neutral.   It  has  not  been  established  that  any
        additional  funds  AW's  partner  might  seek,   based   upon   her
        entitlement  to  the  same  as  a  British  national  and  if   she
        establishes a lawful entitlement to the  same,  will  result  in  a
        disproportionate consequence to either the partner or the  finances
        of the United Kingdom.
    25. The submission that it would be more trouble for AW to have  to  go
        back to Pakistan than to remain in the United Kingdom  may  be  the
        case, but Article 8 does not give a  person  the  right  to  choose
        where they wish to live and is not there to minimise any disruption
        to individuals, per se, but  to  prevent  unwarranted  interference
        with a protected right.
    26. Reference was made to AW's partner having her own medical  problems
        but the only evidence provided in the bundle is a letter  from  the
        Crisp Street  Health  Centre  in  London,  undated,  indicating  an
        individual takes Ibuprofen 400 mg three times a day and paracetamol
        four times a day with the addition wording of '1-2  weeks'  and  '6
        weeks' none of which indicates whether this is  a  prescription  or
        over-the-counter  medication  or  who   is   taking   the   general
        painkillers or for why.
    27. There is within the bundle a letter of the 25 October 2016  written
        by AW indicating he slipped on 21 October 2016 as a result which he
        injured his back and legs and that his GP prescribed medication and
        bed rest for 4-6 weeks indicating they may relate to the  appellant
        as the Crisp Street Health Centre is given as the  address  of  his
        GP.
    28. It is noted AW's partner has been through  the  family  courts  who
        clearly found the best interests of the children are represented by
        the arrangement in which they live with  their  father  during  the
        week and stay with their mother at weekends.  There is no  evidence
        to suggest the impact  of  removing  AW  to  enable  him  to  apply
        lawfully will have any adverse impact upon the children  sufficient
        to make the decision disproportionate.
    29. In relation to the finding by the First-tier Tribunal Judge that AW
        will be able to satisfy the requirements of the Immigration  Rules,
        it must be noted the application made by AW was for leave to remain
        outside the Rules based on  his  marriage  to  a  British  citizen.
        Although it was considered by the decision-maker  under  the  Rules
        there is no right of appeal against a refusal under the  Rules  and
        on the information provided it  cannot  be  said  that  this  is  a
        decision in relation to which AW would succeed under the  Rules  in
        any event. The evidence provided of the use of a proxy was not just
        the generic evidence referred to by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        but also the ETS Source Data, the 'look-up-tool'  specific  to  AW.
        The fact the voice  recording  was  declared  "invalid"  imports  a
        specific meaning that there was evidence of the  use  of  a  proxy.
        Similarly, whether AW's ability to speak English at a hearing on  3
        November 2016 has any bearing upon whether a proxy was used to  sit
        an English language test on  13  December  2011  was  not  properly
        considered by the  Judge.  There  is  also  a  discrepancy  in  the
        original decision where the Judge finds at [18] the respondent  has
        discharged the evidential burden of proving deception but  then  at
        [20] that the only evidence adduced was the  generic  evidence  and
        that based upon that evidence it was not  found  the  Secretary  of
        State to discharge  the  burden  of  proving  the  certificate  was
        obtained by fraudulent means. This is an element would have  to  be
        considered further and properly analysed  a  fresh  application  is
        made. There are more than the two witness statements more  commonly
        referred to as the 'generic evidence' identified in the case law.
    30. AW can make an application for leave  to  remain  under  the  Rules
        which he can do from abroad.
    31. As found in Chen, "in all cases, it will be for the  individual  to
        place before the Secretary of State evidence  that  such  temporary
        separation will interfere disproportionately with protected rights.
        It will not be enough to rely solely upon the  case-law  concerning
        Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40". In this case  AW  has  failed  to
        produce sufficient evidence to establish that temporary  separation
        between him and his partner will interfere disproportionately  with
        the protected rights of them or relevant others.
    32. I therefore find that the Secretary of  State  has  discharged  the
        burden of proof upon her to the required standard to establish that
        any  interference  with  the  family  and/or  private  life  of  AW
        occasioned by his removal to Pakistan, to enable  him  to  make  an
        application  to  re-enter   the   United   Kingdom   lawfully,   is
        proportionate to the  legitimate  aim  relied  upon  which  is  the
        effective maintenance and application of immigration controls. This
        is not a Kafkaesque stance adopted by the Secretary of State  based
        on inflexible policy but a  decision  properly  arrived  at  having
        weighed the competing interests.


Decision

    33. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    34. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 18 July 2017
