
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA264932015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 11 July 2017                          |On 28 July 2017                   |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                 Md R T khan
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. Z. Khan of Londonium Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
     Tribunal Judge Davey,  promulgated  on  28  March  2017,  in  which  he
     dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
     refuse to issue a residence card as confirmation of a right  to  reside
     as the spouse of an EEA national.


  2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows.


     "The Grounds complain that the Judge made findings without taking  note
     of the Bundle of documents.  It would appear from the file  likely  the
     Judge did not have the  Bundle  in  front  of  him  when  he  made  his
     findings, although there appears to be no explanation  as  to  why  the
     Bundle was filed just before the hearing.  Thus  I  am  satisfied  that
     there is an arguable error of law in the decision."


  3. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
     representatives following which I reserved my decision.


Application to admit further ground


  4. At the hearing Mr. Khan made an application to admit further grounds of
     appeal.  This was made orally.  Nothing had  been  put  in  writing  or
     served on the Tribunal prior to the hearing.  The new ground relates to
     the failure of the Respondent to provide a copy of the  full  interview
     record and the interviewer's comments.  It was submitted that  she  was
     obliged to disclose this following  the  case  of  Miah  (interviewer's
     comments: disclosure: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00515 (IAC).


  5. I have considered headnote (iv) of the case of Miah.   This  states  as
     follows:-


     "However, the document enshrining the  interviewer's  comments  -  Form
     ICV.4605 - must be disclosed as a  matter  of  course.  An  appellant's
     right to a fair hearing dictates this course. If,  exceptionally,  some
     legitimate concern about disclosure, for example, the protection  of  a
     third party, should arise, this should be proactively  brought  to  the
     attention of the Tribunal, for a ruling and directions. In this way the
     principle of independent judicial adjudication  will  provide  adequate
     safeguards for the appellant. This will also enable mechanisms such  as
     redaction, which in practice one would expect  to  arise  with  extreme
     rarity, to be considered."


  6. This issue was raised for the first time in the error of law hearing in
     the Upper Tribunal.  The grounds of appeal before the Upper Tribunal do
     not refer  to  disclosure  of  the  interviewer's  notes  or  the  full
     interview record.  Neither do the grounds of appeal before  the  First-
     tier Tribunal.  The documents in the bundle, the  service  of  which  I
     shall turn to below, do not include any reference to the disclosure  of
     these documents.


  7. This matter was raised for the very first time  in  the  error  of  law
     hearing, and there was no request in writing to amend the grounds.   In
     all the circumstances, given that it was the same  solicitors  who  had
     been instructed since 28 February 2016, given the failure to raise this
     issue at any previous time and the failure to raise  it  in  accordance
     with the Practice Directions, and bearing in  mind  that  there  is  no
     satisfactory explanation for this, I refuse permission  to  adduce  the
     further ground of appeal.


     Error of law decision


  8. I have carefully considered the chronology of this  case  in  order  to
     establish whether or not the Appellant was deprived of a fair  hearing.
     On 13 October 2016 notice  of  hearing  was  sent  to  the  Appellant's
     representatives at the time, Universal Solicitors.   This  stated  that
     the hearing would be heard on Wednesday, 1 March 2017 at 10.00 a.m.  at
     Taylor House.  The file shows that  on  20  February  2017  an  amended
     notice was sent to the Appellant's  solicitors,  Universal  Solicitors,
     informing them that the appeal would be heard on the same date and  the
     same time but at Hendon Magistrates' Court.  I do not have  a  copy  of
     the notice as was sent to Universal Solicitors, but  I  have  the  file
     copy before me and Mr. Khan acknowledged that the directions stated  as
     follows:-


     "You must send the following documents to the  Tribunal  at  the  above
     address to arrive no later than five days before the date of  the  full
     hearing: the witness statements and  the  bundle  of  documents."   The
     "above address" is Hendon Magistrates Court, The Court House, The Hyde,
     London, NW9 7BY".


  9. On 28 February 2017  the  Appellant's  new  representatives,  Londonium
     Solicitors, sent by fax a 45 page bundle to Taylor  House.   They  were
     not able to fax the Respondent a copy of this bundle and Mr. Avery said
     at the hearing that there was no bundle on his file.


 10. I do not have a copy of the front page of this fax which indicates that
     it was sent to Taylor House.  The  front  page  that  I  have  has  the
     address of the Presenting Officers Unit, and  has  another  fax  number
     handwritten on it.  This appears to be Taylor House, and indeed it  was
     received at Taylor House.  It is recorded as having been received on 28
     February at 21:43.  No explanation has been provided as to why  it  was
     faxed so late apart from the fact that the  Appellant  only  instructed
     Londonium Solicitors on 28 February 2017, the day before the hearing.


 11. It does not appear that this bundle reached the judge.  The front  page
     of the bundle states "Submission of Appellant's bundle and request  for
     paper hearing".  The request for paper hearing was made  at  9.43  p.m.
     the night before the hearing and has understandably therefore not  been
     put before a duty judge.  The judge  was  unaware  of  the  request  to
     convert the hearing to a paper hearing.   It was  an  oral  hearing  at
     which the Respondent's representative made brief submissions.


 12. The judge proceeded to decide the appeal on the basis of the  documents
     before him.  The decision was written and promulgated on 27 March 2017.
      Although the bundle of documents  was  sent  to  the  Tribunal  on  28
     February 2017, almost a month earlier, it does  not  appear  that  they
     were sent to the judge prior to his writing up of the decision.  It  is
     normal practice for documents to be sent to judges to be added  to  the
     file when the file is in their possession.  This  does  not  appear  to
     have happened.


 13. I find that a bundle of documents was received at Taylor House.  It was
     received very late, and was not provided to the judge on the morning of
     the hearing, but it appears that the documents were not then sent to be
     joined to the file prior to the  judge  writing  the  decision.   While
     these documents had not been  available  to  the  Respondent  prior  to
     making submissions at the hearing, the judge would have  been  able  to
     consider the additional documents and give the Respondent a  chance  to
     respond to them prior to writing up his decision.  However, there is no
     indication that the papers were sent to the judge to be joined  to  the
     file prior to 27 March 2017.


 14. I accept that the Appellant is  not  without  blame.   No  satisfactory
     reason has been provided for why he instructed solicitors so  late  and
     why, in all the circumstances, especially  given  the  subject  of  the
     additional grounds of appeal, an adjournment was  not  requested  or  a
     request for disclosure  was  not  made.   However,  there  has  been  a
     procedural failing insofar as the bundle was not provided to the  judge
     in the period between the hearing and the writing of  the  decision,  a
     period of almost a month.  I find that the decision involves the making
     of a material error of law.


 15. No anonymity direction is made.


Decision


 16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involves making of  a  material
     error of law and I set the decision aside.


 17. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard.


Signed                                  Date 27 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain





