
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/26034/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On February 13, 2015                 |On February 19, 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                          MR SHALIN SURYAKANT AMIN
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Jegaroyah, Counsel, instructed by Vision
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Wilding (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India. On November 22, 2009 the appellant
    was granted leave to enter the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 student.  His
    visa was valid until March 30, 2011. On March 29, 2011 he submitted  an
    application for further leave to remain as a Tier 4  student  and  this
    was granted on May 3, 2011 extending his leave until  April  12,  2013.
    On April 12, 2013 the appellant submitted an  application  for  further
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 student but this was refused with no  right
    of appeal on May 15, 2014. On June 17, 2014 he  was  served  with  form
    IS151A and IS151A part 2 namely a decision to remove him under  Section
    10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. On  June  18,  2014  removal
    directions were set for June 26, 2014.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under  Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on June  19,  2014.
    At the same time the appellant's solicitors filed  an  application  for
    judicial review on June 24, 2014. His Honour Judge Platts sitting as  a
    High Court Judge refused this on the papers.  The  reasons  given  were
    that parliament had given him an out of country  appeal  and  following
    the decision of Bilal Jan v SSHD [2014] UKUT 265  judicial  review  was
    not appropriate.  On  the  evidence  the  respondent  was  entitled  to
    conclude the appellant had used deception on the ETS test as  his  name
    had been provided to the respondent as one of those who tests had  been
    cancelled. The respondent did not act unlawfully in refusing  leave  to
    remain issuing removal directions or detaining the appellant.

 3. The appellant applied for an oral  hearing  and  that  was  listed  for
    November 4, 2014.

 4. In the meantime the appeal notice was put before a duty judge  on  July
    15, 2014 who decided that there was jurisdiction to hear  the  decision
    to refuse his application to remain as a Tier  4  student  because  the
    letter refusing leave was undated and it could not be said to have been
    taken after the Section 10 decision.

 5. The matter was listed for hearing on November 4, 2014 before  Judge  of
    the First Tier Tribunal Lal (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ"). An
    application to adjourn that hearing pending the outcome of the judicial
    review was refused on October 27, 2014 and  at  the  hearing  the  FtTJ
    ruled that the appellant had a right of appeal because the  matter  had
    been  before  a  duty  judge  who  had  ruled  on  this  issue.  In   a
    determination promulgated on November 11, 2014 the  FtTJ  rejected  the
    appellant's appeal having heard oral evidence from the appellant.

 6. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on  November  18,  2014  and  on
    December 31, 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Fisher found it  was
    arguable the respondent  had  failed  to  demonstrate  to  the  correct
    standard that satisfactory false documents had been submitted.

 7. The matter came before me on the above date and on  that  occasion  the
    appellant was present and represented as set out above.

    SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR OF LAW

 8. Ms Jegaroyah submitted there was an error in law because the FtTJ  made
    findings without any evidence from the respondent to prove  the  fraud.
    The respondent had to produce evidence to support  the  fraud  and  had
    failed  to  do  so  before  the  FtTJ.  The  refusal  letter  contained
    inconsistencies because on the one  hand  the  respondent  accused  the
    appellant of fraud but on the other hand she concluded his test  scores
    could not be authenticated. As regards jurisdiction she  submitted  the
    FtTJ accepted there was jurisdiction despite the respondent raising the
    issue at the hearing.  The  FtTJ  was  correct  in  finding  there  was
    jurisdiction because of what is said in paragraphs  [86]  and  [92]  of
    Shabaz Ali v SSHD [2014] EWHC B999.

 9. Mr Wilding argued there was no jurisdiction because the respondent took
    the Section 10 decision the same day. But  even  if  the  decision  was
    taken a different day the Section 10 decision  nullifies  the  previous
    leave and accordingly the application to extend leave legally could not
    have been made. The only time he would have a right of appeal would  be
    if there were an historic human rights appeal. The Court in Shabaz  Ali
    does not assist the appellant  because  at  paragraph  [95]  the  Court
    accepted that the FTT is the correct venue to determine disputes rather
    than the Administrative Court and in  paragraph  [91]  the  Court  made
    clear  "the  appeal  structure  set  out  by  Parliament   specifically
    envisages that challenges to the  factual  accuracy  of  that  evidence
    takes place through an out of country appeal." As regards the merits of
    the claim itself the FtTJ did not err because the High  Court  rejected
    the claim when it considered the judicial review.

    DISCUSSIONS AND FINDINGS

10. The preliminary issue for me to consider was whether there  was  an  in
    country right of appeal.

11. A Section 10 decision invalidates existing leave as  was  confirmed  by
    the Court of Appeal in R on the application of RK (Nepal)  [2009]  EWCA
    Civ 359 when Court of Appeal found that a decision to remove a  student
    pursuant to section 10 of the 1999  Act  automatically  terminated  any
    extant leave he had because it was not  a  decision  to  curtail  leave
    under the Immigration Rules and so not a  decision  to  vary  leave  as
    listed in section 82(2) of the 2002 Act.  Accordingly there was  no  in
    country right of appeal except on asylum and human rights grounds.

12. If the Section 10 decision had been taken before  the  refusal  of  the
    appellant's application to extend his stay then the position  would  be
    as described by Mr Wilding and as envisaged in Shabaz Ali.

13. It is important to recognise the difference between  a  decision  taken
    before and one taken after the Section 10 decision. Where the  decision
    is taken after the section 10 decision then it is not a decision  under
    Section 82 of the 2002 Act because Section 82(2)(d) concerns a "refusal
    to vary a person's leave to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  if
    the result of the refusal is that the person has no leave to  enter  or
    remain."

14. In R (on the application of Ashfaq Ali) v  SSHD  (s3C  extended  leave:
    invalidation) IJR [2014] UKUT 494 the appellant's application for leave
    to remain was refused and he was issued with a removal  decision  under
    section 10 of the 1999 Act. Upper Tribunal Judge  Lane  concluded  that
    the applicant "needs to show that the decision to refuse to  grant  him
    leave to remain was in  fact  made  before  the  decision  pursuant  to
    section 10 of the Nationality and Immigration Act 1999 to remove him as
    a person who had  breached  his  conditions  and/or  attempted  to  use
    deception in connection with an application".

15. The FtTJ had before him an undated letter but I accept  Ms  Jegaroyah's
    submission that the respondent's own case history (see form  ICD  2599)
    confirms the refusal to extend leave application was taken on  May  15,
    2014 and therefore pre-dates the section  10  decision.  Although  that
    refusal letter referred to the respondent being satisfied the appellant
    was liable to administrative removal under section 10  the  reality  is
    that decision was not taken until June 17, 2014 and clearly  post-dates
    the refusal notice.

16. In common with both the duty judge and the FtTJ  I  am  satisfied  that
    there was a right of appeal against the decision to refuse to vary  his
    leave because the decision was taken before the section 10 decision.

17. I therefore reject  Mr  Wilding's  submission  that  the  FtTJ  had  no
    jurisdiction.

18. I now turn to  the  substantive  appeal.  This  was  a  decision  under
    paragraph 322(1A) HC 395. This section applies where

         "Where false representations have been made or false  documents  or
         information have been submitted (whether or  not  material  to  the
         application, and whether or not to the applicant's  knowledge),  or
         material  facts  have  not  been  disclosed,  in  relation  to  the
         application."

19. The respondent refused the appellant's application for leave to  remain
    because-

         "... During an administrative review  process  ETS  have  confirmed
         that your test was obtained through deception. Because the validity
         of your test results could not be authenticated  your  scores  from
         the test taken on 03 April 2013  at  Queensway  College  have  been
         cancelled.  As  deception  has  been  used  in  relation  to   your
         application  it  is  refused  under  paragraph   322(1A)   of   the
         Immigration Rules."

20. When the matter came before the  FtTJ  the  respondent  relied  on  the
    refusal letter and produced no evidence to support her case.  The  FtTJ
    took oral evidence from the appellant and concluded in paragraph [5]-

         "The Tribunal is satisfied that it can place little weight  on  the
         evidence of the appellant.  The  Tribunal  is  satisfied  that  the
         refusal of leave raises explicitly a number of  issues  as  to  the
         bona fides of the appellant as a student.  The  appellant  has  not
         evidentially addressed these  and  has  not  been  able  to  answer
         significant questions, such for example, why he had not  been  back
         to Queensway College where the alleged fraudulent  examination  had
         taken place. The appellant was unable to give a reason why  he  had
         not gone back and was unable to provide details of any  efforts  to
         show that he had undertaken a legitimate TOIEC."

21. Mr Wilding submitted that the High Court had the benefit of seeing  the
    generic witness statements of Millington and Collings and  refused  the
    application for judicial review. The matter had not been fully  pursued
    in the High  Court  as  the  appellant  had  withdrawn  his  appeal  it
    appeared. The FtTJ rejected the appeal on the evidence given to him and
    that decision was open to him.

22. Ms Jegaroyah submitted the respondent bore the burden  of  proving  her
    case and when the case came before the FtTJ the respondent did not rely
    on any of the judicial review evidence and simply relied on the refusal
    letter.  Ms  Jegaroyah  submits  the  respondent  had  to  establish  a
    precedent fact and by producing no evidence-not  even  details  of  his
    test result-she failed to demonstrate the precedent fact and  the  FtTJ
    had erred in requiring the appellant to effectively prove his test  was
    genuine.

23. I have considered very carefully what the FtTJ had before him and I  am
    satisfied that the respondent's case was totally lacking in  substance.
    The refusal letter is no different to the appellant saying he took  the
    test and his result was genuine. The respondent failed to  produce  the
    evidence to support her case and maybe if she had then the  FtTJ  would
    have had evidence to consider. The burden to prove a dishonest  act  is
    on the person who makes the claim and I am satisfied the respondent had
    to prove the dishonest act (to  the  appropriate  standard)  and  I  am
    satisfied a letter of refusal goes nowhere near satisfying that burden.

24. Having read the FtTJ's determination I  am  satisfied  the  FtTJ  erred
    because he approached the appeal from the position that  the  appellant
    bore the burden of proving he took a genuine test as evidenced  by  his
    finding in paragraph [5] of his determination. This is a material error
    and in the circumstances he erred and I must set aside his decision.

    REMAKING OF DECISION

25. Mr Wilding submitted a copy of the JR decision of October 21, 2014  but
    this  was  only  a  paper  application.  The  appellant   renewed   his
    application to the full court and a hearing was listed for November  4,
    2014 but the application was withdrawn because  when  the  matter  came
    before the FtTJ he accepted jurisdiction of the appeal  and  the  whole
    purpose of the JR proceedings was  to  obtain  an  in  country  appeal.
    Little weight can be attached to a paper hearing when an appeal against
    that decision had been lodged.

26. Today the respondent's evidence is extremely limited and no evidence of
    fraud has been put before me with the respondent  placing  reliance  on
    the fact the appellant did not produce  any  evidence  to  support  his
    case. This approach overlooks the fact that the  respondent  bears  the
    burden of proof in this case.

27. Richards LJ described the test the respondent must meet in  R  (AN  and
    another) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 1605 when he found the  respondent  was
    required to prove the  allegation  on  the  balance  of  probabilities.
    Richards LJ went  onto  state  "the  flexibility  ...lies  not  in  any
    adjustment to the degree of probability required for an  allegation  to
    be proved...but in the strength or quality of the evidence that will in
    practice be required...."

28. This is a serious matter for the appellant because he  not  only  would
    lose his right to study here but also potentially faces a ten-year  ban
    from the United Kingdom  so  the  respondent  must  provide  sufficient
    evidence to prove the fraud. As I have already stated a refusal  letter
    is insufficient.

29. In the absence of any evidence to support what is in the refusal letter
    I must allow this appeal.

    DECISION

30. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did disclose an  error  in  law
    and I set aside that decision and allow the appeal.

31. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended)  an  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. An
    order was not made in the First-tier and I see no reason to amend  that
    order.



Signed:     Dated: February 19, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT

There was no application for a fee award.



Signed:     Dated: February 19, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
