
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/26388/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 2nd February 2018                      |  On 13th March 2018             |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR SAKTHIVEL PICHAI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Anzani, Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   Although this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, I shall refer to the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal.
    The Appellant is an Indian national, born on 8 June  1986.  His  appeal
    against the refusal of discretionary leave to remain  was  allowed,  on
    human rights grounds, by First-tier Tribunal Judge Wright  on  10  July
    2017.

2.   The Secretary  of  State  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  on  the
    following grounds:  Although the judge cited the reported  case  of  SM
    and Qadir v Secretary of State for the Home Department (ETS -  evidence
    - burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC), she  failed  to  apply  the
    legal principles in that case. The Secretary of  State  had  discharged
    the evidential burden by submitting the invalid test result accompanied
    by the generic witness statements. That evidence was clearly before the
    judge including an expert report from Professor French  and  a  college
    specific report quantifying the number of invalid scores  for  the  day
    the Appellant took the test to show that on  balance  he  cheated.  The
    judge found that despite the presence of this evidence the Secretary of
    State had failed to discharge the burden of proof. It was difficult  to
    decipher where  the  findings  of  the  judge  commenced.  The  judge's
    findings  were  brief  and  mainly  unreasoned  and   infected   by   a
    misdirection in law in respect of SM and Qadir.  The  judge  failed  to
    follow the law in respect of the ETS  deception  issue  and  failed  to
    direct herself properly in respect of family life and the provisions of
    Section 117B and she failed to give adequate reasons for  allowing  the
    appeal on human rights grounds.

3.   Permission was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin  on  18
    December 2017 on the basis that the judge  arguably  erred  in  law  in
    failing to follow the decided case in respect of the  deception  issue,
    failing to direct herself properly in respect of family life, including
    not considering any of the provisions of Section 117B, and  failing  to
    give adequate reasons.


Submissions

4.   Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds of appeal and  submitted  that  in  the
    case of SM and Qadir the Tribunal held that  the  Respondent's  generic
    evidence satisfied the evidential burden  which  then  shifted  to  the
    Appellant in order to  offer  an  innocent  explanation.  The  evidence
    specific to this Appellant was before the  judge  in  the  Respondent's
    bundle, but she failed to take it into account. This is  apparent  from
    her conclusion at paragraph 40 in which she states:

         "In view of the limited evidence from the respondent in respect  of
         the actual test taken by this appellant the burden of proof has not
         been discharged. The Tribunal accepts  the  appellant's  submission
         that the failure to provide specific evidence and to  question  the
         appellant upon that evidence does not discharge  the  burden  which
         the respondent has to meet."

5.   Mr Tarlow submitted that the  judge  should  have  concluded  that  the
    Respondent met the evidential burden and then gone on to  consider  the
    Appellant's oral evidence as to his explanation. The  judge  failed  to
    consider that there had been a shift in the  burden  of  proof  in  her
    conclusion at paragraph 40.


6.    Further,  the  judge  stated  at   paragraph   43,   "In   considering
    proportionality the Tribunal takes into account  Section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002". She has failed  to  show
    that she has considered all its elements and therefore erred in law  in
    her assessment of  Article  8.  Her  conclusions  on  family  life  and
    proportionality were inadequately reasoned.

7.   Ms Anzani submitted that it was necessary to look at the decision as  a
    whole not just  at  paragraph  40  when  considering  the  question  of
    deception. In particular, at paragraphs 24 and 25 the judge stated:

         "24. In the respondent's supplementary bundle  there  are  the  ETS
             results and the generic witness statements. The respondent has
             come to the conclusion that the appellant used a proxy to take
             the spoken English test. It was submitted the  respondent  has
             discharged the legal burden demonstrating the appellant used a
             proxy test taker. On 14 December 2011 out of 184 tests  taken,
             64% were invalid. With regards to the  respondent's  position,
             she does not say everyone who took the test used a proxy,  but
             that significant weight can be given to those findings.


         25.  The respondent referred to the report of Professor French  and
             his   evidence   on   false   positives   at   paragraph   3.2
             (identification of different speakers as the same person).

8.   Ms Anzani submitted that it was clear from the  judge's  conclusion  at
    paragraph 40 that she was referring to the legal burden. The  Appellant
    was entitled to challenge the adequacy of the evidence submitted by the
    Respondent and the generic evidence was not sufficient to  satisfy  the
    legal burden. The judge was fully aware of the distinction between  the
    evidential burden and legal burden.

9.   The judge had applied  SM  and  Qadir  and  appreciated  the  shift  in
    burden. This was apparent from  paragraph  32  of  the  decision  which
    stated:

         "32. In respect of the respondent's position on the ETS,  the  only
             evidence provided by the respondent is (as  with  all  similar
             cases) generic. The appellant submitted there was no  evidence
             as to how the appellant's test had been assessed  or  how  the
             questions over the appellant's test  had  been  assessed.  His
             result had been declared invalid; however the  respondent  has
             not given evidence as to what procedure was used to reach that
             conclusion. The test centre results suggest 36% of tests  were
             questionable and 64% were invalidated. It was submitted  there
             were shortcomings;  there  was  no  evidence  to  confirm  the
             appellant's individual results. The evidence  upon  which  the
             respondent relies only just passed the evidential burden in SM
             and Qadir and  that  was  a  case  where  there  was  evidence
             specific to those two appellants. The  appellant  referred  to
             the distinction between the evidential burden of proof and the
             burden of proof to the civil standard."
10.   Ms  Anzani  submitted  that  the  judge  had  outlined  the   evidence
    correctly, outlined the Appellant's innocent  explanation  and  overall
    the conclusion at paragraph 40 that the legal burden was  not  met  was
    open to the judge on the evidence before her.

11.  In relation to Article 8, it was accepted that the  Appellant  did  not
    meet the Immigration Rules, therefore any finding in  relation  to  the
    ETS deception was not relevant if the judge's  findings  on  Article  8
    were sustainable. There was no error in her  assessment  of  Article  8
    outside the Rules because there were exceptional circumstances in  this
    case sufficient to outweigh the public interest. The judge had  focused
    on the economic  situation  in  assessing  the  public  interest.   She
    accepted there was family life and her conclusions were open to her  on
    the evidence before her. Her reasons were sufficient because it was  in
    the best interests of the children for the status quo to be maintained.



11.  At paragraph 42 the judge stated:

         "It is accepted by the Tribunal, taking into account  the  evidence
         of the sister's needs, the children's needs and how  the  appellant
         meets  those  needs,  he  has   established   in   the   particular
         circumstances of this case his family life  with  his  sisters  and
         nieces. His removal would consequently interfere with  that  family
         life. Indirect contact with his sister and nieces would not replace
         the emotional  care  which  the  appellant  provides,  besides  the
         undoubted very practical domestic support which he supplies. It  is
         accepted that even if the appellant's sister was able to afford and
         engage someone to assist her  (it  is  not  accepted  it  would  be
         practical to do so), any form  of  assistance  received  would  not
         replicate that which the appellant currently supplies. In  view  of
         the requirements which would fall elsewhere, it must make  economic
         sense for the appellant to continue to shoulder that burden and for
         it to be provided by him.  The appellant's removal  cannot  satisfy
         any legitimate public interest,  as  the  burden  would  then  fall
         elsewhere."

12.  Ms Anzani submitted  that  the  reasons  given  at  paragraph  42  were
    sufficient to sustain the judge's Article  8  findings.  She  submitted
    that the Respondent's submissions  amount  to  disagreements  with  the
    judge's findings but disclose no error of law.

13.  In response Mr Tarlow submitted that there was nothing  exceptional  in
    what the judge had described  at  paragraph  42.  They  merely  were  a
    reiteration of family reasons for the Appellant to support  his  sister
    and his children. It was unclear what the findings under  Section  117B
    were and the reasons for them.

Judge's findings

14.  The judge  concluded  that  the  Respondent  had  failed  to  establish
    deception and the Appellant's removal would be disproportionately harsh
    in the circumstances. Her findings start at paragraph  40  and  end  at
    paragraph 44:

         "40. In consideration and in reaching conclusions,  in  respect  of
             the English language test, the Tribunal is  cautioned  against
             applying its own test of English language  skills  based  upon
             the  level  demonstrated  at  the  hearing  (SM  and  Qadir  v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department (ETS -  Evidence  -
             Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT  00229  (IAC).  In  view  of  the
             limited evidence from the respondent in respect of the  actual
             test taken by this appellant the burden of proof has not  been
             discharged. The Tribunal accepts  the  appellant's  submission
             that the failure to provide specific evidence and to  question
             the appellant upon that evidence does not discharge the burden
             which the respondent has to meet.


         41.  In respect of Article 8 the respondent submitted the appellant
             has given oral evidence, saying he cares for his sister and he
             has a large input into the children's  upbringing,  schooling,
             cooking, housework and attending  hospital  appointments  with
             his sister. That said, the respondent submitted the  appellant
             has not  raised  exceptional  circumstances  with  regards  to
             Article 8. The appellant submits to the contrary  that  it  is
             these exact circumstances which are exceptional and  leave  to
             remain should be granted.


         42.  It is accepted  by  the  Tribunal,  taking  into  account  the
             evidence of the sister's needs, the children's needs  and  how
             the appellant meets those needs, he  has  established  in  the
             particular circumstances of this case his family life with his
             sisters and nieces.  His removal would consequently  interfere
             with that family life.  Indirect contact with his  sister  and
             nieces  would  not  replace  the  emotional  care  which   the
             appellant  provides,  besides  the  undoubted  very  practical
             domestic support which he supplies.  It is accepted that  even
             if the appellant's  sister  was  able  to  afford  and  engage
             someone to  assist  her  (it  is  not  accepted  it  would  be
             practical to do so), any form of assistance received would not
             replicate that which the  appellant  currently  supplies.   In
             view of the requirements which would fall elsewhere,  it  must
             make economic sense for the appellant to continue to  shoulder
             that burden and for it to be provided by him.  The appellant's
             removal cannot satisfy any legitimate public interest, as  the
             burden would then fall elsewhere.


         43.  In considering proportionality the Tribunal takes into account
             s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


         44.  It would be disproportionately harsh  in  these  circumstances
             and for the reasons  set  out  above,  not  to  exercise  that
             discretion in the appellant's favour."


Discussion and Conclusions

15.  The judge records, at paragraph 32, that the Appellant submitted:  "The
    evidence  upon  which  the  respondent  relies  only  just  passed  the
    evidential burden in SM and Qadir and that was a case where  there  was
    evidence specific to those two appellants."


16.  At paragraph 40, the judge does not  refer  to  either  the  evidential
    burden or the legal  burden.  She  stated:  "In  view  of  the  limited
    evidence from the respondent in respect of the  actual  test  taken  by
    this appellant the burden of  proof  has  not  been  discharged."  This
    finding suggests that there was no evidence before her  of  the  actual
    test taken  by  the  Appellant.  It  is  clear  from  the  Respondent's
    supplementary bundle, referred to by the judge at  paragraph  24,  that
    there was evidence of the Appellant's actual ETS result, the number  of
    tests  taken  and  the  proportion   which   were   rendered   invalid.
    Accordingly, there was evidence  before  the  judge  specific  to  this
    Appellant such  that  the  judge  ought  to  have  concluded  that  the
    evidential burden was satisfied.  The judge  failed  to  apply  SM  and
    Qadir and acknowledge the shift in burden.

17.  The judge set out the Appellant's oral  evidence  in  her  decision  at
    paragraphs 10 to 18. However,  she  made  no  finding  on  whether  she
    accepted the veracity of that evidence or whether  she  found  that  it
    amounted to an innocent explanation. There were no  reasons  given  for
    why the Appellant had discharged the evidential burden. It is therefore
    not clear, in concluding that the Respondent  had  not  discharged  the
    burden, whether the judge was referring to the evidential burden or the
    legal burden.

18.  Ms Anzani submitted that it was the legal burden and that  finding  was
    open to the judge, but unfortunately the judge failed  to  specifically
    state the test in SM and Qadir failed or to show that she  has  applied
    it. She failed to show that she appreciated the  shift  in  burden  and
    failed to give any reasons for why she accepted  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant that he did not cheat. Those conclusions have to be  inferred
    from what she stated at paragraph 40.  It may well be that, looking  at
    the evidence as a whole the Respondent  has  failed  to  discharge  the
    legal burden, but it is not apparent that  the  judge  has  taken  into
    account all the relevant evidence or applied the relevant test. She has
    failed to make sufficient findings or give sufficient reasons  for  her
    conclusion at paragraph 40.  Accordingly, I find that the  judge  erred
    in law in relation to ground 1.

19.  Ground 1 obviously affects  the  assessment  of  proportionality  under
    Article 8. Ms Anzani tried to persuade me that this  was  not  relevant
    because it was accepted  that  the  Appellant  could  not  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules and therefore an error of law in relation to the  ETS
    deception was not material to the overall outcome. I  disagree  because
    whether the Appellant had used deception was  relevant  to  the  public
    interest and therefore relevant to the assessment  of  proportionality.
    Having found there is an error of law in respect of the ETS  deception,
    that error has infected the judge's assessment of Article 8.

20.  Further, the judge has failed to give adequate reasons  for  why  there
    is family life between the Appellant, his sister and  his  nieces.  The
    Appellant was not the father of the children  and  the  judge  has  not
    explained why the situation amounted to more than normal emotional ties
    in relation to his family life with his  sister.  The  judge's  finding
    that the Appellant's situation amounted to  family  life  discloses  an
    error of law because she has failed to properly apply the relevant case
    law.

21.  Further, the  judge's  assessment  of  proportionality  is  lacking  in
    reasons. The judge focuses on the assistance provided by the  Appellant
    to his sister and the economic benefit he provides.  She has failed  to
    make findings on Section 117B, merely stating that  she  has  taken  it
    into account in assessing proportionality.

22.  Although Ms Anzani submitted that the judge found that it  was  in  the
    best interests of the children for the status  quo  to  be  maintained,
    there is no proper assessment of the children's best interests  or  why
    they would outweigh the public interest given that the Appellant cannot
    satisfy the Immigration Rules. It is incumbent on  the  judge  to  deal
    with the provisions of Section 117B and her brief comment that she  has
    taken them into account was not sufficient to show that she had  regard
    to each of those considerations.

23.  I find that the judge erred in law in her assessment of Article  8  and
    in allowing the appeal on human rights grounds. It was  agreed  by  the
    parties that if an error of law was found then  the  matter  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing. I  agree  that  is
    the appropriate course. It will be open for the First-tier Tribunal  to
    assess the Appellant's explanation and make proper findings on  whether
    he took the test, notwithstanding that  the  Respondent  satisfied  the
    evidential burden. It will be open to the Appellant  to  submit  up-to-
    date evidence on his Article 8 claim which must be assessed at the date
    of the hearing.

24.  Accordingly, I find there is an error of law in the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  Wright  dated  10  July  2017  and  I  allow  the
    Respondent's appeal.  I set aside the First-tier Tribunal decision  and
    remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing. I do  so  on
    the basis that the case involves an assessment of the oral testimony of
    the  Appellant  in  accordance  with  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Practice
    Statements of 25th September 2012. None of  the  judge's  findings  are
    preserved.



Notice of Decision

The Respondent's appeal is allowed and the Appellant's  appeal  is  remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal with directions (see below).

No anonymity direction is made.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 9 March 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances






                                 DIRECTIONS

    (i)  The  Tribunal  is  directed  pursuant  to  section  12(3)  of  the
         Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 to reconsider the appeal
         at a hearing before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Wright.

    (ii) The Appellant and the Respondent to submit any  further  evidence/
         and or skeleton arguments upon which they intend to  rely  14  days
         before the date of hearing.



