
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/26563/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                |Determination Promulgated            |
|On: 17 March 2015                    |On: 22 April 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                            MR ABDUL KAYUME MUMIN
                       (anonymity direction not made).
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr, M Islam, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brockles-Weller, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department
         against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Horvath  who
         allowed the appellant's appeal in a determination dated 5  December
         2014 pursuant paragraph 322 (3) with reference to 245 ZX (a) of the
         Immigration Rules. However for the  sake  of  convenience  I  shall
         refer to Mr Mumin, as the appellant and the Secretary of  State  as
         the respondent which are the designations that they had before  the
         First-tier Tribunal.

      2. The appellant, born on 21 August 1990,  a  national  of  Bangladesh
         made an application to remain in the United Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4
         (General)  Student  under  the  Points  Based  System   which   the
         respondent refused on 12 June 2014 stating that the  appellant  has
         not complied with the conditions attached to his leave to remain in
         this country as a student.

      3. Permission to appeal was granted by first-tier  Tribunal  Judge  VA
         Osborne who stated that it is  arguable  that  the  Judge  made  an
         arguable error of law by reaching findings which would not open  to
         her on the totality of the evidence despite best efforts to  do  so
         in light of the complexity of the arguments.

    First-tier Tribunal's Findings

      4. The appellant failed to meet the requirements of paragraph  245  ZX
         (a) because he was refused under one of  the  general  grounds  for
         refusal set out in paragraph 322  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
         appellant submitted a certificate and  transcript  dated  25  April
         2014 consisting of a course completion letter  dated  12  May  2014
         from London West Valley College for an EBM  a  Graduate  Integrated
         Diploma in Business Administration. However, he was  granted  leave
         to Study a Diploma  in  Business  Management  at  London  Churchill
         College commencing on 21 November 2011 until 21 January  2014.  The
         appellant did not submit a fresh application for leave to study  an
         EBMA  integrated  Diploma  in  Business  Administration.   He   was
         therefore in breach of Section 50 of the Boarders, Citizenship  and
         Immigration Act 2009 by commencing this study at London West Valley
         College for which he  did  not  have  a  CAS.  The  respondent  was
         therefore not satisfied that the appellant has  complied  with  the
         conditions attached to his leave to remain  in  this  country.  The
         respondent accordingly  refused  the  appellant's  application  for
         leave to remain as a Tier 4 student under paragraph 322 (3) of  the
         Immigration Rules.

      5. The appellant contends that he did not breach any Immigration  Rule
         because he did not leave London Churchill College or cease studying
         with them. He said that he also undertook a supplementary course of
         study at West Valley  College  for  his  EBMA  Graduate  Integrated
         Diploma in Business Administration as an extra  measure  to  secure
         his career. The appellant  claims  relied  on  the  Tier  4  policy
         guidance.  The  appellant  also  observed  that  the  Home   Office
         frequently revoke  Tier  4  sponsor  licences  and  because  London
         Churchill College changed the awarding body after he enrolled  with
         them. Therefore the appellant took an extra measure by launching  a
         supplementary course at London West Valley College. He claimed that
         the Secretary of State failed to exercise her discretion properly.

      6. The Judge noted that he  has  seen  the  qualification  certificate
         awarded by EBMA on 25 March 2014 for completion of  the  course  of
         Graduate Integrated Diploma in  Business  Administration  and  this
         supported by a unit credit certificate issued by EBMA. He has  also
         seen a letter dated 12 May 2014 from  London  West  Valley  College
         which confirmed that the appellant has successfully  completed  the
         course of 240 credits at their educational  establishment.  He  has
         also seen in the respondent's bundle letter from  London  Churchill
         College dated 18 March 2014 which stated that  in  respect  of  the
         diploma in the Management course, the  appellant  has  submitted  a
         number of units assessed  in  January  2014  but  the  grades  were
         provisional and there were waiting approval from the awarding  body
         ATHE and the grades were not  final  and  could  still  change.  No
         completion of the course from London Churchill College or the  ATHE
         qualification  certificate  was  submitted  with  the   appellant's
         current application on 19 May 2014. The Judge noted  that  the  CAS
         submitted with the application made reference to  London  Churchill
         College in these words "provisional grades  issued  by  the  London
         Churchill College dated 18 March 2014"

      7. On the assumption as claimed  by  the  appellant  that  the  London
         Churchill College had decided to transfer all level 6  students  to
         the ATHE level 6 diploma in Management Program,  however  Churchill
         College subsequently decided to reassess all  ATHE  level  6  would
         this work  through  EMBA  level  6  Graduate  Diploma  in  Business
         Administration and the award body changes made by Churchill College
         had put the appellant in a difficult position so  he  had  to  stay
         with Churchill College to finishes course albeit under a  different
         awarding body which apparently was completed on 31 January 2014 but
         the appellant states that he did not cease his studies  with  them.
         Nevertheless the Judge noted that the appellant has not provided to
         the respondent or for the hearing, a qualification  certificate  in
         respect of the  ATHE  diploma  in  Management  or  a  qualification
         certificate in respect of the EBMA  graduate  diploma  in  Business
         Administration.  The  appellant  was  however  able  to  provide  a
         qualification certificate from London West Valley College dated  25
         April 2014 which was submitted with his application  along  with  a
         letter dated 12 May 2014 from London West  Valley  College  stating
         that he has successfully completed his course there.

      8. The  judge  was  satisfied  that  the  appellant  was  awarded  the
         qualification certificate by EMBA  dated  25  April  2014  and  the
         marked transcript strongly indicates that  although  the  appellant
         might well have continued to follow the course at Churchill College
         and that he might well have stayed with that college, the focus  of
         his studies had shifted from London  Churchill  College  to  London
         West Valley College such  that  the  EBMA  course  at  London  West
         Valley,  which  he  might  well  have  originally  intended  as   a
         supplementary course had taken precedence and had become  the  main
         course.  The  appellant's  failure  to  produce   a   qualification
         certificate for the ATHE diploma or  the  EBM  a  graduate  diploma
         which he pursued at London  Churchill  College  strongly  indicates
         that he had not taken the appropriate examinations or that  he  had
         failed them. These factors led to the Judge to  conclude  that  the
         London West Valley course had become his main course which hindered
         his progress on the London Churchill College.

      9. The appellant's course and educational establishments  are  subject
         to Section 50 of the Boarders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009
         by virtue of section 3C of the Immigration Act  1971.  It  was  the
         respondent's case that the appellant  has  not  complied  with  the
         conditions attached to his leave and therefore he  failed  to  meet
         the requirements of paragraph 322 with reference to  paragraph  245
         ZY (c) which provides that an applicant must fall for refusal under
         the general grounds of refusal and must not be an illegal entrant.

     10. The Tier 4 policy guidance at page 57 of version 11/2014 states the
         following. "You are allowed  to  do  a  supplementary  course,  for
         example, an evening class, as well as your main  course  of  study.
         This supplementary course can be in any subject, and does not  have
         to relate to your main course of study. You do not need  permission
         from us to undertake a supplementary cause and you are not required
         to tell your Tier 4 sponsor. However, you must make sure that  your
         supplementary course does not in any way hinder  your  progress  on
         your main course of study".

     11. The Judge accepted that as provided in subparagraph (c) (vi) (3) of
         the Immigration Rules, supplementary study is an exception and that
         supplementary study must be undertaken by a student in addition  to
         his/her main course, so long as it does not hinder progress on  the
         main course of study. Given his findings of  fact,  the  judge  was
         satisfied that the appellant falls foul of the Immigration Rules.

    Grounds of Appeal

     12. The respondent in his grounds of appeal states the following  which
         I summarise. The Judge has totally  misunderstood  the  appellant's
         case and diverted from the original issue of the appeal.  The  only
         issue should have been determined by the  Judge  should  have  been
         whether  the  appellant  breached  Section  50  of  the   Boarder's
         Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 by  studying  at  London  West
         Valley College. However Section  50  does  not  prohibit  but  only
         restricts the student, so  paragraph  322  (3)  is  not  applicable
         because  the  appellant  has  complied  with  all  the  Rules.  The
         appellant did not leave London Churchill College or seize  studying
         with them. He undertook a supplementary course of study  at  London
         West Valley College as an additional course and to  take  an  extra
         measure to secure his career. The course completion letter from the
         London Churchill College  dated  26  August  2014  establishes  the
         truth.

     13. The appellant's course completion letter from the London  Churchill
         College dated 26 August 2014 and 18 March 2014 submitted  with  the
         notice of appeal in respect of the appellant's  provisional  grades
         establish that the appellant never seized studying with the  London
         Churchill College and therefore the London West Valley College  had
         not become the appellant's main  course.  The  appellant  submitted
         evidence which demonstrates  that  the  appellant  has  passed  all
         requirements of the courses. The Judge did not  take  into  account
         that it is not obligatory for a Tier 4 sponsor to notify  the  Home
         Office as he had not seized studying with London Churchill College.
         The respondent has never claimed that the London Churchill  College
         has communicated with  them  and  therefore  there  is  nothing  to
         suggest that the appellant has breached the law.

     14. The Judge's consideration at paragraph 16 of the  determination  is
         totally misconceived. She acted on the assumption from the evidence
         at page 13 and 14 of the appellant's bundle for the notification of
         the change  of  the  awarding  body.  She  also  concluded  on  the
         assumption that the London  West  Valley  College  had  become  the
         appellant's main course  which  hindered  his  progress  at  London
         Churchill College. The evidence submitted by the appellant does not
         sustain that conclusion.

     15. The Judge misapplied section 85 A of the 2002 Act at paragraph 6 of
         the determination which he stated that the  evidence  submitted  by
         the appellant was "additionally evidence which  was  not  submitted
         with the original application and therefore cannot  be  considered.
         The Judge has not taken into account the provision of section 85 A.
         The Judge has failed to take  into  account  that  the  appellant's
         application was not about the attainment of points under the points-
         based system Immigration Rule so there is nothing to  restrict  the
         appellant from adducing evidence to corroborate his claim.  Section
         80 5A (4)  (d)  clearly  states  that  the  Tribunal  may  consider
         evidence  adduced  by  the  appellant  where  it  is  "adduced   in
         connection with the Secretary of State's reliance on the discretion
         under the Immigration Rules, or compliance with the requirement  of
         the Immigration Rules and to refuse an application on  grounds  not
         related to  the  acquisition  of  points  under  the  points  based
         system."

     16. Paragraph 322 (3) of the immigration rules sets  out  discretionary
         general grounds of refusal and there is no framework or guidance or
         criteria  as  to  how   the   respondent   should   exercise   this
         discretionary power. The  respondent  without  stating  any  reason
         exercised her discretionary power against the appellant and this is
         not in accordance with the law or  the  Immigration  Rules  or  any
         publish guidelines and policies.

     17. The appellant has been granted leave to study at  London  Churchill
         College and he was allowed to continue with more than  one  College
         provided he did not seize studying at  the  institution  for  which
         permission was given. Hence this is not  a  case  of  chopping  and
         changing the course provider which was the mischief intended to  be
         prevented by the Rules.

    Rule 24 response

     18. The respondent in their rule 24  response  dated  6  February  2015
         stated that the first-tier Tribunal directed himself appropriately.
         The upper  Tribunal  may  benefit  from  considering  the  case  of
         Bihimani  (student  switching  institution:  requirements)   [2014]
         UKUT516 when assessing whether there is an  error  of  law  in  the
         determination.

    The hearing.

     19. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  both  parties,  the  full
         notes of which are in my Record of Proceedings.

    Is there a material error of law in the determination of the First-tier
    Tribunal?

     20. First-tier Tribunal Judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  and
         stated that the appellant was  given  a  CAS  to  study  at  London
         Churchill College and yet at the  same  time  he  undertook  was  a
         course at London West Valley College for which he did  not  have  a
         CAS. The Judge found that his studies at London West Valley College
         hindered his course of  study  at  London  Churchill  College.  The
         appellant's position  is  that  he  was  entitled  to  undertake  a
         supplementary course with his main course of  study  and  that  his
         studies at London West Valley College  were  supplementary  to  his
         studies at London Churchill College as he did not seize studying at
         that college but did both courses at the same time.  He  relies  on
         the respondent's policy guidance  that  students  are  entitled  to
         undertake supplementary studies and they do not have to inform  the
         Home Office or their college of their supplementary course.

     21. The Judge at paragraph  20  of  his  determination  stated  that  a
         supplementary course is an exception and may  be  undertaken  by  a
         student in addition to his/her main cause, so long as it  does  not
         hinder progress on the main course of study. The Judge  found  that
         the appellant therefore falls  to  be  refused  under  the  general
         grounds of refusal in paragraph 322 of the Immigration  Rules.  The
         Judge concluded that although the appellant did not switch courses,
         as he continued to study at London Churchill College but found that
         as the appellant has not provided a  certificate  from  the  London
         Churchill College which states that the appellant has completed the
         course, and this demonstrates that the appellant's main  course  of
         study became his studies at London West Valley College,  for  which
         he did  provide  a  course  completion  letter,  and  thereby  this
         hindered his studies at London Churchill College and was  not  able
         to provide a completion letter for this course.

     22. The appellant's approved sponsor for  his  studies  in  the  United
         Kingdom was London Churchill College to  study  for  a  Diploma  in
         Business Management. He provided a transcript dated 18  March  2014
         from London Churchill College which states that he has  passed  all
         his examinations and his grades are provisional  awaiting  approval
         from the awarding body, ATHE and the grades are not final and could
         change.

     23. The appellant to support  his  application  for  further  leave  to
         remain as a student, submitted certificates and  transcripts  dated
         25 April 2014 and a course completion letter dated 12 May 2014 from
         London West Valley College to show that he has completed  his  EBMA
         Graduate Integrated Diploma  in  Business  Administration.  He  was
         unable to provide a Diploma  in  Business  Management  from  London
         Churchill College which was his main course of study.

     24. Therefore the course of studies that the appellant was  relying  on
         for further leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a student  was
         not from London Churchill College, for which he  had  been  granted
         permission and who his sponsor was, but  from  London  West  Valley
         College for which he did not have a CAS.

     25. The appellant claims that his studies at West  Valley  College  was
         supplementary to his studies at London Churchill College. He claims
         that he studied at both colleges at the same time.

     26. The evidence before the Judge was  that  initially,  the  appellant
         applied to study at Blake Hall College  but  the  appellant  as  he
         stated to the Judge, that the licence  of  this  college  had  been
         revoked by the Home Office about a month ago and he now intended to
         study at University of Greenwich who had agreed to accept  him  and
         that the  tuition  fees  of  �3700,  he  had  paid  to  Blake  Hall
         University had been transferred to  University  of  Greenwich.  The
         Judge noted that Blake Hall College stated in  a  letter  dated  22
         October 2014 that "the progression and award board for BAH business
         studies (stage 3  entry)-Blake  all  met  on  16  October  2014  to
         consider your results profile for the academic year. I  am  writing
         to inform you that based on the profile presented to it, the  board
         has agreed you have not passed  your  program  of  study  but  have
         successfully completed 60 credits".

     27. This letter from Blake Hall College demonstrated to the Judge  that
         this college did not consider that the appellant had completed  his
         studies at London Churchill College and  stated  that  all  he  had
         proved was  that  he  had  attained  60  credits.  The  Judge  also
         considered a letter dated  18  March  2014  from  London  Churchill
         College which that the appellant has passed nine  examinations  but
         his grades are provisional awaiting approval from the awarding body
         ATHE. This demonstrated to the Judge that  the  appellant  has  not
         completed his course at London Churchill  College  because  he  was
         unable to provide a diploma or a letter  of  completion  of  course
         from this college to state that the  appellant  had  completed  his
         course of studies at this college.

     28. The Judge accepted that London Churchill College had problems  with
         the awarding body and were going to change to a new award body, the
         ATHE, but the fact remains that the appellant has not  provided  to
         the Home Office or for the hearing, a qualification certificate  in
         respect of  the  ATH  diploma  in  management  or  a  qualification
         certificate in respect of the EBM is graduate diploma  in  business
         administration from London Churchill College.  The  Judge  did  not
         consider the appellant's study at London West  Valley  College  was
         supplementary to his studies at London Churchill College and stated
         that this course of study did  hinder  his  progress  of  his  main
         course of study at London Churchill College.

     29.  The  Judge  found  at  paragraph  16,  the  appellant  provided  a
         qualification certificate from London West Valley College dated  25
         April 2014 which were submitted with this application along with  a
         letter dated 12 May 2014 from London West  Valley  College  stating
         that he has successfully completed his course there. His failure to
         produce a qualification certificate for the  ATHE  diploma  or  the
         EBMA graduate diploma, (pursued at  Churchill)  strongly  indicates
         that he had not taken the appropriate examinations or that  he  had
         failed them. These factors have led me to conclude  that  the  West
         Valley course  had  become  his  main  course  which  hindered  his
         progress on the Churchill course".

     30. The Judge stated that the  qualification  certificate  by  the  MBA
         dated 25 April 2014 and the transcript page from  London  Churchill
         College, "strongly indicates that although the appellant might well
         have continued to follow the course at Churchill, and that he might
         well have stayed with that college, the focus on  his  studies  had
         shifted from Churchill to West Valley, such that the EBMA course at
         London West Valley College which  he  might  well  have  originally
         intended as a supplementary course had  taken  precedence  and  had
         become the main course.

     31. On the evidence the Judge was entitled to find that the appellant's
         main focus was on his course at London West  Valley  College  which
         became his main course and not at London Churchill College even  if
         he attended both colleges at the same time. The Judge was  entitled
         to find that the appellant studies at London  West  Valley  College
         could not be categorised  as   supplementary  course  as  permitted
         under the Tier 4 Policy Guidance of the respondent.

     32. The Judge also made an error of law when he said that the appellant
         is not entitled to provide documents at the hearing because his  is
         a  points-based  system  appeal  and  only  material   before   the
         respondent can be considered. However the Judge failed to  consider
         that the respondent's refusal was on discretionary general  grounds
         of refusal under  paragraph  322  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
         appellant was therefore entitled  to  provide  evidence  after  the
         application.

     33. Although the Judge fell into material error by stating that he  was
         not entitled to consider the documents provided at the hearing  and
         which were not before the respondent with  their  application,  the
         judge at paragraph  23  and  24  did  consider  the  documents  and
         concluded that they do not advance  the  appellant's  case  in  any
         material way given his factual findings.

     34. The judge found that the letter dated 26 August  2014  from  London
         Churchill College confirmed that the appellant  was  a  student  at
         their college and that  he  had  successfully  completed  the  EBMA
         graduate Diploma in Business  Administration,  QC  F  level  6  the
         course starting on 9 September 2013 and ended on 31  January  2014.
         He also produced two further  new  letters  from  London  Churchill
         College dated 2 September 2014 and 8 May  2014.  The  first  letter
         stated that the college had decided to transfer all AA BPS level  6
         students to ATHE level 6 diploma in Management program. The  second
         letter confirmed that the appellant was studying at  their  college
         under the previous awarding body ATHE, that the course was expected
         to  finish  on  31  January  2014  and  that  due   to   unforeseen
         circumstances the ATHE award would be  delayed,  so  after  careful
         consideration Churchill has decided to reassess all  ATHE  level  6
         students work through EMBA level 6  graduate  diploma  in  business
         Administration program.

     35. The Judge was entitled to find that these documents do not take the
         appellant's case any further. He stated that the appellant has not,
         for whatever reason, provide his diploma from the London  Churchill
         College for further leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
         student. He  provided  his  certificate  from  London  West  Valley
         College as proof that he has completed a course  of  study  in  the
         United Kingdom. The appellant based his further leave to remain  as
         a student application on the  basis  that  he  has  graduated  from
         London West Valley College  which  was  his  claimed  supplementary
         course. He did not provide a diploma from London Churchill  College
         which was his main course of study to support his  application  for
         further leave to remain. Therefore the supplementary course  became
         his main course and this  suggests  he  switched  colleges  without
         informing the Home Office and gaining permission to do so.

     36. The Judge came to his sustainable conclusion, after considering all
         the evidence in the appeal that the appellant's studies  at  London
         West Valley College were not supplementary to his studies at London
         Churchill College for which he had been given permission  to  study
         by the respondent. The appellant is relying  on  his  supplementary
         course for further leave to remain in this country as a student.  A
         supplementary course is defined as a course that  is  supplementary
         to his main course which was at London Churchill  College.  I  find
         that the Judge was entitled to find that the appellant's studies at
         London  West  Valley  College  hindered  his  progress  at   London
         Churchill  College.  He  was  also  entitled  to  find   that   the
         appellant's main studies switched to London West Valley College and
         they were not supplementary to  his  studies  at  London  Churchill
         College.

     37. Although I find that there is an error in the determination of  the
         first-tier Tribunal Judge by his statement that he cannot  consider
         further documents at the  hearing,  it  is  not  a  material  error
         because his conclusions on  the  evidence  are  sustainable  and  a
         differently constituted Tribunal would not find differently on  the
         evidence in this appeal. The Judge was entitled to  find  that  the
         appellant has breached the conditions attached to his study in  the
         United Kingdom and that his application was correctly refused under
         paragraph 322 of the Immigration Rules.

     38. I take into account fairness to the appellant. The case  of  Thakur
         (PBS decision-common law fairness) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 151 (IAC)
         was relied on, where reference is made to earlier guidance by  Lord
         Mustill: "(1) where an act of parliament confers an  administrative
         power there is a presumption that it would be exercised in a manner
         which is fair in all the  circumstances.   (ii)  The  standards  of
         fairness are not immutable.  They may change with  the  passage  of
         time bought in the general and in their application to decisions of
         a particular type.  (iii) The principles of fairness are not to  be
         applied by rote identically  in  every  situation.   What  fairness
         demands is dependent on the context of the decision and this is  to
         be taken into account in  all  its  aspects.   (iv)   an  essential
         feature of the context is the statute which creates the discretion,
         as regards to both its language and the  shape  of  the  legal  and
         administrative system within  which  the  decision  is  made.   (v)
         Fairness will often require that a  person  who  may  be  adversely
         affected  by  the  decision  will  have  an  opportunity  to   make
         representations on his own behalf either  before  the  decision  is
         taken with a view to producing a favourable result, or after it  is
         taken with a view to procuring  its  modification,  or  both.  (vi)
         since  the  person  affected   cannot   usually   make   worthwhile
         representations without knowing what factors may weigh against  his
         interests, fairness will often require that he is informed  of  the
         gist of the case which he has to answer".

     39. The appellant has attempted to circumvent the requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rules by embarking on a course of study at London  West
         Valley College on which he seeks to rely for  his  application  for
         further leave to remain as a student when he only had permission to
         study at London Churchill College. He did not apply for  permission
         to study at London West Valley College  and  therefore  he  was  in
         breach of the conditions of his leave to remain as  a  student.  In
         the circumstances I find that  the  respondent's  decision  is  not
         unfair to the appellant in any way.

     40. I therefore uphold the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         as not being materially erroneous in law.  As such the Secretary of
         State's appeal must be allowed.

DECISION

Appeal allowed



Signed by

Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal    Dated this 22nd day of March 2015
