
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26349/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22nd July 2014                               |On 11th Aug 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                mr Ali Wanis
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Chris Avery (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Brenells, promulgated on 6th May 2014,  following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 22nd April 2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of Ali Wanis, who subsequently  applied  for,  and
    was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Tunisia who was born on  31st  May  1989.
    He appealed against the decision of the Respondent Secretary  of  State
    dated 11th June 2013 refusing his application for leave  to  remain  in
    the UK outside the Immigration Rules.

 3. The Appellant had entered the UK  as  a  visitor,  having  married  his
    sponsoring wife, a person present and settled in the UK  and  had  then
    overstayed the  grant  of  his  visitor's  leave.   Two  children  were
    subsequently born to the Appellant  and  his  wife,  and  a  third  was
    expected.  The children are British citizens, as is the wife.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge held that it was entirely reasonable  for  the  Appellant  to
    return back to Kosovo because he was not exercising sole responsibility
    over his two children, who were living with his sponsoring wife in  any
    event.

 5.  Neither  the  sponsoring  wife  nor  the  Appellant  himself  were  in
    employment in the UK and both were at home caring for  their  children.
    Both children were healthy and neither were at school.

 6. Their welfare needs were considered in accordance with  the  Rules  and
    there was nothing necessary for the judge to consider  outside  of  the
    Rules under Article 8 ECHR rights (see paragraph 15).  The  appeal  was
    dismissed.

The Hearing

 7. At the hearing before me on 22nd July 2014, the Appellant  was  not  in
    attendance.  His legal representative, Miss E Adu-Gyamfi was  also  not
    in  attendance.   In  fact,  Mr  Avery,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent Secretary of State, handed up CID notes in relation  to  the
    Appellant which made it clear that the Appellant had left the  UK  with
    his son on 18th June 2014 and that his wife and second child  were  due
    to depart later on in the month.

 8. The entire family came to Becket RC with British  passports  and  birth
    certificates for the children and they were added as dependants  of  Mr
    Wanis on CID.  A letter of consent was signed by  the  mother  and  the
    father confirming that the mother was  content  for  her  husband,  the
    Appellant, and the child, to depart together from the  UK  without  the
    mother.  The Appellant was served with IS96,  CSIS  and  IS51D  and  he
    signed a disclaimer.  His passport is with CSRT at Gatwick.

 9. The child departing with the Appellant was a  British  citizen  and  he
    would be in possession of his own passport when he  departs,  which  he
    would have done on 19th June 2014.

10. Accordingly, since the Appellant is  no  longer  in  the  UK,  and  has
    departed to return to Tunisia, this  appeal  is  abandoned.   There  is
    nothing further for this Tribunal to decide.

Decision

11. This appeal has been abandoned by the Appellant.  There is nothing  for
    this Tribunal to decide.

12. This appeal is dismissed.

13. No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 11th August 2014
