
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26549/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided at Field House               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 4 November 2014                   |On 28 November 2014                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              SARWAR ANWAR NASR
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal issued on 29 November 2013 dismissing an appeal  by
    the applicant under the  EEA Regulations 2006  but  allowing  it  under
    article 8.  I will refer to the parties as they were before the  First-
    tier Tribunal, the applicant as the  appellant  and  the  Secretary  of
    State as the respondent.

2.   The respondent applied for permission to appeal  against  the  decision
    under article 8 on the basis that  the  judge  failed  to  have  proper
    regard to the appellant's failure to meet the requirements of the  2006
    Regulations  when  considering  the  appeal  on  article   8   grounds.
    Permission to appeal was  granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  a
    decision dated 20 December 2013.

3.   At a hearing on 12 February 2014 the  Upper  Tribunal  found  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in law in its assessment of article 8 and set
    aside the decision on the basis that the  decision  was  be  remade  in
    relation to article 8 only.

4.   The appeal was relisted for rehearing 23 June 2014 by which time  there
    had been a change of legal representatives and  counsel  appearing  for
    the appellant indicated that he was seeking to challenge  the  findings
    made by the First-tier Tribunal that the appeal could not succeed under
    the Regulations. It was agreed by consent that the  hearing  should  be
    adjourned to  enable  an  application  to  be  made  out  of  time  for
    permission to appeal.

5.   An application was duly made but permission to appeal  was  refused  by
    the First-tier Tribunal in a decision on 18 July 2014.   At  a  further
    hearing on 22 September 2014  it  transpired  that  neither  party  had
    received that decision but in any event a further application had  been
    submitted to the respondent. Both parties agreed that the appeal should
    be adjourned to allow that application to be considered  on  the  basis
    that it was anticipated  that  if  the  application  was  granted,  the
    appellant would withdraw the application.

6.   By a letter dated 24 October 2014 the appellant has confirmed that  the
    respondent has granted  him  permanent  residence  and  that  in  these
    circumstances he no longer wishes to pursue his appeal.

7.   In the light of this indication it is clear that the appeal can now  be
    decided  without  a  hearing.   However,  as  the  appeal  was  by  the
    respondent and the decision has been  set aside, the Tribunal must  re-
    make the decision.  The appellant  has  indicated  that  he  no  longer
    wishes to pursue his appeal and in these circumstances the  appropriate
    course is to record that his appeal against the original  decision  has
    been withdrawn as no issue now arises under article 8 in the  light  of
    the grant of permanent residence.

Decision

8.   For the reasons set out in the determination of Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Hall the First-tier Tribunal erred in law and  the  decision  was
    set aside. In the  light  of  the  grant  of  permanent  residence  the
    appellant has withdrawn his appeal against the original decision.



Signed                                  Date 26 November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

