
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/26313/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 August 2015                    |On 24 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               ms andrea henry
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Stephen Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Simon Harding, Counsel, instructed by J McCarthy
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State)  appeals  against  the
    decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Shamash)  allowing  the
    respondent's appeal against a decision taken on 12 June 2014 to  refuse
    to grant her leave to remain in the UK.

Introduction

 3. The respondent first entered the UK in September 1999 and submitted  an
    asylum application in March 2002. She was then encountered at Stanstead
    Airport on 1 October 2002 in possession of a British  passport  with  a
    substituted photograph. She was arrested, charged and pleaded guilty to
    possession of a  false  instrument.  She  was  sentenced  to  9  months
    imprisonment. The respondent's MP sought to assist her to remain in the
    UK but no leave to remain was granted. The respondent was  released  in
    2003 and there was no further contact  until  2010.  The  Secretary  of
    State wrote to the appellant  telling  her  that  the  Case  Resolution
    Directorate was responsible for the resolution of her  appeal.  Nothing
    happened  until  judicial  review  proceedings  were  issued  and   the
    Secretary of State agreed to consider the respondent's claim.

 4. The Secretary of State concluded that the respondent did not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules  ("the  Rules")
    because she had not been living with Mr Francis ("the  sponsor")  in  a
    relationship akin to marriage for at least two years prior to the  date
    of application. The respondent claims that the  relationship  began  in
    2009 and cohabitation began in  March  2014.  The  Secretary  of  State
    considered that there was no evidence  that  the  respondent  had  lost
    social and cultural ties to Jamaica and there was no  reason  to  grant
    leave to remain outside the Rules.

The Appeal

 5. The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing at Taylor House on 17 February 2015. She was represented by  Mr
    Harding. The First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  respondent  was  a
    credible witness who was waiting to marry and start a family until  her
    immigration status was resolved.  The  relationship  was  genuine.  The
    judge accepted the sponsor's evidence that he was born in  the  UK  and
    his job and family are in the UK. His uncle was murdered in Jamaica  in
    2008 after living in the UK for 30 years, having returned to Jamaica to
    undertake a criminal prosecution. The judge found that the case fell on
    the cusp of paragraph 276ADE in  terms  of  time  in  the  UK  and  the
    respondent had no ties with Jamaica. She  had  little  in  the  way  of
    familial ties because her brother lived in the United  States  and  her
    sister was about to join her  husband  there.  The  judge  allowed  the
    appeal under paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Rules  and  Article  8  in  the
    alternative on the basis  that  it  would  be  unjustifiably  harsh  to
    require the respondent to return to Jamaica to make an application  for
    entry clearance as a partner.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  in
    finding that the respondent met the requirements of paragraph 267ADE of
    the Rules because the appellant had not live in the UK for more than 20
    years. The judge failed to consider section 117B of the 2002  Act  when
    assessing proportionality - under section 117B(4) little weight  should
    have been attached to the relationship with the sponsor.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade on
    12 June 2015 on the basis that the grounds were arguable.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

 9. Mr Whitwell submitted that there was no express finding that  paragraph
    276ADE was met. It is difficult to find a  meaning  for  the  paragraph
    because 15 years is not on the cusp of 20 years. The respondent  had  a
    sister in Jamaica as at  the  date  of  decision.  "Unduly  harsh"  has
    nothing to do with paragraph 276ADE. The respondent was brought  up  in
    Jamaica and has a sister in Jamaica. She clearly  has  not  lost  ties.
    Delay is not relevant to paragraph 276ADE.

10. Mr Harding conceded that paragraph 26 of the decision could be clearer.
    However, the question of no ties was considered and  the  evidence  was
    that the sister was going to relocate. The judge had  to  look  at  the
    question of practical support and the degree of support and the finding
    was properly couched in the future tense. The judge considered a  range
    of issues,  addressed  herself  to  the  correct  test  and  considered
    relevant factors including her criminal offending in the UK. The  judge
    had a significant margin of appreciation and the decision was  not  one
    that no judge could make.

11. Both sides made further submissions on delay,  Article  8  and  section
    117B of the 2002 Act. I have not found it necessary to make a  decision
    about those submissions. Both parties agreed that the previous  version
    of paragraph 276ADE in force as at the date of decision applied to this
    appeal.

12. This is a somewhat unusual case in that the respondent has been waiting
    for many years for a decision in relation to her asylum  claim.  During
    that period the asylum claim fell away and the respondent was left with
    relying upon her relationship with the sponsor  and  lack  of  ties  to
    Jamaica. The core of the decision is paragraphs 26-27. I find that  the
    reference to "the cusp of  276ADE"  is  not  central  to  the  decision
    because the judge was clearly aware that the appellant had not been  in
    the UK for 20 years.

13.  The  judge  considered  and   applied   Bossadi   (paragraph   276ADE;
    suitability; ties) [2015] UKUT 00042 (IAC). The judge  found  that  the
    respondent is a healthy 37 year old woman whose brother  lived  in  the
    USA and whose sister was about to relocate to the  USA.  The  appellant
    would then have no family in Jamaica. The sponsor  would  not  live  in
    Jamaica save for a short period. The respondent would have  no  support
    in Jamaica. She had lived in the UK for 15 years and had never lived in
    Jamaica as an adult. She had no support network and little in  the  way
    of familial ties in Jamaica. I accept that all of those  findings  were
    open to the judge on the evidence.

14. I accept that paragraph 27 would have benefited from clearer separation
    of the issues that were relevant to paragraph 276ADE.  However,  it  is
    not disputed that the judge allowed the appeal under  paragraph  276ADE
    and that was clearly on the basis that the appellant had no  ties  with
    Jamaica. I find that it was open to the judge to take into account  the
    fact that the sister was about to relocate to the USA when  determining
    that issue. In practical terms, the appellant had no family  ties  with
    Jamaica because she would have no family members in  Jamaica  when  she
    was returned. I find that it is at least possible for a person to  lose
    ties with their home country after an absence of 15 years.

15. Paragraph  276ADE(vi)  of  the  Rules  (as  it  was)  states  that  the
    requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave  to  remain  on  the
    grounds of private in the UK are that as at the date of application the
    applicant was aged 18 years or above, had lived continuously in the  UK
    for less than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but had
    no ties (including social, cultural or  family)  with  the  country  to
    which he would have to go if required to leave the country. I find that
    it was open to the judge to find that the  requirements  of  that  sub-
    section were met and that the  judge's  decision  is  not  perverse  or
    irrational. All relevant factors were considered and the judge  carried
    out a rounded assessment. No material error of law arises.

16. I therefore find that the judge did not err in law  when  allowing  the
    appeal under paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Rules.  I  have  not  found  it
    necessary to consider the alternative finding under Article  8  outside
    the Rules which was  unnecessary  given  that  the  judge  had  already
    allowed the appeal in terms of private life within the Rules. Thus, the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow the respondent's  appeal  under
    the Rules did not involve the  making  of  an  error  of  law  and  its
    decision stands.

Decision

17. I dismiss the appeal of the Secretary of State.


Signed   [pic]    Date  22 September 2015

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
