
IAC-AH-KEW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26922/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 28 April 2015                         |On 14 May 2015                      |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR JONATHAN ENI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fajiwala, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr D Olawanle, Dell and Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge R A Cox  sitting  at  Sheldon  Court,
    Birmingham on 29 December 2014) allowing the claimant's appeal  against
    the decision to refuse to grant him leave to remain, and to remove  him
    as an illegal entrant to Nigeria under Section 10  of  the  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999  on  the  ground  that  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to him carrying on family life with his wife in Nigeria.  The
    First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and I  do  not
    consider that such a direction is warranted for  these  proceedings  in
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The claimant is a national of Nigeria, whose date of birth is  6  April
    1965.  He claims to have entered the UK on  20  June  2001.   The  Home
    Office has  no  record  of  him  having  entered  legally,  and  he  is
    considered to have entered by use of documentary deception.  Judge  Cox
    found this to be established on the balance of probabilities, and there
    is no cross appeal against this finding.

 3. The claimant remained in the United Kingdom  illegally  and  undetected
    until he sought to regularise his status in 2012.  In  August  2012  he
    made  an  application  for  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of   his
    relationship with his partner, Patricia  Ufuah,  a  dual  Nigerian  and
    British national  whose  date  of  birth  is  15  October  1967.   They
    subsequently got married in Oxford on 29 November 2012.   The  marriage
    certificate  states  that  Miss  Ufuah's  previous  marriage  had  been
    dissolved.

 4. Ms Ufuah, who had worked as a nurse in Nigeria, had entered the  United
    Kingdom in July 2006 as a work permit holder enabling her to work as  a
    nurse in the UK.  After completing  five  years  residence  as  a  work
    permit holder, she was granted ILR.  One year after being granted  ILR,
    she applied to be naturalised as a British citizen, and the application
    was granted.

 5. The application for leave to remain was refused with no right of appeal
    on 20 November 2013.  The claimant applied for judicial review, and the
    judicial review proceedings were compromised on the basis that the Home
    Office would reconsider his application, and give him a right of appeal
    if it was refused. On 19 March 2014 the claimant  was  served  with  an
    IS15A notice informing him of his liability to removal. A Statement  of
    Additional Grounds settled by his legal representatives, Dell  and  Co,
    on 13 May 2014 argued that he had built a family life in  the  UK  with
    his wife who was a  British  citizen.   She  was  a  registered  nurse,
    earning �20,007 per annum.  They were also making  efforts  to  have  a
    child through  fertility  treatment.   The  claimant  had  no  home  or
    resources back home in Nigeria, and his wife sustained him through  her
    work as  a  nurse  here.   The  representatives  submitted  that  these
    represented insurmountable obstacles, and the Home Office was asked  to
    treat the case with the compassion it deserved.

 6. On 17 June 2014 the Secretary of State gave her reasons for refusing to
    grant the claimant leave to remain.

 7. It was acknowledged  that  he  was  eligible  for  consideration  under
    EX.1(b), which applies where the applicant has a genuine and subsisting
    relationship with a partner who is in the UK and is a British  citizen,
    settled in the UK or in the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
    protection, and there are insurmountable obstacles to family life  with
    that partner continuing outside the UK.

 8. No evidence had been provided to show that Mrs Ufuah could  not  return
    to Nigeria.  She was born in Nigeria and had lived 39 years of her life
    there before coming to the UK.  So she had resided in Nigeria for  most
    of her life, and would be familiar with the culture,  customs  and  the
    language of Nigeria.  The fact that  she  had  regular  employment  and
    family in the UK were  clearly  not  insurmountable  obstacles  to  her
    relocating to Nigeria.  She would be able to pursue her nursing  career
    in Nigeria as she had done previously.  The appellant and  his  partner
    appeared to be healthy, and there were no age-related issues preventing
    them from relocating to Nigeria.  Fertility treatment was available for
    couples in Nigeria.  So there  were  not  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life continuing overseas.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 9. As previously stated, the claimant's appeal came before Judge Cox on 29
    December 2014.  The judge received oral evidence from the claimant  and
    his wife.  At paragraph [11] of his subsequent decision, he listed  the
    obstacles which the claimant and his wife had put forward:

       . The [claimant] has  no  remaining  family  in  Nigeria.   His  only
         surviving relative, his brother, lives in the USA.

       . The [claimant] has no home to go to in Nigeria.

       . A very low likelihood of his obtaining a job in Nigeria.

       . A similar low likelihood of his wife doing so, even as a nurse (she
         came to the UK for that very reason), and the very  fact  that  she
         would have to give up her nursing career in the UK,  her  home  and
         her way of life here.

       . Therefore, a real risk of destitution.

       . The wife's only relative in Nigeria is her 82 year old mother,  who
         lives in a small,  one  bedroom  flat  in  a  village  and  who  is
         financially dependent on her daughter, Mrs Eni.

       . Whilst fertility treatment may be available in Nigeria at  a  cost,
         in view of the above it would not be affordable in  any  event  the
         move to Nigeria would mean the termination of the current cycle  of
         treatment at its mid-point with deleterious consequences.

       . After nearly fourteen years in the UK  and  with  no  relatives  in
         Nigeria,  the  claimant  has  lost  connection  with  the  Nigerian
         community and way of life in that country.

10. The judge went on at paragraph [12] to say  that  no  point  was  taken
    against the credibility of the claimant and his wife  and  the  factual
    basis of the above propositions.  He said he would take no  such  point
    himself.  He found the claimant and his wife to be credible  witnesses.
    The judge continued in paragraph [13]:

         It seems to me that, taken cumulatively, the factors set out by way
         of bullet points above represent  'very  significant  difficulties'
         for this couple if they were required to try to shift their  family
         life together to Nigeria.  Furthermore, whilst  those  difficulties
         might, I suppose, be  overcome  in  the  fullness  of  time,  I  do
         consider they would entail very serious hardship for both of  them.
         There is also  another  significant  factor  which  should  not  be
         forgotten.  The wife is a British  citizen  and  therefore  also  a
         citizen of the European Union.

11. The judge went on to refer to Sanade and Others [2012] UKUT 0048 (IAC),
    in which it was held that as a matter of EU law where a child or indeed
    the remaining spouse is a British citizen, and therefore a  citizen  of
    the European Union, as a matter of EU law it is not possible to require
    the family as a unit to relocate outside of the European Union  or  for
    the Secretary of State to submit that it would be reasonable  for  them
    to do so.

12. The judge said he gave weight to this  consideration  in  finding  that
    there were insurmountable obstacles to the  claimant's  genuine  family
    life with his wife being continued in Nigeria. He went on to allow  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

13. A member of the Specialist Appeals  Team  settled  an  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on behalf of  the  Secretary
    of State.  He argued that the judge had materially misdirected  himself
    in law on paragraph  EX.1.   His  analysis  of  what  constituted  very
    significant obstacles was flawed.  The matters raised  represented  the
    ordinary hardships that a couple would face in relocating.   The  judge
    noted that the claimant considered himself to have lost connection with
    the Nigerian community, and the way of life of that  country,  but  did
    not recall that he had spent his formative years and  the  majority  of
    his life in Nigeria and that he had established a relationship  with  a
    partner who had ties to Nigeria.  There was no evidence to support  the
    assertion that  he  or  his  wife  would  be  unable  to  seek  gainful
    employment.   His  wife  was  a  nurse  and  there  was  a  functioning
    healthcare system in Nigeria.  It was reasonable to  suppose  that  his
    wife could seek and obtain comparable employment  upon  return.   There
    was also no evidence to suggest that the claimant would  be  unable  to
    seek employment, or that he in particular would be precluded  from  the
    job  market.   The  judge's  finding,  based  on  the  claimant's  oral
    evidence, was wholly speculative on this point.  The judge recorded the
    claimant's concerns regarding fertility treatment.   The  disparity  in
    available provision, or the costs of such provision, did not  establish
    very significant obstacles to family life continuing in  Nigeria.   The
    difference in provision should be considered as a factor, but not as  a
    determinative one.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

14. On 27 February  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  E  B  Grant  granted
    permission to appeal.  As submitted in the  grounds,  it  was  arguable
    that the judge had misdirected himself in law as  to  what  constituted
    "very serious obstacles" to the claimant and his wife continuing family
    life together in Nigeria.

The Rule 24 Response

15. On 11 March 2015 Dell and Co Solicitors submitted a Rule  24  response.
    They contended the grounds  of  appeal  amounted  to  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with the decision of the judge which he  was  entitled  to
    reach.

16. But if the judge did make an error of law (which was not admitted), the
    judge also erred in law by not considering Article 8 ECHR.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

17. Mr Olawanle mounted a stout defence of the judge's decision, but having
    listened carefully to the arguments on both sides, I was persuaded that
    an error of law was made out, and gave my reasons  for  so  finding  in
    short form.  My extended reasons for finding an error of  law  are  set
    out below.

18. I then invited submissions from the parties  as  to  how  the  decision
    should be re-made.  Both Ms Fajiwala and Mr Olawanle were content  that
    I should re-make the decision on the evidence that was before the First-
    tier Tribunal.  Ms Fajiwala  declined  to  ask  any  questions  of  the
    claimant and his wife, and  Mr  Olawanle  declined  to  adduce  further
    evidence from either of them.  Ms  Fajiwala's  stance  on  the  alleged
    difficulties which the couple would face on return to Nigeria was  that
    they were not shown to  be  well-founded,  by  reference  to  objective
    evidence.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

19.  EX.2  contains  a  definition  of  "insurmountable  obstacles."    The
    definition was inserted from 28 July  2014.   The  definition  is  that
    insurmountable obstacles means the very significant difficulties  which
    would be faced by the applicant or their partner  in  continuing  their
    family life together outside the UK and which could not be overcome  or
    would entail very serious hardship for the applicant or their  partner.
    This definition is explored in the Immigration Directorate  Instruction
    on family migration issued in April  2015.   Although  this  particular
    version of the  guidance  postdates  the  decision  under  appeal,  the
    guidance is to the same or similar effect  to  the  published  guidance
    which was in operation at the date of decision.

20. The  guidance  stresses  that  the  assessment  of  whether  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles is a different and more  stringent  assessment
    than whether it would be reasonable to expect the  applicant's  partner
    to join them overseas.  For example, a British citizen partner who  has
    lived in the UK all their life, has friends and family here, works here
    and speaks any English may not wish to uproot  and  relocate  half  way
    across the world, and it may be very difficult for them to do so, but a
    significant degree of hardship or inconvenience does not amount  to  an
    insurmountable obstacle.  ECHR Article 8 does  not  oblige  the  UK  to
    accept the choice of a couple as to which country they would prefer  to
    reside in. The guidance continues:

         Being separated from extended family members - such as might happen
         where the partner's parents and or siblings live here -  would  not
         usually amount to an  insurmountable  obstacle,  unless  there  are
         particular exceptional factors in the case.

         Material change in quality of life  for  the  applicant  and  their
         partner in the country of return, such as the type of accommodation
         they would live in, or a  reduction  in  their  income,  would  not
         usually amount to an insurmountable obstacle.

         The factors which might be relevant for consideration of whether an
         insurmountable obstacle exists include but are not limited to:

         (a)  Ability to lawfully enter and stay in another country.

         (b)  Cultural barriers.

         (c)  The impact of a mental or physical disability.

         (d)  The security situation in the country of return.

21. As submitted by Mr Olawanle, the examples given in the guidance are not
    exhaustive.  It is also necessary to bear in  mind  that  the  guidance
    does not have the same status as the Rule  itself.   But  the  guidance
    illuminates the fact that  Judge  Cox  failed  to  draw  a  distinction
    between identified difficulties which would  not  entail  very  serious
    hardship for the claimant or his partner,  as  against  any  identified
    difficulties which arguably would do so.  On the face of it, the  judge
    gives equal weight to all the identified difficulties, when objectively
    they cannot merit  equal  weight.   For  example,  the  fact  that  the
    claimant has no remaining family in Nigeria and no home of his  own  to
    go to in Nigeria, is objectively not a  significant  obstacle  for  the
    obvious reason that what  is  in  contemplation  is  him  returning  to
    Nigeria with his Nigerian born wife: therefore he would be bringing his
    most important family member with him, or she would be joining  him  in
    Nigeria soon.  As to maintenance  and  accommodation,  funding  can  be
    provided by the appellant's wife from her earnings  in  the  UK,  until
    such point as she can obtain a nursing job in Nigeria  (which  she  can
    apply for from the UK) and/or the claimant can find employment.

22. Mr Olawanle relied on the fact that the judge found that  the  claimant
    and his wife were credible witnesses.  As I explored with  the  parties
    at the hearing, there is a crucial distinction between the claimant and
    his wife having an  honest  belief  that  they  face  a  real  risk  of
    destitution on return to Nigeria, as against  a  well-founded  fear  of
    destitution.   Having  reviewed  the  judge's  manuscript   Record   of
    Proceedings, I can see no concession by the Presenting Officer that the
    evidence of  the  claimant  or  his  wife  was  well-founded.   On  the
    contrary, the implication of her line  of  cross-examination  was  that
    their expressed fears were not well-founded.  In the circumstances, the
    judge was not doing his job properly in simply adopting uncritically as
    true what were essentially unfounded assertions as to the  difficulties
    of either of them securing employment in Nigeria, and thereby facing  a
    real risk of destitution.

23. The judge also wholly ignored a number of considerations which  had  to
    be  brought  to  bear  in  order  to  determine  whether  any  of   the
    difficulties which the couple faced (and which the judge found would be
    overcome in the fullness of time) would entail "very  serious  hardship
    for both of them" in the interim.   For  example,  the  fact  that  the
    couple had  embarked  on  a  relationship,  and  had  subsequently  got
    married, in the full knowledge that the claimant  was  present  in  the
    United Kingdom unlawfully  was  highly  relevant  to  the  question  of
    whether the wife having to give up her nursing career in  the  UK,  her
    home and way of life here was  a  very  serious  hardship  in  all  the
    circumstances.  Similarly, the fact that the wife had only been in  the
    UK since 2006 herself was also relevant  to  the  question  of  whether
    having to return to Nigeria with her  Nigerian  husband  constituted  a
    very serious hardship.

24. A further error made by the judge was to place  significant  weight  on
    the Sanade  principle  as  reinforcing  his  finding  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to the claimant's family life  with  his  wife
    being continued in Nigeria.  The Sanade principle was wholly irrelevant
    to the question of insurmountable obstacles.  It merely "explained" how
    the claimant could potentially qualify for leave to  remain  under  the
    Rules. The claimant could potentially take the  benefit  of  EX.1  only
    because he was married to a British national.  The judge was  wrong  to
    approach the resolution of the question  whether  there  were  in  fact
    insurmountable obstacles to family life with a British  national  being
    carried on in Nigeria on the basis that the spouse's  British  national
    status engendered an insurmountable obstacle  per  se  to  family  life
    being continued in Nigeria, or lent significant weight to the case that
    there were insurmountable obstacles within the meaning of EX.2.

25. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    vitiated by a material error of law, such that it should be  set  aside
    and re-made.

The Re-Making of the Decision

26. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  does  not  establish  that
    there are insurmountable obstacles to the claimant carrying  on  family
    life with his Nigerian born wife in Nigeria.  Most  of  the  identified
    difficulties set out in paragraph [11] of the  decision  of  Judge  Cox
    have been discussed in my error of law decision, and  in  summary  they
    are either not shown to be objectively well-founded or, in the case  of
    the claimant's long absence from Nigeria or absence of relatives there,
    to translate into a very significant difficulty.  The  only  identified
    difficulty of any real substance is the interruption in  the  fertility
    treatment which the claimant's wife has been receiving in the UK.  I do
    not consider that the interruption of such  fertility  treatment  would
    entail very  serious  hardship  for  the  couple  as  they  can  resume
    fertility treatment in Nigeria.  The fact that they will  have  to  pay
    for it in Nigeria (as they are apparently paying for it in the  UK)  is
    not an insurmountable obstacle in the  literal  sense.   As  the  judge
    found, all the difficulties faced by  the  couple  would  be  overcome,
    including accessing fertility treatment. There is no reason to  suppose
    that the claimant's wife would not be able to  fund  further  fertility
    treatment in Nigeria once she had  secured  re-employment  there  as  a
    nurse.

27. Moreover, as at the date of the decision in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    the evidence was that the couple were undergoing  a  current  cycle  of
    treatment which was at its mid-point.  Some four  months  have  elapsed
    since the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, and no evidence  was  put
    forward to me that the current cycle of treatment is ongoing.  The last
    cycle of treatment which is documented was scheduled  to  run  for  two
    months, and it is not suggested  anywhere  in  the  evidence  that  the
    fertility treatment is continuous, as opposed to being occasional, with
    substantial breaks in between.

28. My conclusion is that the claimant has not  discharged  the  burden  of
    proving that he qualifies for leave to remain under the  Rules  on  the
    ground that there are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  him  carrying  on
    family life with his British national spouse  in  Nigeria.  I  turn  to
    consider a claim outside the Rules.

29. I drew the parties' attention to R  (On  the  Application  of  Chen)  v
    Secretary of State (Appendix FM - Chikwamba -  Temporary  Separation  -
    Proportionality) IJR 2015 UKUT  00189  (IAC),  the  decision  of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Gill.  She  held  that  Appendix  FM  does  not  include
    consideration of the question whether it would be  disproportionate  to
    expect an individual to return to his home country  to  make  an  entry
    clearance application to re-join family members in the UK. There may be
    cases in which there are no insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    being enjoyed outside the UK but where temporary separation  to  enable
    an individual to  make  an  application  for  entry  clearance  may  be
    disproportionate.  In all cases, it will be for the individual to place
    before the Secretary of State evidence that such  temporary  separation
    will interfere disproportionately with protected rights.  It  will  not
    be enough to rely solely upon the case law concerning Chikwamba v  SSHD
    [2008] UKHL 40.

30. I accept that questions 1 and 2 of the Razgar test should  be  answered
    in the claimant's favour.  It cannot be disputed that questions 3 and 4
    of the Razgar test should be answered in favour  of  the  Secretary  of
    State, and so the crucial question is whether the decision under appeal
    is proportionate,  having  regard  to  the  fact  that  there  are  not
    insurmountable obstacles to family life being enjoyed in the claimant's
    country of return.

31. Mr Olawanle on behalf of the  claimant  does  not  rely  on  any  other
    factors as militating against the  proportionality  of  the  claimant's
    return beyond those relied upon in support of the  claimant's  case  on
    EX.1.  He does not contend that it would be  disproportionate  for  the
    claimant to return to Nigeria on his own, and for his  wife  to  remain
    here and support an entry clearance application by him to return as her
    spouse.

32. I find that the claimant and his wife face a  reasonable  choice.   The
    reasonable choice is between re-settling in Nigeria  together,  or  the
    claimant going back on his own to Nigeria and making an application for
    entry clearance.  As he has an adverse immigration history, the  public
    interest is served, and indeed promoted,  by  an  immigration  offender
    such as the appellant  returning  to  his  home  country  in  order  to
    regularise his status.

33. I have had regard to the public  interest  considerations  set  out  in
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act as amended by the Immigration Act 2014.  I
    consider that the factors which are in the claimant's favour,  such  as
    his ability to speak English, are outweighed by factors which  militate
    in favour of his removal, in particular his illegal presence  here.   I
    consider that the decision appealed against  is  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate aim sought to be achieved, namely the  maintenance  of  firm
    and effective immigration controls.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: this appeal  is  dismissed  under  the  Rules  and  also  under
Article 8 ECHR.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 28 April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

