
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/26537/2014
                                                               IA/26544/2014
                                                               IA/26546/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 February 2016                  |On 25 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                   MRS UFUOMA OGBUROGHO - first appellant
                   MR WILSON OGBUROGHO - second appellant
                           [D O] - third appellant
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Ikie, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first and second appellants are husband  and  wife  and  the  third
    appellant is their son born on 5  June  2006.   They  appealed  against
    decisions made by the respondent on 30 June 2014  to  refuse  to  grant
    leave to  remain  on  Article  8  human  rights  grounds  and  to  give
    directions for removal.

 2. Their immigration history was that  the  first  appellant  entered  the
    United Kingdom in December 2004  as  a  visitor  and  overstayed.   The
    second appellant entered the United Kingdom  in  January  2003.   Their
    child, the third appellant, was born in the United Kingdom  on  5  June
    2006.  The application to remain on human rights grounds was made on  5
    June 2013 and initially refused on 14 August 2013.  However,  following
    a consent order within judicial review proceedings the application  was
    reconsidered by the respondent and refused on 30 June 2014.

 3. The appellants appealed those decisions  and  following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House, and in a decision promulgated on 26 March 2015, Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Colvin dismissed their appeals.

 4. The appellants sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchinson on 18 December  2015.   Her
    reasons for so granting were:-

         "1.  The Appellants seek permission in time  to  appeal  against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Colvin) promulgated
             on 26 March, 2015 whereby it dismissed the Appellants'  appeal
             against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  refuse  the
             Appellants leave to remain on the basis of their  private  and
             family lives inside and outside the Immigration Rules in terms
             of paragraph 276ADE, Appendix FM or under Article 8 of ECHR.

         2.   It is arguable that the Judge erred  in  law  by  misdirecting
             himself in not considering the relevant test of reasonableness
             in relation to the third Appellant under paragraph  276ADE(iv)
             of the Immigration Rules separately from  Section  117B(6)  of
             the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  which  only
             come  into  play  when  considering  the  Appellants'  appeals
             outside the Immigration Rules in  relation  to  Article  8  of
             ECHR"

 5. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 6. Mr Ikie argued that the judge misdirected herself in law  at  paragraph
    24 of her decision in treating "the test of reasonableness" included in
    paragraph 276ADE(iv) as the same as that  in  Section  117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Secondly that the  judge
    "would have allowed the appeal had she appreciated the  true  scope  of
    Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act having concluded at paragraph 22 of her
    decision "that in principle it would be in Donald's best  interests  to
    remain in the UK on the grounds that he is socially  and  educationally
    integrated ... where he has a significant chance of pursuing his skills
    as a young professionally trained footballer in the  future".   Thirdly
    the judge fell into error by failing to appreciate and  direct  herself
    that the cases she cited and relied upon to guide herself never had the
    benefit "of the impact of the provisions of the said Section 117B(6) of
    the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   Had  the  judge
    appreciated the scope of the said Section, she  would  have  approached
    her task differently".  Fourthly she failed to resolve a material  fact
    in issue and but for this she would  have  been  "bound  to  allow  the
    appellants' appeal".  It was part of the appellants' appeal  that  they
    were  being  discriminated  against  on  Article  14  ECHR  grounds  as
    contended  within  the  skeleton  argument  placed  before  the  judge.
    Finally the judge erred by  failing  to  accept  all  the  reasons  put
    forward within the appellants' representative's skeleton  argument  for
    allowing the appeal.

 7. Mr Duffy argued  that  contrary  to  the  appellants'  representative's
    submissions the judge directed herself appropriately  and  no  material
    error has been identified within  her  decision.   The  judge  properly
    considered whether it was reasonable in terms of  paragraph  276ADE  to
    expect the third appellant to leave the United Kingdom.  She  concluded
    that it would not be unreasonable to expect him to do so in the company
    of his parents, the first and second appellants.  In so doing the judge
    took into account "the relevant factors and relevant case  law".   This
    is a well reasoned decision and if there is  any  error  within  it  it
    cannot be said to be material.

 8. In coming to my decision  regarding  this  appeal  I  have  taken  into
    account the appellants' further case law bundle which was handed up  to
    me at the hearing.  It comprises of Bossade (Section  117A-D  -  Inter-
    relationship with Rules) UKUT 00415,  Treebhawon  and  Others  (Section
    117B(6) [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC) and Amin, R (on the application  of)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department) [2014] EWHC 2322.

 9. The nub of the respondent's case in the appeal heard  by  Judge  Colvin
    was that whilst it was accepted that the first  and  second  appellants
    were in a genuine and subsisting relationship their applications failed
    under the partner route under Appendix FM as they  do  not  fulfil  the
    eligibility requirements under E-LTRP.1.2.  Further they failed to meet
    the requirements for leave to remain as a parent under the  eligibility
    routes E-LTRPT.2.2 and 2.3.  The first and second  appellants  did  not
    meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules  as
    they have not been in the United Kingdom for twenty years  and  it  was
    not accepted that they had lost ties to their home country of  Nigeria.
    The third appellant does not meet the requirements for leave to  remain
    as a child under Appendix FM as both  his  parents  have  been  refused
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  Even though the third appellant
    has lived continuously in the United Kingdom for at least  seven  years
    and is under the age of 18, it is reasonable to expect him to return to
    Nigeria with both of his parents and as a family unit they can help him
    adjust  to  that  change  and  provide   him   with   maintenance   and
    accommodation.  Having lived with his parents  who  are  both  Nigerian
    citizens and having lived in the  United  Kingdom  which  is  a  multi-
    cultural society with a Nigerian diaspora, it was not accepted that  he
    had lost ties to his home country. As to Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 the respondent considered that the
    third appellant had lived all his life in the United Kingdom and was at
    the time of hearing 8 years of age.  However, he would be returning  to
    Nigeria  with  his  parents  to  support  him  and  where  there  is  a
    functioning education system.  There was no evidence to  indicate  that
    his parents would be unable to maintain him in  Nigeria  or  that  they
    would be unable to provide for his safety and welfare.

10. The nub of the appellants' case was that the first appellant overstayed
    a visitor's visa  after  arriving  in  December  2004  and  the  second
    appellant, her husband was already in the United Kingdom having entered
    in January of 2003.  The third appellant was born in the United Kingdom
    and has attended both nursery and primary school.  By February 2015  he
    would have lived continuously in the United Kingdom for eight years and
    eight months.  He is a talented footballer and has  been  part  of  his
    school's team since Year 2.  He was  also  chosen  to  compete  at  the
    Millwall Football Club and more recently at the Crystal Palace Football
    Club.  He is very good at mathematics and has been selected for a group
    of talented pupils.  His life is in the United Kingdom.

11. It was agreed at the hearing before Judge Colvin  that  the  first  and
    second appellants could not qualify to come within paragraph 276ADE  or
    Appendix FM in terms of their private or family  life.   Therefore  the
    issue in the case centred principally upon  the  circumstances  of  the
    third appellant who had been born in the  United  Kingdom.   The  judge
    states at paragraph 17 of her decision:-

         "17. ... The consideration of  Donald's  case  is  under  paragraph
             276ADE as to his private life: he is under the age of 18 years
             and has lived in the UK for at least 7 years and it would  not
             be reasonable to expect him to leave the UK.  The same test is
             whether it would be reasonable to expect Donald to  leave  the
             UK as a 'qualifying child' is set out  in  s.117B(6).   It  is
             inherent in assessing this test of reasonableness to  consider
             the best interests of the child  as  a  primary  consideration
             although not paramount."

12. The judge then analysed the factual matrix within the  context  of  not
    just the Immigration Rules and Section 117 of the  2002  Act  but  also
    relevant case law including EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874
    and Azimi-Moayed (decisions affecting children; onward appeals)  [2013]
    UKUT 001.  The judge made factual findings in  relation  to  all  three
    appellants and under the Immigration  Rules  carried  out  a  balancing
    exercise in relation to Article 8.  She concluded that the  appellants'
    appeals could not succeed and having reached such a decision under  the
    Immigration Rules stated at paragraph 26 of her decision that:-

         "26. In line with a series of recent  case  decisions,  it  is  not
             necessary to conduct a separate examination of  Article  8  of
             the Rules when all  the  considerations  have  been  addressed
             within the Rules.  I consider that this is  the  situation  in
             this appeal and  therefore  have  not  undertaken  a  separate
             Article 8 assessment more generally."

13. I appreciate that the Immigration Rules in relation to  Article  8  are
    not, unlike those relating to deportation, a complete  code.   It  does
    not follow, as Mr Ikie argued, that Section 117B(6)(b) is an issue that
    has to be considered as distinct from a consideration of the same claim
    under the Immigration Rules themselves.  The test within each very much
    overlap.  The provisions of Section 117 of the 2002 Act apply where the
    Tribunal is required to consider whether a decision breaches Article  8
    rights.  In this appeal the question posed by Section  117B(6)  is  the
    same question posed in relation to the  third  appellant  by  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv).  What the judge has done is, quite rightly, answered  it
    in the proper context of whether it was reasonable to expect the  third
    appellant to follow his parents to their country of  origin.   She  has
    properly applied EV (Philippines).  There was no necessity for  her  to
    deal with the question or indeed answer it more than once.   The  judge
    here was weighing all factors for and  against  the  third  appellant's
    removal and in so doing  she  has  taken  into  account  not  just  the
    Immigration Rules themselves but also the provisions of Section 117  of
    the 2002 Act.  As such she cannot be criticised.

14. Ground 2 amounts to no more  than  a  misconceived  argument  with  the
    ultimate findings of the judge who has taken proper account of relevant
    case law in coming to her decision.

15. She did not  fall  into  error  in  terms  of  her  assessment  of  the
    importance and weight of the period of time in excess  of  seven  years
    that the third appellant has spent in  the  United  Kingdom.   She  has
    properly applied the authority of Azimi-Moayed.

16. As to ground 4 and the Article 14 issue  this  is  dealt  with  in  the
    skeleton argument that was put before the judge at paragraph  23  which
    states:-

         "23.  In  any  event,  it  would  be  inimical   to   justice   and
             discriminatory in Article 14 sense to grant leave to remain to
             family units on account of the presence of qualifying children
             in their family units and decline to do  the  same  for  these
             appellants."

    The skeleton argument then goes on to  cite  other  families  who  have
    benefitted from a qualifying child/children.   It  is  totally  unclear
    where the names and Home Office references have come  from  and  I  can
    only assume that  they  are  cases  in  which  those  representing  the
    appellants have also been involved.  The outcome of those  appeals  has
    no bearing whatsoever on this  case.   It  is  a  flawed  argument  put
    forward by those representing the appellants.  Even if  the  judge  has
    not directly dealt  with  this  issue  within  her  decision  it  would
    certainly not amount to a material error and would have  no  effect  on
    the outcome at all.

17. This is a decision where the judge has given sustainable reasons  which
    were open to her on the evidence for coming to the conclusions that she
    did.  The grounds are no more than a dispute with the decision  of  the
    judge who was entitled to come to the conclusion that she has.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 22 February 2016.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
