
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/26601/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17th November 2015                |On 20th November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR FAISAL MAQSOOD
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Biggs, counsel instructed by M-R Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

 1. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 28th December  1986.   On
    6th August 2013, whilst present in the UK as a Tier 4 (general) student
    migrant, he applied for an EEA residence card as the family  member  of
    Tauseef Ahmed (his maternal uncle who is a Portuguese national born  on
    11th March 1969) as he says he is and has been dependent upon  him  and
    currently lives as part of his household. The application  was  refused
    on 12th June 2014. He appealed on 24th June 2014.  His  appeal  against
    the decision was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge David  C  Clapham
    in a determination promulgated on the 11th December 2014.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  V
    A Osborne on the basis that it was arguable that the  First-tier  judge
    had erred in law. The grant of permission is confusing but  it  appears
    that the concern that Judge  Osborne  had  was  it  was  arguable  that
    insufficient regard was had to the  Immigration  Service  interview  in
    determining whether the appellant was dependent on  his  uncle/  formed
    part of his household.

 3. The matter came before me to determine whether the First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law

Submissions

 4. The grounds of appeal raised four issues but Mr Duffy did not rely upon
    any save for the fourth one. This set out that it was an error  of  law
    for the First-tier Tribuanl to have allowed the appeal outright. If the
    appeal was to be allowed in accordance with  Regulation  17(4)  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 (henceforth the EEA Regulations)  it
    could only be allowed as not in accordance with the law  as  discretion
    to issue a residence permit had not yet been exercised by the Secretary
    of State. He submitted that in fact that all  the  Secretary  of  State
    would do was to carry out a  criminal  record  check  with  the  Police
    National Computer, and if this was clear that a residence permit  would
    be granted.

 5. Mr Biggs argued that the appeal could  not  succeed  as  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal should be seen as one solely based on  the  second
    ground which Mr Duffy had conceded was not an error of law as  it  went
    to the weight given to evidence which was properly  a  matter  for  the
    judge. He argued that the grant had been properly limited in accordance
    with Ferrer (limited appeal grounds; Alvi) [2012] UKUT  00304.  It  was
    very clear that Judge Osborne granting permission had refused to make a
    grant on the fourth ground  concerning  Regulation  17(4)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations.

 6. In the alternative, if the grant of permission was not limited  as  set
    out above, the appeal could not succeed as the Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer had not argued that discretion was in issue before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. The submissions of the Presenting Officer were  set  out
    at paragraph 31 of the decision, and  (like  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter) did not include a submission that if there was  dependency  the
    Secretary of State put discretion in issue so the appeal should only be
    allowed to the extent that discretion to issue a  residence  permit  on
    the found dependency remained extant before the Secretary of State. The
    lack of this prior submission meant that the Secretary of  State  could
    not rely upon the argument at the appeal stage.

 7. Mr Duffy raised the possibility that the decision of Judge Clapham  was
    limited in allowing the appeal to a decision that there was  dependency
    under Regulation 8 (2) of the EEA Regulations, and thus that there  was
    no error as the decision had the meaning he argued for in any case.

Conclusions - Error of Law

 8. The grant of permission to appeal was most unfortunately expressed, and
    did not meet the proper standards of judicial clarity. In  relation  to
    the second ground Judge VA Osborne both said "any arguable error of law
    is not material" and in his concluding  paragraph  that  there  was  an
    arguable "error of law with regard to the weight" that should have been
    attached  to  the  interview  with  the  appellant  which  meant   that
    permission to appeal should be granted. Mr Duffy rightly accepted  that
    questions of weight to be given to evidence were ones  for  the  judge,
    and that this ground could not be pursued as an error of law.

 9. It is clear that in order to grant permission on limited  grounds  this
    must be made "abundantly  plain"  in  the  decision  on  permission  to
    appeal, and that the Tribunal staff must send out  the  proper  notices
    informing the applicant of the right to apply to the Upper Tribunal for
    permission to appeal on the  grounds  on  which  he  or  she  has  been
    unsuccessful  in  the  application  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (see
    conclusion (2) of head note in Ferrer (limited  appeal  grounds;  Alvi)
    [2012] UKUT 00304.) It was quite clear  that  Judge  V  A  Osborne  had
    discounted giving permission to appeal on grounds one, three  and  four
    (the one which Mr Duffy wished to pursue relating to  Regulation  17(4)
    of the EEA Regulations and to the extent to which the appeal  could  be
    allowed), but  it  is  also  quite  clear  that  the  relevant  notices
    regarding options to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  for  permission  on
    these grounds were not provided to the Secretary of State.

10. Ultimately I find that the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  was  not
    limited, taking all matters into consideration.  However I do not  find
    that the First-tier Tribunal has erred in law.

11. I find that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  limited  to
    allowing the appeal under Regulation 8(2) of the EEA  Regulations.  The
    decision does not do anything further than find that the  claimant  was
    and is dependent on his  uncle,  a  Portuguese  citizen,  and  is  also
    currently part of his household. There is no statement in the  decision
    that the claimant is thereby  automatically  entitled  to  a  residence
    permit. I am entitled to assume that the First-tier Tribunal understood
    that in accordance with Regulation 17(4) of the EEA Regulations and  YB
    (EEA reg 17(4) - proper approach) Ivory Coast [2008] UKAIT  00062  that
    it remained for the Secretary of State to  exercise  discretion  as  to
    whether to issue a residence permit in the context of  the  finding  of
    the claimant being able to meet Regulation 8(2) of the EEA Regulations.



12. I would however urge that in  the  future  First-tier  Tribunal  judges
    appreciate that it  is  clearer  and  definitely  preferable  to  allow
    appeals that find  the  appellant  qualifies  as  an  "extended  family
    member", on the basis that the decision is not in accordance  with  the
    law so that it is absolutely clear  that  the  matter  returns  to  the
    Secretary of State to consider the exercise of discretion  to  issue  a
    residence permit  in  accordance  with  Regulation  17(4)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations. If discretion is not exercised in his or her  favour  such
    an appellant will of course be entitled to  a  further  appeal  against
    that decision.

    Decision:

 1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

 2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal  is  upheld
    but is clarified in its affect above.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley   Date: 17th November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

