
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26791/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23rd November 2016                |On 24th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           BENJAMIN ABIODUN KAYODE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Singh (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr S M Khan (SMK Solicitors)


                             NOTICE OF DECISION

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary  of  State  in
    relation  to  a  Decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Judge  Ohbi,
    promulgated on 1st March 2016 by  which  she  allowed  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse to issue him
    with a residence card as the family member (spouse) of an EEA national.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria married to an EEA national.  The
    Secretary of State refused the application believing this to be a  sham
    marriage.

 3. Judge Obhi heard evidence from the Appellant and  from  his  wife.  The
    Judge considered in some detail the question of the genuineness of  the
    marriage and her deliberations with regard to that start  at  paragraph
    27 and conclude at paragraph 32 where she finds  it  to  be  a  genuine
    marriage. She then allowed the appeal.

 4. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal and in fact  it
    was I who granted  permission.  The  "killer"  point  on  Secretary  of
    State's behalf is that the appellant had not produced a valid  passport
    and in accordance with Regulation 26 of the EEA  regulations  therefore
    had no right of appeal.  That  was  the  basis  upon  which  I  granted
    permission to appeal.

 5. Mr Khan sought to argue that Regulation 26 is discretionary because  it
    states that a person "may" not appeal under the Regulations  unless  he
    produces a passport. I disagree with his submission that this creates a
    discretion upon the Secretary of State whether or not to confer a right
    of appeal. The wording is quite clear that a person  has  no  right  of
    appeal unless they produce a passport.  Thus  the  first-tier  Tribunal
    made a material error of law in hearing and deciding the appeal at  all
    when it had no jurisdiction to do so.  Accordingly,  the  Decision  and
    Reasons must be set aside in its entirety and the appeal dismissed  for
    want of jurisdiction.

 6. Mr Khan requested that I should indicate that there is no error in  the
    actual findings made by the Judge in relation  to  the  nature  of  the
    marriage. Mr Singh had no objection to me making that indication and  I
    do so.



Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed and in  re-
deciding the appeal it is dismissed for want of jurisdiction.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 23rd November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

