
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26761/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd December 2015                        |On 6th May 2016               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                               MR. BILAL FAWAZ
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss E Daykin instructed by KQ Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell,  Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1.  This is an appeal against  a  decision  and  reasons  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Andrew promulgated on  15th  May  2015  in  which  she
       dismissed an appeal against a decision made by the Secretary of State
       on 16th June 2014, to refuse to grant appellant leave  to  remain  in
       the UK and to give directions under s10 of the Immigration and Asylum
       Act 1999 for removal of the appellant from the UK.


 BACKGROUND


    2. The appellant claimed to be stateless but has been  found  to  be  a
       Nigerian national.  He claims to have entered  the  UK  in  February
       2004 accompanied by his uncle, who then abandoned him with a  family
       here.  He subsequently went  into  the  care  of  Hillingdon  Social
       Services and he claimed asylum on  15th  May  2004.  His  claim  was
       refused but the appellant was granted discretionary leave until  2nd
       April 2006. He did not appeal against  the  refusal  of  the  asylum
       claim. He has since made a number of further applications for  leave
       to remain in the UK.


    3. On 4th June 2010, the respondent refused an  application  to  extend
       the appellant's leave, due to his criminality.   An  appeal  against
       that refusal was dismissed for the reasons set out in  determination
       promulgated by Immigration Judge Miller on 16th  August  2010.   The
       appellant then made an application  for  leave  to  remain  on  17th
       September 2010 under the ECHR.


    4. On 12th July 2012 he made application for leave  to  remain  as  the
       spouse of a settled person. This was refused on 3rd March 2012, with
       no right of appeal.


    5. It was the appellant's application for further leave  to  remain  in
       the UK made in September 2010, that gave rise  to  the  respondent's
       decision of 16th June 2014 and the appeal before First-tier Tribunal
       Judge Andrew.


    6. In her decision of 16th  June  2014,  the  respondent  set  out  the
       appellant's immigration history.  She noted that in order to qualify
       for a period of Leave to Remain in the United Kingdom the applicant,
       under the Immigration Rules introduced on 9th July 2012, must  first
       show a level of suitability and good character.  The decision letter
       refers to the suitability requirements and the respondent considered
       that the application fell for refusal under the suitability  grounds
       as outlined in the Immigration Rules,  and  specifically,  S-LTR.1.5
       and S-LTR.1.6.


    7. In refusing the application, the respondent noted that the appellant
       had received 15 convictions for 27 offences between 12th April  2007
       and 28th October 2013.   These  include  8  drugs  offences,  theft,
       driving without  a  licence,  driving  whilst  intoxicated,  driving
       without  insurance,  failing  to  provide  a  specimen,  failing  to
       surrender to custody,  failing  to  comply  with  community  orders,
       breaching conditional discharges  and  resisting  or  obstructing  a
       constable.   The respondent concluded that the  appellant  has  been
       identified as an  individual  whose  presence  in  the  UK,  is  not
       considered to be conducive to the public good.  The respondent  also
       concluded that the presence of  the  appellant  in  the  UK  is  not
       conducive to the public good because  his  conduct,  character,  and
       associations make it undesirable to allow him to remain in the UK.


 The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew


    8. The Judge set out the background at paragraphs [1]  to  [12]  of  her
       decision.  At paragraph [21]  she  found  that  the  appellant  is  a
       Nigerian citizen for the reasons set out in the preceding  paragraphs
       of her decision.


    9. At paragraphs [24] to [42] of her decision, the Judge  considered  at
       some length, the appellant's offending.  At paragraphs [24] and  [25]
       she noted the offences for which the appellant had been convicted  or
       cautioned, and which were not therefore in issue. She states:


          "24.     The Appellant accepts that he  has,  in  the  past,  been
             convicted of a number of offences. These are detailed  in  the
             PNC report which is at pages  Ql  to  Q8  of  the  Appellant's
             Bundle.   There are a total of 15 convictions for 27 offences:
             eight offences relating  [sic]  to  Police/Courts/Prisons,   8
             drug  offences,   8   miscellaneous  offences  and  one   non-
             recordable offence. They are referred to in further detail  in
             the statement of PC Macdonald  at  pages  Tl  to  T23  of  the
             Respondent's Bundle. I accept that  the  Appellant  has  never
             been convicted of supply of drugs and there is  no  suggestion
             that any of his convictions were gang related.       I  accept
             that the offences of which the Appellant  has  been  convicted
             are at the lesser scale of  criminal  offending.    This  does
             not, however, take away from the fact  that  any  offence,  in
             particular those relating to drugs, are  serious  and  show  a
             complete lack of respect for the criminal laws of the UK.


          25. In  addition  to  the  convictions  the  Appellant  has  three
             cautions, one in 2005,  one  in  2006  and  one  in  2007  for
             possession of cannabis."


   10. At paragraphs [26] to [34], the Judge considered three  incidents  in
       which the Police took no further action and which did  not  therefore
       result in a criminal conviction.   The  respondent's  case  was  that
       notwithstanding  the  lack  of  a  criminal  conviction,  there   was
       sufficient evidence before the Tribunal to establish the  appellant's
       involvement in those three incidents to a civil standard.  The  Judge
       considered each of those three incidents in turn, and found that  the
       appellant had been involved in one, but could not be satisfied on the
       evidence before her, even on the civil standard, that  the  appellant
       was culpable in respect of the other two.


   11. At paragraphs [28] to [31], the Judge considered  the  first  of  the
       three incidents and states:


             "28. The first non-conviction matter of which I was  asked  to
             find the Appellant was involved, to  the  civil  standard,  is
             that referred to in PC Macdonald's statement at NC/4  on  27th
             March 2010.  It refers to an incident  outside  a  night  club
             involving the Appellant who is seen to kick and punch  another
             and stamp on his head. This followed an earlier incident  when
             the Appellant was initially attacked by three males.  What  is
             apparent from the CRIS report is that the Appellant ran  after
             the victim (and others) before  delivering  the  assault.  The
             victim declined to provide a statement as did other  witnesses
             and no further action was taken.  The  Appellant  was  charged
             with possession of cannabis but this charge was dismissed.


             29.  During the course of his evidence  to  me  the  Appellant
             admitted the assault that had taken place. He said: 'I put  my
             hands up - but it was not me. I was assaulted they ran away  -
             I chased them. The CCTV showed everything. I did not stamp  on
             his head with immense energy. I punched him. I stamped on him.
             It was my self defence. He could have got up and beat  me  up.
             He could have got a knife and stabbed me'.


             30.  I am asked by  the  Appellant's  representative,  in  his
             submissions, to  find  that  there  is  insufficient  evidence
             before me to show that the  Appellant's  culpability  in  this
             offence was anything more than self defence.


             31.  I am unable to accept this:  during  the  course  of  the
             hearing the Appellant admitted  that  he  had  run  after  his
             victim: he admitted punching him and  stamping  on  his  head.
             There was no necessity for the  Appellant  to  run  after  his
             victim:  this  was  a  deliberate  decision   on   his   part.
             Accordingly, and on his own admission I am satisfied that this
             offence is proved, to the civil standard."


   12. Having considered  the  evidence  as  to  the  appellant's  offending
       behaviour, the Judge considered, at  paragraphs  [35]  to  [37],  the
       psychiatric report relied upon by the appellant.  At paragraph  [37],
       she found that she could place little weight upon the  report.    The
       Judge also considered the appellant's offending between July 2010 and
       October 2013, at paragraphs [38] to [41] of her decision,  and  noted
       that the appellant has no convictions  since  that  of  28th  October
       2013.  At paragraph [41] of her decision, the Judge stated:


             "41. .... I accept that he has no convictions  since  that  on
             28th October 2013 when he  pleaded  guilty  to  possession  of
             Class A drugs.  This is a year and a  half  ago.   However,  I
             have also to bear in mind that when he  last  appeared  before
             the Tribunal the Appellant had last committed  an  offence  in
             Summer 2009, a year previously.   However, very shortly  after
             the hearing he went on to  commit  a  further  offence.  I  am
             unable to be satisfied, on the evidence before  me,  that  the
             Appellant has, indeed,  left  his  offending  behind  him.  In
             saying this I have taken full note of  the  statements/letters
             from Councillor Zaffar Van Kalwala and Stephen Graham. I  have
             also taken into account the copy photographs handed to  me  at
             the hearing."


   13. At paragraph [43], the Judge found that she was  satisfied  that  the
       respondent has discharged the burden of proving that the  appellant's
       presence is not conducive to the public good.


   14. The Judge went on at paragraphs [44]  to  [58]  of  her  decision  to
       consider the appellant's Article 8 claim both within, and outwith the
       immigration  rules.   She  was   not   satisfied   that   there   are
       insurmountable obstacles to the appellant's  family  life  continuing
       outside the UK for the reasons set out at paragraphs [45] to [47]  of
       her decision.  The appeal under the Immigration Rules  was  therefore
       dismissed.  At paragraphs [50] to [58] of  her  decision,  the  Judge
       considered the Article 8 claim outwith  the  Immigration  Rules  and,
       again, dismissed the appeal.


The Grounds of Appeal before me


   15. The  appellant  initially  advanced  five  grounds  of  appeal,  but
       following an initial refusal of permission to appeal by  the  First-
       tier Tribunal, the appellant abandoned the first ground, challenging
       the  Judge's  finding  in  relation  to  the  first  of  the   'non-
       convictions'.   Permission to appeal on what was the third ground of
       appeal, relating to the  Judge's  failure  to  properly  consider  a
       letter from Nigeria House and the circumstances in which that letter
       came into being, was refused by Upper Tribunal Judge  Blum  on  21st
       September 2015.


   16. Upper Tribunal Judge Blum granted  permission  to  appeal  on  three
       remaining grounds.  The matter comes before me to  consider  whether
       or not the decision  of  the  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
       material error of law, and if the decision is set aside, to  re-make
       the decision if appropriate.


   17. At the hearing before me, Miss Daykin relied upon the three  grounds
       upon which permission to appeal has been granted by  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Blum.


   18. The first ground advanced by the appellant concerns the adequacy  of
       the Judge's assessment that the appellant's presence in  the  UK  is
       not conducive to the public good.  The  appellant  submits  that  in
       considering whether the appellant's  presence  in  the  UK  was  not
       conducive to the public good, the judge carried out  her  assessment
       without  reference  to  (i)  the  particular   paragraphs   of   the
       immigration  rules  upon  which  the  respondent   had   based   her
       assessment, (ii)  the guidance which  was  supposed  to  inform  the
       assessment under those paragraphs and (iii)  the submissions made on
       behalf of the appellant in that respect.


   19. Miss Daykin submits that the Judge failed  to  have  regard  to  the
       respondent's published policy set out in  the  'Modernised  Guidance
       'General grounds for refusal Section 1 - Version  20'  as  in  force
       from 6th January 2015, and Chapter 13 of the Immigration Directorate
       Instructions.  Both had been referred to in the appellant's skeleton
       argument (at Section E) that was before the Judge.  She  was  unable
       to identify anything in the guidance that would weigh in  favour  of
       the appellant and which the  appellant  would  say,  the  Judge  had
       specifically disregarded.


   20. Second, in considering the ability of  the  appellant's  partner  to
       live in Nigeria, the  Judge,  irrationally,  found  that  there  was
       simply a 'wish' on the part of the appellant's wife  not  to  go  to
       Nigeria.  The appellant submits that on a rational  reading  of  the
       travel advice issued by the Foreign  Office,  the  appellant's  wife
       would not be safe in Nigeria.  Before me, Miss  Daykin  referred  to
       the guidance issued by the Foreign Office and she submits  that  the
       guidance plainly advises against all  travel  to  certain  areas  of
       Nigeria. She was unable to point to  anything  within  the  guidance
       that advises against any travel to Lagos.


   21. Third, the Judge failed to have regard to the significant delays  on
       the part of the respondent and those delays  were  relevant  to  the
       assessment of proportionality under Article 8 ECHR.   The  appellant
       submits that the Judge fails to make any reference to the  delay  of
       more than four years in resolving the  appellant's  application  for
       humanitarian  protection,  and  the  further  four-year   delay   in
       considering his application for leave to remain in  the  UK.  Before
       me, Miss  Daykin  submits  that  the  application  for  humanitarian
       protection made by the appellant in  2006  was  not  resolved  until
       2010, a delay or four years. Thereafter the application made by  the
       appellant in September 2010 was not resolved until February 2014,  a
       further significant delay of almost four years. She submits that the
       judge failed to have regard to the delay in considering whether  the
       removal of the  appellant  from  the  UK  is  proportionate  to  the
       legitimate aim sought to be achieved.


   22. The respondent has filed a Rule 24 response dated 13th October  2015
       that was adopted by  Mr  Whitwell.     The  respondent  opposes  the
       appeal and Mr Whitwell submits that there can be no doubt  that  the
       Judge found that the appellant is a persistent offender who shows  a
       particular disregard for the law.  He submits that it  was  open  to
       the Judge, following a careful consideration  of  the  evidence,  to
       find that the respondent has discharged the burden of  proving  that
       the appellant's presence in the UK is not conducive  to  the  public
       good.   He submits that the appellant's reliance upon the failure of
       the Judge to make specific reference to the guidance, is an argument
       as to form over substance, because the Judge has  taken  account  of
       relevant factors such as  the  number  of  offences  committed,  the
       seriousness of the offences, the timescale  and  frequency  and  any
       steps taken by the appellant to address the cause of the  offending.
       Mr. Whitwell submits that the Judge has considered the  guidance  in
       substance.


   23. Mr. Whitwell refers to  paragraph  [15]  of  the  decision  and  the
       conflicting information as to whether  the  appellant  was  born  in
       Lagos or Minna.   He submits that whether the appellant  is  removed
       to Lagos or Minna, the advice issued by the Foreign Office is simply
       "See our travel advice before travelling".  He submits that it is in
       that context that the Judge was required to consider  whether  there
       are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  appellant's   family   life
       continuing outside United Kingdom. He submits that the Judge plainly
       had regard to the Foreign Office advice at  paragraph  [46]  of  her
       decision and at paragraph [57], carefully  considered  the  evidence
       given by the appellant's wife in reaching her decision.


   24. Finally, Mr. Whitwell submits  that  whilst  there  have  been  some
       delays in reaching a  decision  on  the  applications  made  by  the
       appellant, the question of delay was not one that was advanced  with
       any vigor before the Judge and it  is  unsurprising  therefore  that
       there is no reference to it in the decision of  the  Tribunal.   Mr.
       Whitwell submits that in any event, the appellant did not enjoy  any
       valid leave to remain in the UK and the only expectation that he and
       his partner can have had, is that the appellant's immigration status
       was precarious, and the  appellant  is  someone  who  might  not  be
       permitted to remain in the UK.   He submits that the  appellant  and
       his partner entered into, and developed their  relationship  knowing
       of that. The appellant had made a  number  of  applications  all  of
       which had been refused.


 Discussion


   25. It is useful  to  begin  by  setting  out  the  relevant  suitability
       requirements that are set out in the Immigration Rules.


              Section S-LTR: Suitability-leave to remain


             S-LTR.1.1. The applicant will  be  refused  limited  leave  to
             remain on grounds of  suitability  if  any  of  paragraphs  S-
             LTR.1.2. to 1.7. apply.


              ....


              S-LTR.1.5. The presence of the applicant in  the  UK  is  not
             conducive to the public good  because,  in  the  view  of  the
             Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm or
             they  are  a  persistent  offender  who  shows  a   particular
             disregard for the law.


             S-LTR.1.6. The presence of the applicant  in  the  UK  is  not
             conducive to the public good because their conduct  (including
             convictions which do not fall within paragraphs S-LTR.1.3.  to
             1.5.), character, associations,  or  other  reasons,  make  it
             undesirable to allow them to remain in the UK.


   26. The suitability requirements at S-LTR.1.5  make  it  plain  that  the
       presence of an applicant in the UK is not  conducive  to  the  public
       good because, in the view of the Secretary of State, their  offending
       has caused serious harm or[1] they  are  a  persistent  offender  who
       shows a particular disregard for the law.  At paragraph [24]  of  her
       decision, the Judge refers to the 15 convictions for 27 offences that
       were not in issue.  She states:


             "24. .... I accept that the offences of  which  the  Appellant
             has been  convicted  are  at  the  lesser  scale  of  criminal
             offending.   This does not, however, take away from  the  fact
             that any offence, in particular those relating to  drugs,  are
             serious and show a complete lack of respect  to  the  criminal
             laws of the UK."


   27. In my judgment, it is clear that the Judge did not proceed  upon  the
       basis that the appellant's offending  behaviour  had  caused  serious
       harm.  She found that the convictions were at  the  lesser  scale  of
       criminal offending.  However, she plainly found that the appellant is
       a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for  the  law.
       Importantly, this sub category of S-LTR 1.5 is  narrowed  to  matters
       which do not cause serious harm.


   28. Although there is no express reference in the Judge's decision to the
       matters set out in the Modernised  Guidance  or  Chapter  13  of  the
       Immigration Directorate  Instructions,  it  is  plain  that  what  is
       required is a  case-specific  assessment  of  a  number  of  factors,
       including the number of offences committed, the seriousness of  those
       offences including the degree of  public  nuisance,  the  pattern  of
       offending, and the timescale and frequency within which the offending
       occurred.  As set out in Chapter 13 of  the  Immigration  Directorate
       Instructions, a "persistent offender" means  a  repeat  offender  who
       shows a pattern of offending over a period of time.  This can mean  a
       series of offences that escalate in seriousness over time, or a  long
       history of minor offences.


   29. In my  judgement,  a  persistent  offender  who  shows  a  particular
       disregard for the law might be shown in a number of  different  ways.
       The Judge clearly found that the appellant was a persistent  offender
       given the number of offences for which he  had  been  convicted.   It
       might be that a persistent offender shows a particular disregard  for
       the criminal justice process by, as here, the number of offences  for
       which he is convicted and, as found by the Judge,  the  demonstration
       of a complete lack of respect for the criminal  laws  of  the  UK  by
       reference to the types of offences for which he is convicted.  In  my
       judgement it was open to the Judge to find that  the  fact  that  the
       appellant's  convictions  were  at  the  lesser  scale  of   criminal
       offending, did not take away from  the  fact  that  any  offence,  in
       particular those relating to drugs, are serious and show  a  complete
       lack of respect to the criminal laws of the UK.


   30. Whether someone is "a persistent offender with a particular disregard
       for the law" is not simply a matter of crude  arithmetic  or  totting
       up. At paragraphs [24] to [42] of her decision, the  Judge  carefully
       considered the number and frequency of the appellant's offending  and
       the evidence available to her in the form of a psychiatric report and
       the explanations provided by the appellant to  place  that  offending
       into context.


   31. Having carefully considered all of the evidence  before  her,  in  my
       judgement, it was open to the Judge to find as she did  at  paragraph
       [43] of her decision that she was satisfied that the  respondent  has
       discharged the burden of proving that the appellant's presence in the
       UK is not conducive to the public good  for  the  reasons  given.   I
       accept the submission made  by  Mr.  Whitwell  that  the  appellant's
       reliance upon the failure of the Judge to make specific reference  to
       the guidance, is an argument  as  to  form  over  substance.   In  my
       judgement, the Judge has taken account of relevant factors identified
       in the  guidance  and  the  Judge  has  considered  the  guidance  in
       substance.  Miss Daykin was unable to point to  anything  within  the
       guidance that the Judge had failed to consider  and  would  weigh  in
       favour of the appellant.


   32. Turning then to the Judge's assessment of the Article 8 rights of the
       appellant and his wife, I am satisfied that the Judge has  taken  all
       relevant matters into account  before  deciding  that  there  are  no
       'insurmountable obstacles' to family life continuing in Nigeria.   At
       paragraph [46] of her decision, the  Judge  makes  reference  to  the
       Foreign Office advice to which she had been referred.   There  is  no
       reason to believe from a careful reading of that paragraph  that  the
       judge failed to take all relevant matters into  account.   The  judge
       has clearly accorded weight to each relevant  matter.   Weight  is  a
       matter for the fact-finding judge.


   33. In my judgement, the appellant's claim that it was irrational for the
       Judge to describe the appellant's partner's stance as merely a  "wish
       on her part not to go", amounts to no more than a  disagreement  with
       the Judge's findings of fact  regarding  'insurmountable  obstacles'.
       The Judge properly directed herself having  considered  the  evidence
       relied upon by the appellant.  Paragraph [47] of the decision must be
       read as a whole in light of what is said in the preceding paragraphs,
       and indeed the evidence of the appellant's wife that is  referred  to
       at paragraph [57] of the Judge's decision.  The Judge  accepted  that
       it may not be easy for the appellant's wife to travel to Nigeria with
       him.  It was open to the Judge to find that "there is nothing in  the
       evidence to show that this amounts to an insurmountable obstacle  but
       rather it is a wish on her part not to go".  To put that finding into
       context one must read what is said by the Judge at paragraph [57]  of
       her decision:


             "57. It is a matter for the Appellant's wife as to whether  or
             not she accompanies the Appellant to Nigeria.  In  an  earlier
             letter in the Respondent's Bundle at page S8  the  Appellant's
             wife says: 'the last thing I would like to say is that I would
             follow Bilal anywhere that he goes  as  the  thought  of  life
             without him isn't even a life I would want to  live....'   She
             then goes on to say that she could not go at  that  particular
             time because her nan is unwell. However, the fact-remains that
             on 2nd April 2014 the Appellant's wife was willing  to  follow
             him. I am satisfied that, on the balance of probabilities, she
             would be likely to do so if he  were  to  be  removed  now.  I
             accept that it would not be easy for her to do so  given  that
             it would mean leaving the life she has in the United  Kingdom.
             However, she must have been aware that this was a step she may
             have to take when she decided to form and continue  to  build,
             the relationship she has with the Appellant."


   34. In my judgement, it was open to the Judge to find that it may not  be
       easy for the appellant's wife to travel to Nigeria with him, but  she
       was also entitled to find that there are no insurmountable obstacles.
       The Judge clearly considered the relevant circumstances in a sensible
       and practical manner, having had regard to the Foreign Office advice.


   35. I turn finally to the relevance of  the  delay  in  the  respondent's
       decision making.  The appellant cites  EB  (Kosovo)  [2008]  UKHL  in
       support of the proposition that the  House  of  Lords  in  that  case
       decided delay was potentially relevant in three  ways,  and  that  in
       this case, the lengthy delay had arguably given rise to  a  sense  of
       permanence and a legitimate expectation that the appellant  would  be
       granted leave to remain.


   36. The delay was referred to by the appellant in paragraph [28]  of  the
       appellant's  skeleton  argument  that  was  before   the   First-tier
       Tribunal.  The appellant submitted, at paragraph [28] of the skeleton
       argument "...the Rules contain no mechanism by which the Tribunal can
       consider the effect of the appellant's removal on those with whom  he
       enjoys private and family life,  no  mechanism  for  considering  the
       benefit to the community (both financial  and  as  described  in  the
       letter  of  Cllr  Zaffar)  and  no  mechanism  for  considering   the
       significance of the delays on the part of the SSHD".


   37. I accept that the respondent's delay in reaching  decisions  did  not
       feature as a significant part of  the  appellant's  case  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal, and it is perhaps  unsurprising  therefore  that
       the Judge makes no reference to the delay in her  decision.   I  have
       considered whether the failure to consider the  delay  amounts  to  a
       material error of law that is capable of affecting the outcome of the
       decision.


   38. In an assessment of proportionality, the Tribunal  decides  how  much
       weight is to be attributed to competing considerations in determining
       how the balance should be struck  between  the  public  interest  and
       protected individual rights: see inter alia,  Huang  v  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department  [2007]  UKHL  11  and  EB  (Kosovo)  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 41.


   39. In EB (Kosovo), the House of Lords considered a case  where,  through
       an erroneous decision and a delay of four years, a 13-year-old asylum
       seeker had been deprived of the benefit of the  policy  according  to
       which he would  have  been  given  leave  at  least  until  his  18th
       birthday.    Their  Lordships  held  that  delay  in  determining  an
       application could affect it, in  that  the  applicant  might  develop
       closer personal ties and a tentative quality of a relationship  would
       be diminished as time elapsed and enforcement  did  not  take  place.
       Delay could diminish the weight to be accorded to the requirements of
       firm and fair immigration control if it resulted from a dysfunctional
       system which yielded unpredictable, inconsistent and unfair outcomes.




   40. At paragraphs [7] to [11] of her decision, the Judge  refers  to  the
       appellant's  immigration  history.  The  Judge  carried  out  a  full
       proportionality exercise at paragraphs [52] to [58] of  her  decision
       before coming to a  conclusion,  taking  into  account,  as  she  was
       required to, sections 117A and 117B of the 2002 Act as  amended.  The
       Judge had regard, at paragraph [53] of her decision to the time spent
       by the appellant in the UK.


   41. In my judgment, a system which operated, as  it  had  in  this  case,
       could not be said to be "unpredictable, inconsistent  and  unfair  as
       between one applicant and another" or as yielding  "inconsistency  of
       treatment  between  one  aspiring  immigrant   and   another".    The
       appellant's leave to remain in the UK expired in April 2006  and  the
       applications that he has since made to regularise his presence in the
       UK have all failed.  Any failure by the Judge to expressly  refer  to
       the delay in decision making on the part of the respondent, would not
       in my judgement make any difference to the  decision,  and  does  not
       amount to an error of law.


   42. I do not accept that the Judge  left  out  of  account  any  material
       consideration or took into account any immaterial consideration.  She
       undertook  a  balanced  assessment  of  the  facts  resulting  in   a
       conclusion that was open to her.


   43. In those circumstances in my judgement, there is no material error of
       law in any of the respects advanced on behalf of  the  appellant  and
       the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew, stands.


   44. The appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


   45. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of
       an error of law and the appeal is dismissed.


   46. No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


As I have dismissed the appeal, there can be no fee award.


Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

-----------------------
[1] My emphasis

