
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26203/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 February 2014                           |On 14th March 2014           |
|Prepared on 1 March 2014                      |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                            ANENNA CHIEME ASINYA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms D Ofei-Kwatia, Counsel, instructed by Maus
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 12 January  1953.
    She was granted entry clearance as a visitor, and first  entered  on  6
    August 2004.  She returned to  Nigeria  but  then  came  back  to  this
    country on 20 September 2004.   Although she only had  entry  clearance
    until 28 July 2006, she did not return to Nigeria but remained in  this
    country without leave.

 2. The appellant claims that she stayed with her sister and  her  brother,
    both of whom are British citizens and both of whom have children.   One
    of her brother's children, Shallom, has special needs.   The  appellant
    claims  that  she  looked  after  her  nieces  and  nephews,  and   was
    particularly close to Shallom, whose mother had abandoned her  and  her
    siblings.

 3. On 6 July 2012, having overstayed  for  several  years,  the  appellant
    applied for indefinite leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  outside
    the Immigration Rules, on compassionate grounds.  This application  was
    considered by an official  acting  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  but
    refused on 13 June 2013.  The refusal letter is  dated  the  same  day.
    The appellant was also notified under Section 10 of the Immigration and
    Asylum Act 1999 of the respondent's decision to remove her as a  person
    subject to administrative removal.

 4. The respondent's reasons for refusing the application  and  for  making
    the decision to remove the  appellant  were  set  out  in  the  refusal
    letter.   The  respondent  considered  that  there  were   no   factors
    justifying leave being granted on exceptional  grounds,  and  that  the
    appellant did not qualify for leave under the Rules.

 5. The appellant appealed against this decision and her appeal  was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Thorne, sitting at Hatton Cross on  26
    November 2013,  but in a determination promulgated on 5 December  2013,
    Judge Thorne dismissed her appeal, both under the Immigration Rules and
    under Article 8.

 6. The appellant now appeals against this decision, having  been   granted
    leave by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hemingway on 30 December 2013.

Grounds of Appeal

 7. At paragraph 1 of the grounds, a challenge is made  to  Judge  Thorne's
    statement at paragraph 44 of his determination, that "the Article  8(2)
    ground of prevention of disorder or crime has regularly  been  held  by
    the courts to cover the maintenance of effective immigration controls".
    It is said that this is a  material  error  of  law  "as  the  need  to
    maintain an effective system  of  immigration  control  arguably  falls
    within  the  'economic  wellbeing'".   This,  it  is  submitted,  "will
    arguably impact upon the proportionality assessment  where  "prevention
    of disorder and crime" would arguably attract more weight than economic
    wellbeing."

 8. The next challenge to the determination, at paragraph 2 of the grounds,
    is that although at  paragraph  40,  Judge  Thorne  accepted  that  the
    appellant had a family life in the UK with her brother and  sister  and
    their children, at paragraph 49(v) and (vi) he finds that the  evidence
    does not establish on the balance of probabilities that he  has  family
    ties either with her adult siblings or with her nieces and  nephews  in
    the UK "that go beyond the normal ties to  be  expected"  between  such
    family members.   It  is  asserted  in  the  grounds  that  this  is  a
    contradiction, which amounts to a material error of law.

 9. It is also asserted that this conclusion is "contrary to the evidence",
    especially because the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  the
    children "does not have to meet the Kugathas definition of family life,
    as that definition applies to adults".

10. Then, it is asserted that at paragraph 49(x) of the determination,  the
    judge's finding that "the appellant has a  familial  relationship  with
    her nephews and nieces who are all children and British citizens"  also
    contradicts the finding at paragraph 49(vi)   (that  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities it has not been  established  that  the  family  ties  go
    beyond the normal ties to be expected between such family members).

11. With regard to the judge's finding (at paragraph 49(x)) again  that  "I
    conclude that it is in the best interests of  the  children  to  remain
    with their parents" it is asserted that this is clearly  wrong  because
    the appellant's brother was a single  parent,  and  thus  reference  to
    parents in plural is "misconceived".

12. Complaint is then made that while it may be correct to take account  of
    the fact that the adults knew that the appellant had no right to be  in
    the UK, "that logical reasoning does not apply to the children".

13. It is asserted that for these reasons it  cannot  be  said  that  Judge
    Thorne properly carried out the balancing  exercise,  or  that  he  had
    considered all the evidence in the round or had taken into account  all
    the relevant factors in this appeal.  Further, it is asserted  that  he
    failed to make "adequate, if any, credibility findings  in  respect  of
    the evidence given by the appellants of the witnesses".

14. When granting permission to appeal, Judge Hemingway stated as follows:

         "...

         3.   It may be felt [that] much of the grounds are  taken  up  with
             mere disagreement and that some of the points made focus  upon
             peripheral matters.  However, it is arguable the  judge  erred
             in failing to provide reasons  for  his  findings  as  to  the
             nature and depth of the family relationships the appellant has
             with various UK based family members including  her  sibling's
             child Shallom. In particular, it is arguable no proper reasons
             are given for the findings from paragraph 49(v) to  (viii)  of
             the determination and that no assessment as to credibility  of
             the appellant and her two witnesses has been  undertaken. ..."

The Hearing

15. I heard submissions on behalf of both parties.  As my  notes  of  these
    submissions,  which I made contemporaneously, and in which I  attempted
    to record everything which was said to  me,  are  contained  within  my
    Record of Proceedings, I shall not set out below everything  which  was
    said to me in the course of the hearing.  I have, however,  had  regard
    to everything which was said, as well as to all the documents contained
    within the file, whether or not the same is set out specifically below.

16. At the outset, I indicated to the parties that it was  the  provisional
    view of the Tribunal that although, clearly, the need  to  maintain  an
    effective system of immigration control is  for  the  purposes  of  the
    "economic wellbeing" of the country   rather  than  the  prevention  of
    disorder or crime, this did not seem to the Tribunal to be  a  material
    error.  However, if Ms Ofei-Kwatia wanted to persuade the Tribunal that
    this provisional view was not correct, she was free to do so.

17. Ms Ofei-Kwatia did not seek to reinforce the argument  which  had  been
    made regarding this point in the grounds, but  asked  the  Tribunal  to
    find that essentially there  were  several  cumulative  errors  in  the
    judge's determination, such that when  these  were  considered  in  the
    round, they pointed to a  determination  that  ultimately  contained  a
    material error of law.

18. The evidence of neither the appellant nor her two  witnesses  had  been
    considered in "a satisfactory way" and no findings had been  made as to
    credibility.  In an appeal of this kind, findings of  credibility  were
    crucial when assessing what weight to attach to the evidence.

19. Further, there was a discrepancy, as ventilated in the grounds, between
    the judge finding at paragraph 42 that there would be  an  interference
    with the appellant's right to family life  in  this  country  with  her
    brother and sister and their children and the findings at paragraph  49
    that this family life did not go beyond the normal ties to be  expected
    between such family members.  In answer to a question from the Tribunal
    as to whether or not this was just the judge's  way  of  distinguishing
    between family life and family life which engaged Article 8,  Ms  Ofei-
    Kwatia submitted that if this was so it should have been made clear  in
    the determination.  Obviously there was the issue with  regard  to  the
    family life enjoyed between the appellant and her adult siblings as had
    been  discussed  in  Kugathas  ,  but  in  relation  to  the  children,
    especially Shallom, there was no such test or definition of  the  level
    of relationship which should be recognised.

20. The oral evidence before the judge had been such that it  took  account
    of the dependence that Shallom had on her aunt, so in  the  absence  of
    any conclusion about credibility, such as would affect the weight  that
    the judge should have attached to the evidence he heard about the level
    of dependence, it should have been accepted that  Shallom  depended  on
    her aunt.  Essentially this led to an inference that there had been  an
    incomplete assessment under Section 55.

21. There was another mistake that  the  judge  had  made  in  relation  to
    Section 55 when at paragraph 49(x) he had found the best  interests  of
    the children was to remain "with their parents".   This  could  not  be
    right, because the  mother  had  abandoned  the  appellant's  brother's
    children.  Also, this did not "fall  within  the  evidence  as  given",
    which had dealt with the support that the appellant gives  Shallom,  on
    which no finding had been made.

22. There had not been a finding as to what effect  the  appellant  leaving
    the country would have on the ability of the father to remain in  full-
    time employment in light of the fact that in evidence he stated that it
    was because of the appellant looking after his  children  that  he  was
    able  to  work  full-time  (which  evidence   was   recorded   in   the
    determination at paragraph 18).

23. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Wilding submitted that there  had  been
    absolutely nothing wrong  with  the  judge's  reasoning,  analysis,  or
    consideration of proportionality.  With regard to  the  assertion  that
    the judge had failed to make findings on credibility, these submissions
    got her nowhere.  There had been no suggestion that the  witnesses  had
    been deliberately concocting a false case in terms of evidence  and  it
    was not an error of law  to  fail  to  make  a  positive  finding  when
    credibility was not in issue.  It had not been argued on behalf of  the
    respondent that the witnesses had been deliberately presenting a  false
    case.

24. With regard to the submission that on one particular  point  the  judge
    had made an error, because he had referred to  it  being  in  the  best
    interests of the children to remain with their "parents",  whereas  the
    mother of the appellant's brother's  children  had  deserted  them,  so
    these children only had a parent in the singular, it was clear that the
    nephews and nieces which  were  being  referred  to  (these  were  "the
    children") were children respectively of the  appellant's  brother  and
    sister, so they had different parents.   Accordingly,  when  the  judge
    concluded that it was "in the best interests of the children to  remain
    with their parents", he was clearly referring to the different  parents
    that these children had.   Some  of  them  were  the  children  of  the
    appellant's sister, while others were the children of  the  appellant's
    brother.  That was the logical interpretation.  It was said in  respect
    of all these  children that this appellant looked after them.

25. So when the judge found that it  was  in  the  best  interests  of  the
    children to remain with their parents,  this  was  an  incontrovertible
    fact, and this statement did not contain any error whatsoever.

26. Ultimately, the judge had found that the evidence before  him  did  not
    point to that dependency on the appellant which would be  required  for
    great weight to be placed on it and that was why  at  paragraph  49(vi)
    there was reference to the "normal ties  to  be  expected".   In  other
    words, the value to be placed on the relationship was  not sufficiently
    high, rather than that there was no such relationship at all.

27. The judge had carried out a text book Razgar  approach,  and  what  the
    judge was saying when he said that the  ties  did  not  go  beyond  the
    normal ties to be expected between family members is that this was  not
    a factor which carried great weight in the proportionality  assessment.
    When one looked at the  proportionality  assessment  holistically,  the
    judge had considered all  the  positive  factors  put  before  him  and
    weighed those against the  public  interest  in  this  appellant  being
    removed, and there was a  high public interest in maintaining effective
    immigration control, whether or not this was in order  to  advance  the
    economic wellbeing of the country (which it was) rather than  in  order
    to prevent disorder and  crime.   Effectively,  the  challenge  to  the
    determination did not amount to more than an  attempt  to  reargue  the
    appellant's case.

Discussion

28. As I indicated to the parties at the commencement of the hearing, while
    clearly the judge made an error by stating that the  need  to  maintain
    effective  immigration  control  was  for  the  purpose  of  preventing
    disorder and crime, rather than advancing the economic wellbeing of the
    country, I do not consider that this error was in any way  material  to
    the decision which was made.  Clearly, the need to  maintain  effective
    immigration control is important, and this factor must be  given  great
    weight.

29. The judge clearly  considered  carefully  whether  or  not  there  were
    factors of sufficient weight to outweigh the need to maintain effective
    immigration control, and his decision that there were not  is  properly
    reasoned.  There was no issue regarding credibility as such, but having
    considered all the evidence, the judge did  not  consider     that  the
    appellant had established  on  a  balance  of  probabilities  that  her
    relationship with her  nieces  and  nephews,  including  Shallom,  went
    beyond the normal ties to be expected in a family.

30. The reality is that this appellant overstayed, knowing that she had  no
    right to be here, but now seeks to argue that her relationship with her
    nieces and nephews is so important that even though clearly  it  is  in
    the interests of maintaining a fair and effective system of immigration
    control to require her to leave, she should nonetheless be  allowed  to
    remain because her removal will have such a dire effect on  her  nieces
    and nephews, and in particular Shallom.

31. The judge did not agree, and he was entitled not to agree.  He noted in
    particular that there was no  independent  medical  evidence  regarding
    precisely what it was that Shallom was suffering from, and he  recorded
    accurately (there is no suggestion that this was misreported) that  the
    evidence before him was that her father had said that "he did not  know
    what the technical term for her condition was.  It was  something  like
    autism and Downs syndrome" (at paragraph 18).

32. It was not at all clear from this evidence how it was that the  removal
    of this appellant could be so crucial to the  best  interests  of  this
    child, who was receiving support from social  services  for  two  hours
    every day.  The judge considered that  it  was  not,  and  this  was  a
    finding  which was open to him on the evidence.

33. With regard to  the  judge's  conclusions  that  it  was  in  the  best
    interests of the  children  to  remain  with  their  parents  (that  is
    respectively the appellant's brother and sister) and that the  decision
    to remove this appellant did not interfere with these  best  interests,
    that again was a finding which was open to him.   As the judge finds at
    paragraph  51  "there  is  a  strong  public  interest  in  maintaining
    effective and fair  immigration  control  as  well  as  protecting  the
    economic wellbeing of the UK" (which shows that the judge did  in  fact
    have the correct test in mind, even though he had  wrongly  stated  the
    purpose of maintaining effective immigration control as the  prevention
    of disorder and crime earlier in his determination).  He is also in  my
    judgement correct when he says that the  appellant  and  her  UK  based
    family "knew when she arrived as  a visitor that there was no guarantee
    that she would be allowed to live in the UK".

34. While it is obviously correct that the children would not be a party to
    any decision that she should remain, it is not correct  that  for  that
    reason alone, this factor should not be given weight.  If  people  were
    allowed to remain because they  had  young  family  members  who  would
    prefer them to remain,  who  cannot  themselves  be  blamed  for  their
    relatives' breaches of immigration law, it would be very much harder to
    maintain a fair and effective system of immigration control,  which  is
    an important consideration.

35. Essentially, therefore, the judge made findings which were open to him,
    and carried out a proper proportionality assessment.  In my  judgement,
    the grounds do not do more than attempt to reargue the appellant's case
    which has already been  rejected by the First-tier Tribunal, and do not
    identify any material error of law in the  judge's  determination.   It
    follows that this appeal must be dismissed and I so order.

Decision

There being no material error of law in the determination of the  First-tier
Tribunal, the appellant's appeal is dismissed.



Signed:                                 Dated: 11 March 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


