

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/26586/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 8 July 2015                       |On 9 July 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RENTON
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                              SOUFIANE MARCHANE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Gayle, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. This is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   For  ease  of
         reference, we have referred below to  the  Secretary  of  State  as
         respondent and Ms Marchane as  appellant  even  though  it  is  the
         Secretary of State's appeal.

      2. The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Morocco.   She  appealed  under
         regulation  26  of  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
         Regulations 2006 ("the EEA regulations") against  the  respondent's
         decision dated 9 June 2014 refusing to issue her a  residence  card
         as the family member of her  EEA  sponsor,  Mr  Amro  Hassan  ("the
         sponsor").

      3. Her appeal was allowed by First-Tier Tribunal Judges Reid and Scott-
         Baker in a Decision promulgated on 30 March 2015.   The  respondent
         sought permission to appeal on 2 grounds - that the  assessment  of
         credibility was perverse and/or failed  to  take  material  matters
         into account (ground 1) and that the  Tribunal  failed  to  make  a
         finding in relation to whether the sponsor was a  qualified  person
         and had instead remitted the matter to the respondent to reconsider
         which it was not open to the Tribunal to do (ground 2).

      4. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Ransley on 28 May 2015 on both grounds.

      5. The matter comes before the Upper Tribunal to determine whether the
         First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law
         so that it should be set aside.

    Decision and reasons

      6. In relation to ground 1, Mr Wilding submitted that  the  assessment
         of the appellant's and sponsor's evidence at [13] to  [24]  of  the
         decison was riddled with contradictions and material errors.   This
         demonstrated  that  the  Tribunal  had  either  given   little   or
         inadequate reasoning for  the  discrepancies  and  had  implied  or
         assumed  evidence  to  explain  away  issues.   As  a  result,  the
         assessment of the reliability of the evidence  made  little  sense.
         He  suggested  that  it  did  not  appear  that  the   balance   of
         probabilities had been properly  applied  (although  the  test  was
         noted at [10]).  He submitted that the Decision gave the impression
         that the Tribunal was looking to excuse  the  discrepancies  giving
         the appellant the benefit of the doubt.  He pointed to the  way  in
         which the Tribunal had dealt with the issue of wedding venue  which
         he said was speculative [15], catering arrangements at the  wedding
         which imported an  academic  assessment  in  relation  to  cultural
         differences and was speculative  [16]  and  contradictions  in  the
         evidence given by the couple in  relation  to  what  they  did  the
         previous weekend [20].   He also submitted that there was no reason
         to say what was included at [18] and this  appeared  to  amount  to
         making excuses for the appellant  with  no  evidential  foundation.
         Overall he submitted that these examples showed that the assessment
         of the evidence was manifestly unlawful.

      7. In relation to ground 2, Mr Wilding submitted that the Tribunal was
         required to decide whether, at the date of hearing, the sponsor was
         a qualified person for the purposes of the EEA  Regulations.   This
         was considered at [25] to [26].  However,  instead  of  reaching  a
         finding in that regard, the Tribunal had  purported  to  remit  the
         matter to the respondent to make a decision.   Either  the  sponsor
         was a qualified person  or  he  was  not.   The  option  which  the
         Tribunal took was not one  open  to  it.  Since  the  Tribunal  had
         acknowledged that there was no (documentary)  evidence  before  it,
         the appeal should have been dismissed on that basis.

      8.  In  response  to  a  question  from  us  concerning  the  apparent
         acceptance  by  the  Tribunal  of  the  appellant's  and  sponsor's
         credibility on this issue [26], Mr Wilding very fairly and properly
         accepted that it would have been open to the Tribunal to allow  the
         appeal if it accepted that the sponsor was working as at  the  date
         of the hearing.  However, reasons would need to have been given.

      9. We did not need to call on Mr Gayle.

     10. Having considered the grounds  of  appeal  and  Mr  Wilding's  oral
         arguments  we  are  not  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         decision involved the making of an error of law in relation to  the
         findings that the relationship was  genuine.   The  Tribunal  heard
         evidence from the appellant and her sponsor  and  was  entitled  to
         reach its own  views  on  credibility.   The  respondent's  grounds
         amount to no more than a disagreement with  the  factual  findings.
         We are satisfied, however, that the  First-Tier  Tribunal  made  an
         error of law in allowing the appeal to the extent of remitting  the
         matter to the respondent  to  decide  whether  the  sponsor  was  a
         qualified person for the purposes of  the  EEA  Regulations  rather
         than deciding the issue for itself.  We indicated our view  however
         that it would be possible to remake the decision and to  allow  the
         appellant's appeal on the basis of the findings of  the  First-Tier
         Tribunal Judges given the credibility  findings  and  Mr  Wilding's
         concession. Mr Wilding indicated that, on this issue, Mr Gayle  had
         already provided him with documents  prior  to  the  hearing  which
         demonstrated that the sponsor was currently in  employment.   Those
         were handed in to the Tribunal.  Those indicated that  the  sponsor
         had been in receipt of salary payments  from  1  April  to  1  July
         inclusive and there was a letter from the employer indicating  that
         he commenced work in February 2015. Mr  Gayle  indicated  that  the
         sponsor had been training prior to March 2015 so  that  letter  was
         not inconsistent with the oral evidence  given  to  the  First-Tier
         Tribunal.

    DECISION

     11. The First-tier Tribunal decision did involve the making of an error
         on a point of law in relation to the failure to decide whether  the
         sponsor was a qualified person under the EEA regulations.

     12. We set  aside  the  decision  remitting  the  matter  back  to  the
         respondent.  We re-make the decision in the appeal by finding  that
         the sponsor is a qualified person as at the  date  of  the  hearing
         before the Upper Tribunal and therefore  allowing  the  appellant's
         appeal in full.



Signed      Date 9 July 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
