
IAC-HX-MH/11-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/26558/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 January 2015                           |On 1 May 2015                 |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway


                                   Between

                             Mr Alexander birts
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of the United  States  of  America  born  in
    1978.  He appealed against a decision of the Secretary of State made on
    23 May 2014 to refuse to grant leave to remain as the unmarried partner
    of a person exercising EEA treaty rights.

 2. The Respondent in considering the five year route under the Immigration
    Rules was not satisfied that the Appellant's partner Mr Florent  Gilles
    was settled in the UK.  Also that Mr Gilles was a  French  national  as
    only a photocopy of his passport had been submitted when  the  document
    itself should have been. Further, there was no evidence that he and the
    Appellant have been living together akin to a married couple for  a  24
    month period prior to date of application.  In addition, the  Appellant
    had failed to  provide  six  months'  pay  slips  and  bank  statements
    covering the same period, as well as contracts of employment/employers'
    letters to confirm his and his partner's yearly salary and whether  the
    jobs are permanent or not.  He could not  thus  satisfy  the  financial
    requirements.

 3. As for the ten year route, he could  not  succeed,  again  because  his
    partner was not settled in the UK.  It was also noted that his  partner
    has  lived  in  the  UK  for  only  three  months.    There   were   no
    insurmountable  obstacles   stopping   them   from   continuing   their
    relationship in either France or the USA.  The Respondent also  refused
    the application under paragraph 276ADE (private life).

 4. He appealed.

 5. The appeal was determined without a hearing 'on the papers' by Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Chohan.  In a determination promulgated  on  21
    October 2014 he dismissed the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  and
    under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 6. His findings are at paragraphs [4] to [7] of the determination.

 7. He found that the Appellant entered into a civil  partnership  with  Mr
    Gilles on 15 April 2014.

 8. However, he found  the  difficulty  in  the  case  was  that  'all  the
    documentation submitted related to the Appellant himself'  [5].   Apart
    from a statement there was nothing in respect of Mr  Gilles.    It  was
    not even clear what his nationality is.   Even  if  he  is  a  European
    national  there  was  'no  evidence  before  (the  judge)  that  he  is
    exercising treaty  rights'  [5].   Further,  'According  to  the  civil
    partnership deed (Mr Gilles) is a fashion journalist but  again,  there
    is no evidence to that effect.  Indeed, there is not even  evidence  to
    establish that the civil partner is in the United Kingdom' [5].

 9. Moreover, there was no evidence to establish that the  Appellant  is  a
    fashion product developer.  Finally, 'apart from bank statements  there
    is no evidence in respect of his financial circumstances' [6].

10. He sought permission to appeal which  was  granted  by  a  judge  on  5
    December 2014.

11. At the error of law hearing the  Appellant  attended.   He  represented
    himself.  He said his partner, Mr Gilles was abroad.

12. The grounds, in summary, were that  documentation  submitted  with  the
    application and which therefore should have been before the judge, such
    as evidence  of  his  partner's  nationality  and  of  the  Appellant's
    employment which indicated his income, were not considered.  Employment
    contracts for the partner were not submitted because he is a  freelance
    fashion journalist.

13. The Appellant said he understood that the case could not succeed  under
    the Immigration Rules not least because his partner Mr  Gilles,  having
    lived only briefly here, was not settled in the UK.

14. Mr Kandola thought that the Appellant had inadvertently  submitted  the
    wrong application form. He submitted an  application  under  the  Rules
    which had required him to submit copies of  Mr  Gilles'  passport.   Mr
    Kandola thought that the EEA application form required  the  submission
    of the passport rather than photo copies, which would have resolved the
    issue of the nationality.  It was clear that he is a French national.

15. However, the crux was whether on the evidence before the judge  it  was
    shown that Mr Gilles was a 'qualified person'.

16. The Appellant on that point repeated that  Mr  Gilles  is  a  freelance
    journalist.  He accepted, however, that there was no evidence submitted
    to the First tier Tribunal to show that  Mr  Gilles  was  a  'qualified
    person'. There was no evidence of payments  received,  no  contract  of
    employment, no tax or national insurance details.  He accepted that the
    case could not succeed under the regulations as it  could  not  succeed
    under the rules.  He said he would reapply.

17. I agreed.  On the evidence before him the Appellant could  not  satisfy
    the Immigration Rules not least because Mr Gilles, having lived in  the
    United Kingdom for only about three months was not  settled.   He  does
    not have indefinite leave or a permanent right of residence. There  was
    also no dispute that there was no documentary evidence before the judge
    that Mr Gilles, a French national, was exercising treaty  rights.   The
    Appellant could not succeed under the EEA Regulations.

18. The judge's decision is sustainable for the reasons he gave.  There  is
    no material error of law.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows no material error of  law  and
the decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 30 April 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

