
[pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26300/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 February 2016                  |On 25 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                          ms shobna devi bissessur
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Golchool of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Fletcher-Hill promulgated in August 2015  in  which  she
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 5
    June 2014 refusing to vary the appellant's leave to remain.



Background

 2. The appellant is a national of Mauritius born on  24  June  1978.   The
    appellant entered the UK on 27 April 2005 with  leave  to  enter  as  a
    student for six months valid to 27 October  2005.   The  appellant  was
    subsequently granted an extension of stay as a student valid  until  31
    October 2006.  A further extension was granted  valid  to  31  December
    2007 and again to 31 March 2009.  On 28 October 2009 the appellant  was
    refused an extension of stay in the UK but after  a  successful  appeal
    she was granted an extension of stay as a student valid until  31  July
    2011.  She was granted an extension of her stay in the UK as a  Tier  4
    Student valid to 1 November 2012.  She was granted an  extension  as  a
    Tier 4 Student valid until 20 April 2014.  On 17 April 2014 she applied
    for leave to remain on  the  basis  of  private  life  and  exceptional
    circumstances.  The respondent refused that application.  The Secretary
    of State considered private life under Rule 276ADE but considered  that
    the appellant did not satisfy the Rules on the basis that  it  was  not
    accepted that the appellant had lost ties to  her  home  country.   The
    respondent also considered whether or not there  were  any  exceptional
    circumstances which would warrant a grant of leave  to  remain  outside
    the Immigration Rules and Article 8 of the European Convention on Human
    Rights (ECHR).  The appellant had requested at least one  year's  leave
    to remain in order to complete her studies on a part-time  basis.   The
    respondent did  not  consider  that  this  was  itself  an  exceptional
    circumstance the appellant having been unable to pass the course within
    the five years allowed under Tier 4.  The  respondent  considered  that
    the appellant could return to Mauritius and continue her studies there.
     The appellant relied on her strong emotional ties to  her  sister  and
    other siblings in the UK.  The respondent considered that the appellant
    entered the UK as a student and could have  no  reasonable  expectation
    that she would be allowed  to  remain  in  the  UK  indefinitely.   The
    respondent considered the appellant's assertion that she suffered  from
    depression but noted that no details of treatment being undertaken  had
    been given.  The respondent considered that the  appellant's  condition
    is not life threatening and treatment for her condition is available in
    Mauritius. The respondent considered that the appellant did not qualify
    for leave as an adult dependent relative.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appellant appealed against the decision of the  respondent  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The Tribunal proceeded to hear the appeal in  the
    absence of the appellant as there was no appearance by the appellant or
    her representative and no explanation of the failure to attend had been
    provided.  The judge noted that no appellant's bundle had been received
    by the Tribunal.  The Tribunal having considered the evidence that  was
    before it found that any interference with the appellant's private life
    was both necessary and proportionate  to  the  wider  interest  of  the
    maintenance of effective immigration policy and  that  the  appellant's
    rights under Article 8 would not be breached if she were to  return  to
    Mauritius.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 4. The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision to the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  grounds  of  appeal
    assert that the appellant and her representative made a genuine mistake
    by attending  the  Tribunal  on  5  March  instead  of  4  March.   The
    representative  submitted  a  bundle  together  with  a  letter  to  be
    forwarded to the Immigration Judge.  It is asserted that that does  not
    seem to have been taken into account and that it is  therefore  in  the
    interest of justice to have the appeal relisted.  It is  also  asserted
    that the judge acknowledged that a family  life  had  been  established
    between the appellant and her brother and  his  family  but  failed  to
    apply the relevant principles.  The grounds assert that at paragraph 21
    the judge wrongly applied paragraph 117B contending  that  117B  is  in
    favour of the appellant who has not precarious immigration history, has
    been here lawfully and speaks English and has  no  recourse  to  public
    funds.  It is further asserted that the judge failed to  apply  Section
    85(4) the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as  the  judge
    failed to consider that the  appellant  has  been  present  in  the  UK
    lawfully for a continuous period of ten years and therefore the  appeal
    should have been allowed under paragraph 276B.   On  11  December  2015
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer granted the  appellant  permission  to
    appeal.  The grant of permission sets out that there is a note  on  the
    file enclosing the appellant's bundle but there is no explanation as to
    why the judge did not consider that  documentation  which  should  have
    been received long before the  decision  was  promulgated.   The  grant
    notes that there is no explanation on the file as to why  there  was  a
    delay of six months before the decision  was  promulgated.   The  grant
    also sets out that it is arguable that the judge had  made  a  material
    error of law in respect of the argument that the appellant has been  in
    the UK for a continuous period of ten years at the date of the  appeal.



Summary of Submissions

The Appellant's Submissions

 5. The grounds set out four grounds of appeal.  Ground  1.   There  was  a
    genuine mistake  made  by  the  appellant  and  her  representative  in
    attending the Tribunal on 5 March instead  of  4  March  the  date  the
    hearing was listed for.  It is submitted that after noticing  that  the
    appeal was heard on 4  March  the  representative  submitted  a  bundle
    together with a letter to be forwarded to the judge.   It  is  asserted
    that this does not seem  to  have  been  forwarded  to  the  judge  and
    therefore it is in the interest of justice to have the appeal relisted.
     It is submitted that no contact was made with  the  appellant  or  her
    representative to check the reason why they were not present.  All  the
    contact details were available to the Tribunal.

 6. Ground 2.  It is asserted that the judge  acknowledged  that  a  family
    life has been established between the appellant and her brother and his
    family but failed to apply the principles set out in  Kugathas  v  SSHD
    [2003] EWCA Civ 31 where family life does exist when there is more than
    emotional ties.

 7. Ground 3.  It is asserted that  the  judge  wrongly  applied  paragraph
    117B.  It is contended that 117B is in favour of the appellant  as  she
    has no precarious immigration history, she has been here lawfully,  she
    speaks English, she has no recourse to public funds and has no criminal
    convictions.

 8. Ground 4.  The judge made the  determination  on  4  August  2015  even
    though the appeal was listed on 4 March 2014  (sic).   It  is  asserted
    that the judge failed to apply Section 85(4) of the NIAA2002  which  is
    relevant postdecision.  The judge has failed to consider  that  at  the
    time of determining the appeal the appellant had been present in the UK
    lawfully for a continuous period of ten years and therefore the  appeal
    should have been allowed  under  paragraph  276B  the  ten-year  lawful
    residence route.

 9. Mr Golchool indicated that the appellant had made an application  under
    paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules that has  a  real  prospect  of
    being granted indefinite leave to remain.   However,  that  application
    has been classed as invalid because she  has  an  ongoing  appeal.   He
    submitted that the case should be remitted to the Secretary of State in
    order to make a decision on that application.   Mr  Golchool  submitted
    that as the judge failed to take into account the  documents  submitted
    there was a material error of law.  I asked Mr Golchool what difference
    the evidence and information in the bundle of documents  have  made  to
    the outcome of the appeal.  He submitted that the evidence referred  to
    ties between the appellant and her brother that were more  than  merely
    emotional ties.  He referred to the case  of  Kugathas.   He  submitted
    that in this case there was family life between the appellant  and  her
    brother.  This was not raised in the Reasons for Refusal  Letter.   The
    appellant had established more than emotional ties and the judge should
    therefore have found that there was family life.  I asked  Mr  Golchool
    why a finding of family life  would  have  made  a  difference  to  the
    assessment of proportionality.  His submissions were that  once  family
    life has been established the judge has to consider proportionality and
    how the brother who plays an important role would be  affected  if  the
    appellant were  removed.   He  submitted  that  the  matter  should  be
    remitted to the Secretary of State to consider  the  application  under
    the ten-year Rule and provide a decision.

10. Mr Golchool submitted that the principle in the case of Kugathas should
    have been applied.  There is family life between the  brother  and  the
    appellant and  maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control  cannot
    outweigh the appellant's interest.  She has lawfully remained in the UK
    for nine years.  He submitted  that  Section  117B  should  be  in  the
    appellant's favour.

The Respondent's Submissions

11. The respondent served a Rule 24 notice.  It  is  asserted  that  it  is
    unclear from the  grounds  of  appeal  what  the  bundle  of  documents
    contained and why it would have made any difference to the  outcome  of
    the appeal if the judge had taken it into account.  It is also asserted
    that in relation to the error of law the  grounds  now  seek  to  place
    reliance on Rule 276B.  At the date of the hearing  the  appellant  had
    not yet been in the UK for ten years.  It is asserted that this was not
    an issue that the judge could have dealt with even when  he  wrote  the
    decision in August 2015.  The respondent asserts that an  appellant  is
    required to seek the permission of the First-tier Tribunal on appeal if
    one wishes to amend add to the Statement of Additional  Grounds.   This
    was not a matter raised before the judge at the hearing or the date  of
    determination.  It is also said that the appellant is required to  make
    an application on the specified form and pay the relevant  fee  if  she
    now wishes to seek to rely on 276B of the Immigration Rules.

12.  Mr  Tarlow  relied  on  the  Rule  24  response.   He  submitted  that
    consideration of  the  bundle  of  documents  would  not  have  made  a
    difference as  the  judge  was  faced  with  the  situation  where  the
    appellant did not  turn  up  and  no  representative  arrived  for  the
    hearing.  In essence he submitted the case  concerned  proportionality.
    The Secretary of State had dealt with the ties between the brother  and
    the appellant in the Reasons for Refusal Letter.  This was supported by
    the judge at paragraph 24.  The finding of the judge was entirely  open
    to him.  He indicated that he could not see anything in  the  documents
    that would have caused the judge to come to a different conclusion.

Discussion

13. With regard to the first ground of appeal (that the bundle of documents
    submitted on the day following the appeal hearing was  not  taken  into
    consideration by the judge and that therefore it is in the interest  of
    justice to have the appeal relisted) the real issue is whether  or  not
    that bundle of documents could have potentially made  a  difference  to
    the outcome of the appeal.  I have considered the  documents  submitted
    by the appellant on 5  March  2015.   The  bundle  comprises  of  three
    witness statements namely, that of the appellant, her brother, Mr Navin
    Nishcal Bissessur,  and  the  appellant's  sister-in-law  Mrs  Sabitree
    Kumari Bissessur. There was a  skeleton  argument  and  copies  of  the
    appellant's  sister-in-law's  passport  and  residence  permit  of  her
    brother.  In her witness statement the appellant sets out:
         "3.  That I entered the UK on 27th April 2005 as a student  at  the
             age of 27 years old.  I have been dependent of my brother  and
             his wife in the UK.
         4.   That I completed my foundation course in information system in
             the UK and went to college here  in  the  UK.   After  that  I
             started my degree course which I could not finish as the  last
             place I was studying was closed down by the respondent.
         5.   That during my stay in the UK I have made a lot of friends and
             I have created a private life in the UK.  I have lost contacts
             with my friends in Mauritius.   Since  I  left  Mauritius  has
             changed and it will be impossible to start again in  Mauritius
             since I did not manage to complete my degree and will  not  be
             able to secure employment if I am forced  to  return  back  to
             Mauritius.
         6.   That I sought legal advice to renew my leave at the  beginning
             of this year from my previous solicitor.  My solicitor advised
             me that I cannot renew my student visa since I  have  been  in
             the UK as a student for more than five years, I  will  not  be
             granted leave as a Tier 4  General  Student  as  the  law  has
             changed on 6th April 2012.   I  told  him  that  I  wanted  to
             complete my degree.  He advised me to apply for  discretionary
             leave which will entitle me to continue to study in the UK  as
             well as allow me working.  I followed  my  solicitor's  advice
             and submitted this current  application  on  17th  April  2014
             which was refused on 5th June 2014 with a right of appeal.
         7.   That I do not have any place to go  back  to  and  cannot  see
             myself living anywhere except the UK.
         8.   That I am fully integrated into the British society.
         9.   That I have built up a private life and I live with my  family
             here in the UK.
         10.  That I cannot leave my brother and his  wife  to  go  back  to
             Mauritius.  They are my only family as I have lost  my  father
             and mother in Mauritius".

14. Mr Navin Nishcal Bissessur  the  appellant's  brother  in  his  witness
    statement sets out, at paragraph 3, that he has been looking after  his
    sister for the past ten years even when she was in Mauritius, that when
    he moved to the UK the appellant moved in with him and that he and  his
    wife are responsible for her.  His evidence is that they have created a
    family life together.  The appellant's  sister-in-law  in  her  witness
    statement says that the appellant moved in with  her  and  her  husband
    when he arrived in the UK, that she has been supporting  the  appellant
    in the UK.

15. The appellant's application was for discretionary leave  to  remain  in
    the UK under paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Immigration  Rules  and  under
    Human Rights under Article 8 of the  ECHR.   In  that  application  the
    appellant asserts that she has  been  maintaining  herself  in  the  UK
    without recourse to public funds  with  the  help  of  her  sister  and
    brother in the UK and that she is entirely dependent on  her  siblings.
    She indicated that she intended to complete her studies  and  requested
    the Secretary of State to consider her  application  under  exceptional
    circumstances to grant leave for at least  one  year  to  complete  her
    course on a part-time basis.  The appellant  also  indicated  that  she
    'has been living with his (sic) sister for the past nine years  in  the
    UK. We have continued to strengthen our family tie, the ties between my
    sister and I are more than just mere emotional ties'.  She set  out  in
    that application that she had been in  the  UK  for  nine  years.   She
    arrived here in the UK with the  clear  intention  of  obtaining  a  UK
    qualification which is worldwide recognised  especially  in  Mauritius.
    However, she had not been able to complete her studies and has lost her
    money.  She has no place to go back to in Mauritius.  Her parents  have
    passed away in Mauritius.  She suffers from depression and it  is  'her
    sister who supports me emotionally and financially.  All my friends and
    close relatives are living in the UK.  I have my brother and  his  wife
    living in the UK.  I have my brother-in-law and niece in the UK.'   She
    was not  able  to  complete  her  studies  and  therefore  it  will  be
    impossible for her to secure a job  if  she  is  forced  to  return  to
    Mauritius.

16. There is a clear discrepancy between the appellant's assertions in  her
    application to the  Secretary  of  State  and  the  witness  statements
    submitted in support of the appeal.  As set  out  above  the  appellant
    asserted at the time of her application that she was  living  with  her
    sister and that it was her relationship with her sister that  satisfied
    the ties required to create a family life under Article 8.  It was  her
    sister she asserted she had been living with for the past nine years in
    the UK.  This is entirely contrary  to  the  witness  evidence  of  her
    brother and her sister-in-law.  I do not consider that it was an  error
    in her statement in support of her  application  to  the  Secretary  of
    State as she clearly also refers to  the  fact  that  her  brother  and
    sister-in-law are living in the UK.  It was set out in the Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter that:
         "You state that you have strong emotional ties to your sister,  who
         you have lived with whilst in the UK.  You also state that you have
         a close relationship with your  other  siblings  in  the  UK,  your
         brother, and that all your friends and close relatives are  in  the
         UK.   However,  your  relationship  with  your  siblings  does  not
         constitute  family  life  as  determined  by  Appendix  FM  of  the
         Immigration Rules".

17. In the grounds of appeal, the appellant did not seek to clarify who she
    had been living with in the UK and no reference was made to the Reasons
    for Refusal Letter where it set  out  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    understanding was that she had been living in the UK with her sister.

18. In any event whether or not the judge had considered that  family  life
    existed between the appellant and her brother would  not  have  made  a
    material difference to the outcome of this case as in the assessment of
    proportionality the factors to be examined are likely to be the same in
    a case such as this regardless of whether family  or  private  life  is
    engaged. In the case of Singh & Anor v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2015] EWCA Civ 630 the court considered:
         "25. However, the debate as to the whether an applicant has or  has
         not a family life for the purposes of Article 8  is  liable  to  be
         arid and academic. In the present case, in agreement with  Sullivan
         LJ's comment when refusing  permission  to  appeal,  the  issue  is
         indeed academic, and clearly so. As the  European  Court  of  Human
         Rights pointed out in AA, in a judgment which  I  have  found  most
         helpful,  the  factors  to  be  examined   in   order   to   assess
         proportionality are  the  same  regardless  of  whether  family  or
         private life is engaged. The question for the Secretary  of  State,
         the Tribunal and the Court is whether those  factors  lead  to  the
         conclusion  that  it  would  be  disproportionate  to  remove   the
         applicant from the United Kingdom. I reject Mr  Malik's  submission
         that the Upper Tribunal Judge's assessment of  proportionality  was
         flawed  because  she,  on  his  case  wrongly,  based  it  on   the
         Appellants' private life rather than their family and private life.
         In my judgment, she took all relevant factors into account, and her
         conclusion on proportionality is not open to challenge.  Indeed,  I
         would go further. In my judgment, no reasonable  Tribunal,  on  the
         facts found, could properly have come to a different conclusion.

19. Had the judge considered the bundle of documents there would have  been
    no material difference to the outcome  in  this  appeal  as  the  judge
    accepted that the interference with the appellant's  private  life  was
    both  necessary  and  proportionate  to  the  wider  interests  if  the
    maintenance of effective immigration policy.

20. In relation to the ground of  appeal  that  the  judge  ought  to  have
    considered paragraph 276B - the ten-year lawful residence route,  there
    was no error of law in the judge's failure to consider that  provision,
    the case was never put on that basis and as set out in the respondent's
    Rule 24 response the appellant was  required  to  make  an  application
    under those provisions.

21. With regard to the ground of appeal  that  the  judge  wrongly  applied
    paragraph 117B there was no error of law in  the  judge's  application.
    Section 117B cannot provide any positive right to a grant of  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis  that  the  appellant  speaks
    English and is not a financial burden on the taxpayer.  In  AM  (S117B)
    Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) it was held, as enunciated  in  the  head
    note of the determination that:
         "2) An appellant can obtain no positive right to a grant  of  leave
         to remain from either s117B (2) or (3), whatever the degree of  his
         fluency in English, or the strength of his financial resources."

22. In the case of Forman (ss117A to  C  considerations)  [2015]  UKUT  412
    (IAC) it is set out in the headnote that:
         "(i) the public interest in firm immigration control is not diluted
         by the consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8
         ECHR has at no time been a financial burden on the state or is self-
         sufficient or is likely to remain so indefinitely the  significance
         of these factors is that where they  are  not  present  the  public
         interest is fortified"

23. The appellant has only ever been in the UK on a temporary basis. It was
    submitted that she has 'no precarious immigration history'.  Her  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom has always been precarious. As set  out
    in AM Malawi in the headnote:
         "(4) Those who at any given  date  held  a  precarious  immigration
         status must have held at that date an  otherwise  lawful  grant  of
         leave to enter or to remain.   A  person's  immigration  status  is
         'precarious'  if  their  continued  presence  in  the  UK  will  be
         dependent upon their obtaining a further grant of leave"

24. There is no positive right to any form of  leave  to  be  derived  from
    s117B. Little weight would be afforded to her private life  as  it  was
    formed at a time when her immigration status was precarious. The  judge
    correctly applied s117B.

25. The judge  concluded  that  there  was  insufficient  evidence  of  any
    relevant compassionate circumstances to justify any concession  on  the
    grounds of any of the factors raised or that  any  of  them  was  of  a
    sufficiently compelling nature to  justify  allowing  leave  to  remain
    exceptionally.  The circumstances of the appellant's case do  not  give
    rise to factors that would outweigh the public  interest  in  effective
    immigration control when  the  appellant  was  here  in  the  UK  on  a
    temporary basis from  the  outset.   Her  position  within  the  United
    Kingdom has always been precarious.

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material  error  of
    law such that the decision should be set aside.  The  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State stands

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.  The Secretary of State's decision stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 21 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

