
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26378/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 August 2013                             |On 10 September 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD



                                   Between

                          abdul fahad khan mohammed

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Khan, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of India, born on 12 June 1986.  He  appeals
    against the decision of the respondent dated 3 October 2011 refusing to
    grant him leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant pursuant to paragraph 245ZX of the Immigration Rules.

2.   The respondent in her letter dated 31 October noted that the  appellant
    had not provided a valid CAS reference number and  therefore  concluded
    that he did not satisfy the Immigration Rules.

3.   The background to the matter was that the appellant had been a  student
    at the Royal London College.  His  application  on  2  April  2011  for
    further leave to remain was refused because  the  college  licence  had
    been revoked.   The appellant had appealed against  that  decision  and
    the Immigration Judge had ordered that he be given six months to obtain
    a fresh CAS.

4.   The appellant's new  college  Lincoln's  College,  London  licence  was
    revoked on 23 May 2012.  The  appellant  received  a  letter  from  the
    respondent dated 21 June 2012 allowing  him 60 calendar days to  submit
    his CAS.

5.   However the appellant  had  applied  for  a  driving  licence  and  had
    forwarded his original passport to the DVLA. He applied to  obtain  his
    passport back from DVLA but received no response.

6.   The appellant approached several colleges to obtain  a  fresh  CAS  but
    was turned down  because  he  did  not  have  the  passport.   It  then
    transpired that the DVLA had sent his passport to the Home Office.  The
    appellant requested that the respondent return his passport   in  order
    to enable him to enrol at the college  and  obtain  a  CAS  letter.  In
    response on 31 October 2012 the respondent refused his application  for
    leave to remain.

7.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana by way  of  a  paper  case.
    The Judge was not satisfied as to the situation regarding the  passport
    and upheld the decision of the Secretary of State.  She  dismissed  the
    appeal.

8.   Grounds of appeal were submitted essentially  on  the  basis  that  the
    passport  was with the respondent and that it was unfair of  the  judge
    to have found otherwise.

9.   Thus the matter came before me on 17 July  2013.   A  letter  from  the
    DVLA was produced which confirmed than the passport had  been  sent  to
    the Home Office.  Mr Wilding  who  represents  the  respondent  had  no
    knowledge of that particular letter and needed time to  make  enquiries
    about the situation.  Thus the matter was adjourned For Mention  to  23
    August 2013.

10.  On that occasion Mr Wilding confirmed  that  the  passport  was  indeed
    with the respondent and it was understandable therefore  why  in  those
    circumstances the appellant had not been able to  obtain  a  valid  CAS
    from another provider.  Mr Wilding indicated that in the  circumstances
    he sought to withdraw the decision of 21 June 2012.

11.  Although the withdrawal of the decision would normally put  an  end  to
    the appeal process in the First-tier Tribunal that does not necessarily
    apply within the Upper Tribunal.   I  note  Rule  17  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 that  the  notice  of  withdrawal
    will not  take  effect  unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  consents  to  the
    withdrawal except in relation  to  an  application  for  permission  to
    appeal.  The party may withdraw its case but that does not  necessarily
    dispose of the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

12.  The essence of the appellant's appeal is to  the  effect  that  it  was
    unreasonable for the  respondent  to  have  issued  a  refusal  in  the
    circumstances  when  she  had  his   passport,    thereby   effectively
    preventing him doing that which he had been allowed leave to do, namely
    to find another  provider.   Mr  Wilding  by  his  application  clearly
    accepts that the decision was defective and that the  appellant  should
    be allowed further leave to obtain the CAS.

13.  In the circumstances I shall treat the application  for  withdrawal  as
    an acceptance of the complaint by the appellant that it was  unfair  in
    all the circumstances.

14.   In  that  situation  I  find  the  immigration  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.  It shall therefore be set aside to be remade.
     To that extent therefore the appeal is allowed.

15.  Mr Wilding indicated that a letter  would  be  sent  to  the  appellant
    offering him 60 days to find  alternative  educational  support.   That
    letter will contain certified copies  of  all  relevant  identification
    documents to enable the appellant to do so.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

