
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26864/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 June 2016                      |On 04 July 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  MR L M S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Muquit of counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings
       or any form of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
       identify the original Appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst
       others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction  could
       give rise to contempt of court proceedings

    2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of the
       First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of Mr L M S ('the  claimant')
       who appealed against a decision, taken on 12 November 2013, to refuse
       to grant leave to remain in the UK on the basis  of  his  family  and
       private life and a decision to remove him.

Background Facts

    3. The claimant is a citizen of Brazil who was born  on  [  ]  1979.  He
       entered the UK as a visitor on 8 August 2004  with  leave  to  remain
       valid until 7 February 2005. The claimant is married to [SS] who  was
       born on [ ] 1972. They have two children, a son born on [ ] 2000  and
       a daughter who was born on [ ] 2003. The claimant's wife and children
       entered the UK illegally in  November  2005.  Thereafter  the  family
       remained in the UK unlawfully.

    4. On 1 April 2011 the claimant applied for leave to remain  in  the  UK
       under the Immigration Rules HC395 (as amended) on the  basis  of  his
       family and private life in the UK. The claimant's wife  and  children
       were  named  as  dependents  on  the  claimant's   application.   The
       applications were refused on 9 May 2011. On  27  September  2011  the
       claimant asked for the decision to be reconsidered. The Secretary  of
       State reconsidered  her  decision  but  maintained  the  reasons  for
       refusal. The Secretary of State concluded that the claimant  did  not
       meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules and found  that  there
       were no features of his case that would  justify  a  grant  of  leave
       under Article 8 outside the Rules. Similar  decisions  were  made  in
       respect of his wife and children. No removal decisions have been made
       in relation to the claimant's wife or children.  Therefore,  they  do
       not have a right of appeal against the decision to  refuse  to  grant
       leave to remain. However, it is  not  disputed  that  the  claimant's
       appeal cannot be considered in isolation of the  effect  his  removal
       would have on his dependants.

The First Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

    5. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
       promulgated on 11 November 2014, Judge Carroll dismissed  the  appeal
       without a hearing. The claimant was granted permission to appeal  the
       decision. The  Upper  Tribunal  allowed  the  claimant's  appeal  and
       remitted the case to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de-novo.

The second appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

    6. In a decision promulgated on  21  October  2015  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Kelly allowed the claimant's appeal.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
       found that removal of the claimant would amount to a disproportionate
       interference with his rights under Article 8. The  judge  found  that
       the claimant's children's best interests  outweighed  the  legitimate
       interest in maintaining effective immigration control.





The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

    7. The Secretary of State sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal.  The grounds of appeal, in  essence,  are  that  the  judge
       erred in considering that the claimant's children were close to being
       entitled to register as British Citizens. On 15 April 2016 First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Hollingworth granted permission to appeal.  Thus,  the
       appeal came before me.

Summary of the Submissions

    8. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge made a material error  of
       law through a misdirection  in  law.  The  judge  believed  that  the
       claimant's children were close  to  being  entitled  to  register  as
       British  Citizens.  The  Secretary  of  State  assets  that  this  is
       incorrect. The judge  indicated  that  the  imminent  entitlement  to
       British Citizenship was 'an important' factor in his decision and  it
       is asserted that this must necessarily be material to the outcome  of
       the appeal.

    9. Mr Whitwell adopted the grounds of  appeal.  He  submitted  that  the
       judge's findings  in  relation  to  the  children's'  entitlement  to
       British citizenship is incorrect  in  fact  and  in  law.  Given  the
       importance of the issue to the judge's decision  it  cannot  be  said
       that a Tribunal would have arrived at the same decision. He  referred
       to paragraph 31 of the decision and submitted that it is  clear  that
       the finding in respect of imminent eligibility goes directly  to  the
       judge's' findings on the best interests of the children.

   10. Mr Musquit submitted that it was necessary to read  paragraph  31  in
       the entire context of the decision not in isolation.  The  judge  set
       out a serious of findings. He referred to the case of PD  and  Others
       (Article 8 - conjoined family claims) Sri  Lanka  [2016]  UKUT  00108
       (IAC) ('PD') and submitted that the judge could have reached the same
       findings irrespective of the finding in relation to  eligibility  for
       British Citizenship. In respect of section 117B of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act') and paragraph 276ADE
       of the Immigration Rules  he  submitted  that  it  was  necessary  to
       consider if it was unreasonable for the children to leave the UK.  In
       making such findings the judge did not treat the children as  British
       Citizens. He submitted that it is clear  that  the  judge  took  into
       consideration the claimant's  immigration  history.  He  referred  to
       paragraphs 36 and 38 of the decision. He submitted that following the
       PD case there is no need to consider anything  further  if  the  best
       interests of the child are to stay in the UK. This would be the  same
       as a finding of unreasonableness. I asked Mr Musquit to refer  me  to
       authority that best interests equate to  a  reasonableness  test.  He
       referred me to PD. He submitted that the question is whether  or  not
       the judge's finding on British Citizenship eligibility is material to
       the outcome of the appeal. He submitted  that  the  judge's  findings
       were sufficient to demonstrate that the judge  would  have  made  the
       same decision. He referred to the findings of a lack of connection to
       Brazil, the children were in the midst of studies etc.

   11. Mr Musquit submitted that s117B (6) does not require removal  if  the
       claimant is in a relationship with a qualifying child.  The  children
       have both been in the UK for more than  7  years  so  are  qualifying
       children. He submitted that the judge's findings  that  the  children
       should not be expected to go back to Brazil was a reasonable  one  on
       the facts of the case.

   12. Mr Whitwell, in reply, submitted that the judge  had  not  considered
       the 'test' of whether or not it was reasonable for  the  children  to
       leave the UK. There was a gap between the findings regarding the best
       interests of the children and whether or not it  was  reasonable  for
       them to leave the UK.

Discussion

   13. The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  erred  when  considering  that  the
       claimant's children were likely to qualify for British Citizenship in
       a matter of weeks 'as they will have lived in  this  country  for  10
       years'. It is clear that the judge took this into consideration  when
       deciding if 'it was reasonable for them to leave the  United  Kingdom
       at this moment in their lives' (para 31). The  judge  refers  to  the
       children having lived in the UK for  nearly  10  years.  No  specific
       reference is made to any relevant legislative provision. As  set  out
       by the Secretary of State s1(4) of the British Nationality Act  1981,
       which provides for acquisition if a  right  to  British  Citizenship,
       applies to children  born  in  the  UK.  Neither  of  the  claimant's
       children were born in the UK. The judge was influenced by  this  when
       considering whether it was reasonable for them to leave the UK as she
       took it into account as an 'important factor'.

   14. However, whether the error is material centres around  the  essential
       issue in this case which is whether or not it would be reasonable for
       the children to leave the UK. The judge accepted  that  the  claimant
       cannot satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  She  found
       that there were  exceptional  circumstances  to  consider  his  claim
       outside of  the  Immigration  Rules  under  Article  8  and  that  in
       assessing proportionality she must  begin  by  considering  the  best
       interests of the claimant's children. The Secretary of State did  not
       dispute that the children's position was  relevant  when  determining
       the claimant's appeal and no  appeal  was  made  in  respect  of  the
       judge's approach to determining the best interests of the children.

   15. Whether or not it is reasonable to expect the children to  leave  the
       UK is the test in paragraph 276ADE and in s117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

   16. Paragraph 276 ADE (1)(iv) provides:

           "The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to  remain
           on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of
           the application the Applicant: ....

           (iv) Is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously  in
           the  UK  for  at  least  7  years  (discounting  any  period  of
           imprisonment) and it would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
           applicant to leave the UK."

   17. S117B(6) of the 2002 Act provides:

           (6)    In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                relationship with a qualifying child, and

                (b)    it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                leave the United Kingdom.

   18. Although the approach taken by the judge was not correctly structured
       the findings were ones that were open to her. The judge  does  appear
       to have conflated the children's best interests with consideration of
       the  reasonableness  of  the  children  leaving  the  UK.  The  judge
       considered  correctly  that  she  had  to  determine  what  the  best
       interests of the children were. She found that their  best  interests
       lay in them remaining in the UK with  the  claimant.  The  judge,  in
       reaching this conclusion, found that the children were aged 2  and  5
       years when they came to the UK and had lived in the UK a little short
       of 10 years. They had been in the UK for the majority of their lives.
       The judge noted that greater significance is to be attached  to  time
       spent in the UK when the children are of school  age  and  developing
       ties and attachments outside  of  the  family.  She  noted  that  the
       children have not been back to Brazil since they first came to the UK
       and that they have become culturally and emotionally  distanced  from
       Brazil and that all of their important attachments and interests  are
       in the UK. The judge also noted that the  claimant's  son  was  at  a
       critical stage of his education as he was due to undertake his GCSEs.
       The judge then erred, as noted above,  by  taking  into  account  the
       'fact that they could soon be' British Citizens when deciding whether
       it is reasonable to require them to leave the UK.

   19. The question is whether this has infected the  decision  to  such  an
       extent that it is material to the outcome of the appeal.

   20. The judge went on to consider and to weigh heavily in the balance the
       public interest  in  maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control
       particularly  given  the  claimant's  'blatant  disregard   for   the
       immigration laws of this country'. However, when  considering  s117B,
       at paragraph 38, the judge correctly noted that the  public  interest
       does not require removal where it would not be reasonable  to  expect
       the child to leave  the  UK  (see-  Treebhawon  and  others  (section
       117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 674 (IAC)).  The judge found that  the  claimant
       fell within the requirements of s117B(6).

   21. Given the judge's findings on the children's best interests  and  the
       reasonableness of  expecting  them  to  leave  the  UK,  despite  the
       erroneous addition of likelihood of British citizenship, the  finding
       at paragraph 38 remained one that was reasonably open to the judge on
       the facts of the case.

   22. Although the judge clearly erred as set out above I do  not  consider
       that this was material to the outcome of this  appeal.  The  findings
       were ones that were open to the judge on the facts of this case.



Decision

   23. There was no error of law such that the decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal is set aside.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 3 July 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
