
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/26378/2014
                                                               IA/26377/2014
                                                               IA/26379/2014
                                                               IA/26380/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 September 2015                 |On 5 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                            foa (First appellant)
                           Bmo (second appellant)
                            ko (third appellant)
                           roo (fourth appellant)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms K Joshi, Legal Representative, instructed by A
                    Bajwa & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought by four appellants,  although  it  is  common
    ground that the lead appellant is the first, namely  the  wife  of  the
    second appellant and the mother of the  two  infant  third  and  fourth
    appellants who are respectively 6 and 4 years of age.  Application  was
    made that the identity of all the  appellants  be  anonymised  in  part
    because appellants 3 and 4 are minors but also due to the fact that the
    first appellant has a medical condition.  No  objection  was  taken  to
    that order being made and accordingly I make a direction for  anonymity
    in this case.

2.   The determination with which I  am  concerned  was  promulgated  on  25
    February 2015 following a  hearing  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Kainth.  The appellants  are  citizens  of  Nigeria.   The  history  in
    relation to a number of  prior  applications  is  as  set  out  in  the
    determination and I do not need to rehearse it in this  judgment.   The
    appeal was from a decision of the Secretary of  State  communicated  by
    letter dated  6  June  2014.   I  note  that  in  paragraph  2  of  the
    determination that date is wrongly stated as  being  2004  but  nothing
    turns on that typographical error.

3.   The first appellant apparently entered the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully
    in May 2002.  Much of the decision letter issued by  the  Secretary  of
    State dealt with whether under the Immigration Rules she  had  achieved
    the twenty year residence which  would  entitle  her  to  remain.   The
    Secretary of State concluded from the chronology that was  clearly  not
    the case and those matters were not pursued in the First-tier Tribunal.
     On the contrary the substance of the appeal  related  to  whether  the
    removal of any or all of the appellants would amount to a violation  of
    their rights under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights
    which relate to family life and to private life.

4.   The matter pursued with greatest vigour before me this morning was  the
    first ground, as amplified in a written skeleton argument. Criticism is
    made of the judge in stating relatively early  in  the  course  of  the
    determination that the removal of the first and second  appellants  was
    "plainly lawful" because they had entered the United Kingdom illegally.
     This argument was developed by Ms Joshi in front of  me  this  morning
    and the way she  puts  her  case  is  that  this  amounted  to  a  pre-
    determination on the judge's part and that having taken the  view  that
    the entry being illegal therefore removal was plainly  lawful  coloured
    the judge's overall determination and there were  no  adequate  reasons
    for coming to that conclusion.  She developed that argument  in  a  way
    which had not been heralded by the grounds of  appeal  by  pointing  to
    subsequent paragraphs and suggesting that the judge  gave  no  adequate
    reasons for his expressed scepticism about what was said by  the  first
    and second appellant in relation to their ties with Nigeria.  The judge
    concluded  at  paragraph  14  "both  were  reluctant  to  admit   their
    continuing familial and cultural  links  to  Nigeria".   The  judge  in
    reciting the evidence which he both  read  and  heard  from  the  first
    appellant (in paragraph 10) and from the second appellant (in paragraph
    11) sets out their assertions that they had lost contact  with  friends
    and family and that close relatives had died.   The  judge  heard  that
    evidence as it was being delivered and  formed  an  assessment  of  its
    credibility and cogency.  He was perfectly entitled to have  doubts  as
    to what was being asserted and it is not for the Upper Tribunal in  the
    exercise of its appellate jurisdiction  to  go  behind  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's adjudication in relation to the  strength,  credibility  and
    weight of evidence. I do not think the criticism made by  Ms  Joshi  of
    the judge's finding has any substance.

5.   What is further said by Ms Joshi is that the subsequent paragraphs  are
    no more than a justification for the  primary  statement  that  removal
    would be lawful.  As I indicated during the course of argument,  judges
    have two styles in giving determinations.   One  is  to  start  with  a
    conclusion and then to give the reasons for coming to it; and the other
    is to work through the reasons before declaring  the  conclusion  which
    has been reached.  Both styles are legitimate and it is  not  for  this
    court to criticise the style adopted by the judge.  It is correct  that
    the judge did not  in  this  instance  adopt  the  formulaic  numerical
    approach as set out in paragraph 17 of Regina v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department ex parte  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27.   The  approach
    commended by the House of Lords involves five  distinct  stages.   They
    are as follows:

         "(1) Will the proposed removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?

         (2)  If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

         (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

         (4)  If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
             in the interests of national security, public  safety  or  the
             economic well-being of the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

         (5)  If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             public end sought to be achieved?"

6.   It seems clear to me reading the determination that the judge  properly
    turned his mind to all of the five stages of the Razgar test.  He dealt
    properly with whether there might have been an  interference  with  the
    family and/or private life both of the adult appellants  and  of  their
    minor children.  He reached proper and  appropriate  conclusions  based
    upon the evidence which he had heard.  He took into account  issues  in
    relation to the first appellant's health and  he  gave  those  discrete
    issues the weight which they deserved.  I have been taken to a decision
    of the Court of Appeal in GS (India) & Others v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 40 and in particular  to  paragraph
    111 of the judgment delivered by Lord  Justice  Laws,  which  reads  as
    follows:

         "First, the absence or inadequacy of medical treatment, even  life-
         preserving treatment, in the country of return, cannot be relied on
         at all as a factor engaging article 8: if that is all there is, the
         claim must fail. Secondly, where article  8  is  engaged  by  other
         factors, the fact that the claimant is receiving medical  treatment
         in this country which may not be available in the country of return
         may be a factor in the proportionality exercise;  but  that  factor
         cannot be treated as by itself giving rise to a breach  since  that
         would contravene the 'no obligation to treat' principle."

7.   In this case there was evidence of the first appellant's condition  but
    no specific evidence as to the quality  and  extent  of  the  treatment
    which might be available were the first appellant to return to Nigeria.
     In my opinion the approach taken  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    cannot be faulted.  He rightly had regard to the  health  issues  which
    were raised albeit they were not pursued in relation to Article  3.  He
    came to the conclusions which  he  did  both  in  relation  to  whether
    Article 8 was engaged (which clearly it was not) and in relation to the
    question of proportionality.  Equally, in relation to  public  interest
    considerations  and  to  whether  any  possible  interference  was   in
    accordance with the law, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  properly  had
    regard to Section 117B of  the  Immigration  Act,  in  particular  that
    little weight should be given to a private life established by a person
    at a time when the person's immigration right is precarious.  In  those
    circumstances, there is no substance in the criticism made of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge under ground 1.

8.   Moving then to the second ground which talks  about  the  relevance  of
    the first appellant's medical  condition,  I  have  adequately  covered
    those issues insofar as they overlap with the points raised  under  the
    first ground of appeal.  There is no doubt that  the  judge  considered
    such limited material as was available to him in relation to the  first
    appellant's medical condition, and accorded it proper weight in  coming
    to the conclusion which he did.

9.   A slightly more finessed argument pursued by Ms Joshi today is  to  the
    effect that the judge may not have differentiated between  the  private
    and family life claim of the adult appellants and that of the two minor
    appellants.  In  particular  it  was  suggested  that  were  the  first
    appellant to die prematurely, as might be the case having regard to the
    nature of her condition, this would impact upon the  wellbeing  of  the
    children.  Again, I do not consider that that argument as raised  today
    is indicative of any error  of  law  on  the  part  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in coming to the conclusion which he did and I therefore
    reject that argument.

10.  The third ground of appeal is not pursued.  It related to a  concession
    which may or may not have been made in the court below.  The reason why
    that ground was rightly abandoned by Ms  Joshi,  as  is  apparent  from
    paragraph 16 of the determination, is that even in the  absence  of  an
    express concession, the First-tier Tribunal Judge expressly found as  a
    fact the matters to which the concession related.

11.  That then leads me to the fourth ground of appeal which is slightly re-
    crafted in the light of an error in chronology as to the age of one  of
    the children.  The ground originally relied upon Appendix  FM-EX.1  and
    the suggestion that a 7 year old child might have a  right  to  remain.
    As is now conceded, the child in question, namely the  third  appellant
    is yet to reach its seventh birthday and therefore  that  provision  of
    the Appendix to the Immigration Rules is not engaged.  The argument was
    put on the basis that this was a near-miss under the Immigration  Rules
    and should be considered as such but I do not consider that  this  adds
    anything to the criticisms made of  this  determination  which  I  have
    otherwise rejected.

12.  Finally, and encompassing several of the grounds  which  I  have  dealt
    with already, a broader argument was raised namely that the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge should have found some level of exceptionality  in  this
    case and in particular should have come to the  conclusion  that  there
    were exceptional circumstances outside the Rules which would allow  the
    appellants to stay.  I questioned Ms Joshi as to what  she  said  would
    constitute exceptional circumstance and she come back with merely  with
    the severe illness, arguably life-shortening, of the  first  appellant.
    This, though tragic, is not exceptional.  Issues such as these are  for
    the judge to determine in accordance with the evidence  heard  and  the
    view which he takes on it. The delicate assessment  of  proportionality
    is a matter  which  this  appellate  jurisdiction  should  not  lightly
    interfere with.  It may well  have  been  unfortunate  that  the  judge
    expressed himself in the  way  he  did  at  paragraph  13  and  made  a
    statement regarding lawfulness prior  to  his  consideration  of  other
    arguments but reading the determination in its entirety,  the  law  has
    been  properly  applied  and  it  is  a  proper  exercise  of  judicial
    discretion on the judge's part.

13.  In all those circumstances this appeal must be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Mark Hill QC  Date 5 October 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Mark Hill QC  Date 5 October 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
