
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26464/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 November 2017                  |On 6 March 2018                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                        mr Syed Shah Hyssain Bukhari
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Janjua of Morden Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He was born on  1  July  1989.
    He appealed against the respondent's decision to refuse to grant him  a
    residence card on the basis of his relationship with  an  EEA  national
    such decision being made on 23 June 2015.

 2. In a decision promulgated on 13 January 2017, Judge M A Khan  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal.  The judge found the appellant  was  not  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with his EEA national  sponsor  and
    that the respondent on the balance  of  probabilities  had  established
    that the appellant had entered into a  marriage  of  convenience  under
    Regulation 21B(1)(c) and (2) of the EEA Regulations 2006 (as  amended).



 3. The grounds claim that the judge erred because it was unfair to  refuse
    the adjournment request.   There  was  medical  evidence  to  show  the
    sponsor was unfit to attend court.  In any event, the judge  failed  to
    satisfy himself in terms  of  Papajorgii  (EEA  spouse  -  marriage  of
    convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038  (IAC)  [39]  that  it  was  more
    probable than not that it was a marriage  of  convenience.   The  judge
    erred because he failed to adequately  consider  the  totality  of  the
    information and evidence before him.

 4. Judge Cruthers in a decision dated 26 July 2017, found that the grounds
    did not identify any arguable error of law.  He found that the  grounds
    did not establish that a grant of permission would be appropriate.   As
    regards the appellant's first complaint that  the  appeal  should  have
    been adjourned, the judge dealt more than adequately with that  at  [5]
    and [6].  Essentially the judge was being told that the  appeal  should
    be delayed because the appellant's spouse was said to be suffering from
    abdominal pain and drowsiness.  Judge Cruthers said it was difficult to
    see why abdominal pain and drowsiness would have prevented the  sponsor
    attending the hearing if she was in a  genuine  relationship  with  the
    appellant.  The  judge  did  not  act  unfairly  in  terms  of  Nwaigwe
    (Adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) and/or SH (Afghanistan)
    [2011] EWCA Civ 1284.  See [13].  More generally, Judge Cruthers  found
    that the grounds amounted to no more than an attempt  to  quarrel  with
    the judge's  conclusion  that  the  evidence  overall  established  the
    respondent's allegation  that  the  appellant's  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience.

 5. The grounds were resubmitted.  Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor  found  on
    13 September 2017 that it was arguable that the First-tier hearing  was
    vitiated by procedural unfairness.  The reasons read inter alia:

         "The FTT refused to adjourn the hearing of the appeal (set down for
         22 December 2016) in the face of medical evidence from a  qualified
         medical  practitioner  dated  6  December  2016  stating  that  the
         appellant's spouse was 'not to go through  court  proceedings  this
         month'.   The  reasons  underpinning  the  FTT's  refusal  of   the
         application to adjourn can be resolved  into  a  rejection  of  the
         evidence as to the appellant's  wife's  fitness  to  attend.   Such
         reasoning is arguably irrational or, alternatively, it is  arguable
         that the FTT failed to take account of the aforementioned evidence.
          All grounds may be argued."

 6. The respondent lodged a Rule 24 response on 4  October  2017.   It  was
    argued that the onus was on the appellant to show that the partner  was
    unable to attend  the  hearing.   The  judge  was  satisfied  that  the
    previous application for an adjournment was refused and  there  was  no
    evidence before him that the partner could  not  attend  the  court  as
    considered between paragraphs 5 and 6 of the decision.  Such a decision
    was open to the judge based on the evidence.

Submissions on Error of Law

 7. Mr Janjua relied upon the grounds.  He submitted that there was  cogent
    evidence that the sponsor's medical condition was  such  that  she  was
    unable to attend the hearing. As a result and bearing in mind  Nwaigwe,
    the judge should have adjourned the hearing.

 8. Mr Tufan relied upon the Rule 24 response.  He submitted that the  onus
    was on the appellant to show that the sponsor was medically  unable  to
    attend the hearing such that the judge directed himself  appropriately.



Conclusion on Error of Law

 9. It is instructive to set out the history of events prior to the hearing
    on 22 December 2016 before the judge.  Morden Solicitors wrote  to  the
    Tribunal on 8 December 2016.  Because  of  a  difficult  pregnancy  the
    sponsor would be unable to give evidence.  A letter  from  the  GP,  Dr
    Saidi Syed of the Edith  Cavell  Surgery  dated  6  December  2016  was
    attached.  It reads inter alia as follows:

         "This is to certify that  Ms  Lakatas  has  severe  back  pains  in
         pregnancy, an infection and is also suffering from daily migraines.
          She is in poor health and is not to go  through  proceedings  this
         month. I have  prescribed  her  painkillers  which  will  make  her
         drowsy.

         I would be grateful if this can be taken into account."

10. The application for an adjournment was  considered  and  refused  on  8
    December 2016.  Inter alia, the refusal reads as follows:

         "The sponsor can give a witness  statement  if  she  is  unable  to
         attend  court.   It  is  noted  that  the  doctor  who  signed  the
         certificate is Dr Z Syed but the list of doctors  at  the  practice
         refers to Dr R Saed.  Please explain."

11. Morden Solicitors wrote again to  the  Tribunal  on  12  December  2016
    attaching a further report from the Edith Cavell Surgery.  It reads  as
    follows:

         "This is to certify that Dr Syed Zaidi is a full-time GP  at  Edith
         Cavell Surgery and was in fact the same doctor that  wrote  to  you
         previously with the initials Dr Z Syed.  Liliana Lakatas  was  last
         seen by Dr Zaidi on 6 December 2016.

         I would be grateful if this could be taken into account.  Sorry for
         the inconvenience caused."

    The letter is signed by Dr Syed Zaidi.

12. Morden Solicitors said in their letter of 12 December 2016  inter  alia
    as follows:

         "We write further  to  your  letter  dated  8  December  2016.   In
         response to your query regarding the  GP  who  signed  the  medical
         certificate, please note that  GP's  name  is  available  on  their
         website.  A letter has been provided confirming this.

         Furthermore we also submit that our  client's  spouse  Mrs  Liliana
         Lakatas is in a condition that she cannot come  to  our  office  to
         give a statement.  It is again  submitted  that  she  is  having  a
         difficult pregnancy and is suffering from dizziness, an  infection,
         severe back pain and migraines.  She is currently taking medication
         which make  her  drowsy.   She  has  had  a  history  of  difficult
         pregnancy  and  she  was  advised  by  the  doctor   to   have   an
         abortion/miscarriage July 2015  because  she  suffered  an  ectopic
         pregnancy.  If she is unable to give evidence or give a  statement,
         this may have a detrimental effect on our client's case."

13. The application to adjourn was again refused but repeated on behalf  of
    the appellant at the hearing.  See [5] of the decision  of  the  judge.
    The judge took into account the adjournment application history and the
    new sick note provided, that the sponsor was suffering  from  abdominal
    pain.  Relying upon what had gone before, the judge did not  reconsider
    that evidence but in considering the sick note said as follows:

         "The sick note states  that  Miss  Liliana  Lakatas  (EEA  national
         sponsor) is suffering from abdominal  pain.   The  notes  does  not
         state as to whether the witness is unable to attend court  and  not
         why not.  In these circumstances the adjournment request is refused
         as it is not in the interest of justice to do so." See [6].

14. Whatever suspicions the judge might have had regarding the  genuineness
    of the symptoms complained of and the nature of  the  contents  of  the
    medical reports, he was obliged  to  reconsider  the  reasons  for  the
    refusal of the adjournment of the hearing as  well  as  the  sick  note
    handed up.   The  judge  was  clearly  suspicious  regarding  both  the
    genuineness of the marriage as  well  as  his  concerns  regarding  the
    medical evidence.  Nevertheless, I do find it was incumbent upon him to
    engage with the same and, in my view,  his  absence  to  do  so  was  a
    material error of law.

15. The appeal will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  de
    novo when, on this  occasion,  it  will  be  incumbent  upon  both  the
    appellant and the sponsor Ms Liliana Lakatas to  attend  to  give  oral
    evidence.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal made a material  error  of  law.  I  set  aside  the
decision and remit the appeal to the First-tier for a de novo hearing.


Signed                              Date 14 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
