
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/26903/2014
                                                               IA/26904/2014
                                                               IA/26910/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 February 2016                  |On 26 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE


                                   Between

                                    J K B
                                     R K
                                    J K B
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms I Mahmud of counsel instructed by Jasvir Jutla &
Co, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are nationals of  India.  The  first  appellant  is  the
    husband of second appellant and the third  appellant  is  their  child.
    They appeal, with permission granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan on
    13 August 2015, against the decision of Judge Coaster of the First Tier
    Tribunal dismissing their appeals against the respondent's decision  to
    refuse them leave to remain. The third appellant is seven years old and
    the first and second appellant have another child born in the UK who is
    4 years old and whose appeal is entirely dependant on  the  outcome  of
    the appeals of the three named appellants or  at  the  very  least  the
    outcome of the appeals of the first and second appellants.

 2. In granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan  in  her
    decision said, "The third ground of appeal argues that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did not place sufficient weight on the best interests of
    the children and did not make specific findings in relation to  Section
    55. The First-tier Tribunal Judge referred to  one  relevant  authority
    and considered the position of the two children in some detail [59-69].
    It was no incumbent on him to make separate findings under Section  55,
    which imposes a duty on the Secretary of State, if the welfare  of  the
    children was properly considered. However, it is at least arguable that
    the First -tier Tribunal Judge did not indicate  whether  e  considered
    the interests of the children as a primary consideration,  nor  did  he
    consider all  the  issues  outlined  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  EV
    (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874. No clear findings  were  made
    as to whether, it was reasonable to expect the oldest child  to  return
    to India and whether as a result,  she  met  the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules. While the First-tier Tribunal Judge wrote a  careful
    and detailed decision it is at least arguable that he may have erred in
    his assessment of the weight to be placed on the best interests of  the
    children".

 3. Having regard to the decision of the President of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey in Nixon [2014] UKUT 00368  (IAC),  I  am
    not sure whether the permission granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
    in the above terms  meets  the  statutory  requirements  to  which  the
    President drew attention in the Nixon decision. However, this point was
    not taken by Ms  Isherwood,  the  respondent's  representative  in  her
    submissions before me at the hearing.

 4. For the appellants Ms Mahmud of Counsel  argued  that  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal Judge's assessment of proportionality  was  flawed.  She  said
    that the eldest child of the appellants was born  in  the  UK  and  had
    lived in the UK for all the eight years of his life. He had never  been
    to India and neither of the couples' children have had any contact with
    any family member in India. She drew my attention to  the  contents  of
    Paragraph 35 of the Court of Appeal decision in EV  (Philippines).  She
    also relied on paragraph 13 of the decision of the Administrative Court
    in Tinizarey [2011] EWHC 1850 Admin. Ms Mahmud contended that the First
    tier Tribunal Judge should have considered the best  interests  of  the
    children in isolation of the immigration history of the parents.

 5. Ms Isherwood argued that the determination of the First  tier  Tribunal
    Judge does not disclose any  material  error  of  law.  The  appellants
    according to her were simply trying to reargue the merits of the  case.
    She asked me bear in mind  the  contents  of  paragraph  34(b)  of  the
    decision in AJ (India). She argued that the impugned decision had taken
    all the relevant factors into account and had been entitled in  law  as
    well as on facts  to  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  appeals  be
    dismissed.

 6. In her response to the arguments advanced by Ms  Isherwood,  Ms  Mahmud
    introduced a new factor. She argued that the First  tier  Tribunal  had
    failed to have regard to the difference in the castes of the parents  -
    the  first  and  the  second  appellant.  According  to  her  the  cast
    difference in parties to a marriage can  be  very  important  and  that
    whilst  inter  faith  marriages  in  India  are  received   with   more
    acceptance, the inter caste marriage are not. To this  argument  of  Ms
    Mahmud, Ms Isherwood quite properly drew my attention to  the  contents
    of paragraph 66 of the determination of the First tier Tribunal. It had
    noted that no evidence had been adduced in support of the argument that
    had been advanced on behalf  of  the  appellants.  I  also  noted  that
    permission to appeal had been specifically refused on this ground as is
    evident from paragraph 2  of  the  decision  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Canavan.

 7. Having heard the arguments from representatives I adjourned the hearing
    to consider all the relevant papers and the  relevant  authorities  and
    make a reasoned decision in the light thereof and which I now  give  as
    follows.

 8. I dismiss the appeals as I  find  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of Judge Coaster, a Judge of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal.
    Described by the  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Canavan  as  "a  careful  and
    detailed decision", with which  I  respectfully  agree,  Judge  Coaster
    carried out a full and thorough examination of all the  relevant  facts
    including in  particular  those  facts  which  had  an  impact  on  the
    determination of the best interests of  the  children.  The  Judge  has
    demonstrated that in assessing proportionality he paid full  regard  to
    the birth, length of residence and  all  other  factors  listed  in  EV
    (Philippines) decision. What weight the Judge gave to each factor is  a
    matter that was open to him but he did not ignore consideration of  any
    of the material fact. The  argument  that  Judge  Coaster  should  have
    determined best  interests  of  the  children  "in  isolation"  of  the
    immigration history of the parents is, with great respect, absurd as it
    is their immigration history that is the cause of the decision  of  the
    respondent. Also such submission has no basis in any of the authorities
    relevant to the determination of the best interests of  children  which
    of course must be a primary consideration but is not and cannot be  the
    only or sole consideration.  Ms Mahmud's reliance on  the  contents  of
    paragraph 35 of the Court of Appeal decision  in  EV  (Philippines)  is
    very selective as the paragraphs that follow - 36, 37 and  38  make  it
    clear that the best interests of the child have to be  weighed  on  the
    totality of all the evidence and  in  proportionality  exercise  "there
    falls to be taken into account the strong weight to  be  given  to  the
    need to maintain immigration control in pursuit of the  economic  well-
    being of the country and the fact that, ex  hypothesi,  the  applicants
    have o entitlement to remain. The immigration history  of  the  parents
    may also be relevant e.g.  if  they  are  overstayers,  or  have  acted
    deceitfully." [paragraph 37 of the decision  in  EV  (Philippines)].  I
    have also borne in mind paragraph  58  of  the  decision  [author  Lord
    Justice  Lewison].  Lord  Justice  Lewison  states,  "In  my  judgment,
    therefore, the assessment of the best interests of the children must be
    made on the basis that the facts as they are in  the  real  world.   If
    neither parent has the right to remain, then  that  is  the  background
    against which the assessment is conducted. Thus the  ultimate  question
    will be: is it reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent with
    no right to remain to the country of origin?" That  is  precisely  what
    Judge Coaster used as the test for his decision. Appeals are  therefore
    dismissed.


K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
23 February 2016
