

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: IA/26873/2015

                                                 IA/26875/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House           |            Decision & Reasons      |
|On 7 July 2017                 |Promulgated                         |
|                               |On 13 July 2017                     |
|                               |                                    |
|                               |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                              MRS SANA FAIZAL+1
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Rehman of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant in this appeal is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department. The respondent is Mrs Faisal. However, for the convenience, I
   shall continue to refer to Mrs Faisal as the appellant and the  Secretary
   of State as the respondent which were the designations they  had  in  the
   proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal.

2. The second appellant is the son of the first appellant who is  a  citizen
   of Pakistan. As the second appellant's appeal rests or falls with that of
   the first appellant I shall refer to her as "the appellant" and  consider
   her appeal first.

3. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of  the
   respondent dated 14 July 2015  for  grant  of  leave  under  Appendix  FM
   paragraph 276 ADE and Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
   Rights.

4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Amin allowed the  appellant's  appeal  pursuant
   to the Immigration Rules.   Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  to  the
   respondent by first-tier Tribunal Judge Caruthers on 11 May 2017  stating
   that it is arguable that the respondent's complaint at paragraph 8 of the
   grounds of appeal are arguable. The Judge arguably failed to address  the
   respondent's evidence relating to an interview undertaken with the  first
   appellant on 25 June 2015.

   First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings


5. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appellant's appeal for the following
   reasons which I summarise.


6. The  respondent  alleges  fraud  and  therefore  the  burden  is  on  the
   respondent to provide cogent evidence to support that  allegation,  on  a
   balance of probabilities. This is that the appellant  used  deception  in
   order to obtain her TOEIC Certificate in 2014. Relying on the case of  SM
   and Qadir v SSHD (ETS - evidence - burden of  proof)  [2016]  UKUT  00229
   (IAC) multiple phases from which the generic evidence was considered  the
   respondent had failed to discharge the legal burden of proving dishonesty
   by the appellant.


7. In the present appeal, no voice recordings  have  been  provided  to  the
   Tribunal or to the appellant. The respondent has failed to  identify  the
   proxy and no name has been provided for the proxy. The problem  with  the
   respondent's case is that there is no identified person as  well  as  any
   original evidence to show that the proxy taker  took  the  test  for  the
   appellant.


8. In response to the assertions made by the respondent, detailed and  clear
   evidence was heard from the appellant as to how  she  went  to  the  test
   centre; how long the test took place; the layout of the rooms; the number
   of candidates; the nature  of  the  speaking  test;  the  tools  she  was
   provided to take tests, et cetera. The appellant's husband also confirmed
   that he drove the appellant to the test centre in Hounslow and he  waited
   some four hours for her to complete the tests. "I  have  to  balance  the
   appellant's clear oral and direct evidence about the  background  to  the
   test, has spoken  English.  I  conclude  that  the  appellant's  evidence
   carries more weight than the generic evidence of the respondent.  I  find
   the appellant's evidence to be credible and consistent.


9. Dr Harrison in SM and Qadir describe the evidence of Mr Millington to  be
   insufficient. At paragraph 63 of that case, the Upper Tribunal criticised
   the evidence of Mr Millington and Miss Collings. These  criticisms  stand
   as far as Mr Millington's evidence is concerned  as  the  respondent  has
   sought to rely on the same evidence in this appeal.


10. The  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  appeal  under  paragraph  S.
   LTRP.1.6 of Appendix FFM, namely that the presence of  the  applicant  in
   the United Kingdom is not  conducive  to  the  public  good  because  her
   conduct (including convictions which do not all within  paragraph  S-LTR.
   1. 32 1. 5), character, associations or other reasons make it undesirable
   to allow her to remain in the United Kingdom.


11. The appellant's counsel that the  respondent's  Immigration  Directorate
   Instructions entitled family life five year  routes  of  August  2015  at
   section 7.3  which  requires  consideration  to  be  given  in  any  case
   involving S-LTR 1. 6 to the respondent's "criminality  guidance  in  ECHR
   cases, implying that this section  is  focused  on  applicants  who  have
   criminal convictions. The appellant has no criminal convictions.


12. It is therefore  not  clear  why  the  respondent  has  relied  on  this
   paragraph. Under paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules was therefore
   not in accordance with the law. Therefore S- LRT 1. 6 is  not  applicable
   to the appellant. In any event in  considering  the  provisions  of  that
   section, a rounded assessment of all relevant circumstances is  necessary
   including any reprehensible conduct, the circumstances surrounding it and
   the applicants good character otherwise and that the appellant's  present
   would be undesirable irrespective of  the  conduct  relied  upon  by  the
   respondent. The respondent failed to  take  all  the  circumstances  into
   consideration and on this basis the  respondent's  decision  was  not  in
   accordance with the law.


13. The Judge then gave his notice of decision that the  appellant's  appeal
   succeeds on the  grounds  that  the  respondent  decisions  were  not  in
   accordance with the law and therefore valid decisions are outstanding.


   Grounds of appeal


14. The respondent in her grounds of appeal states  the  following  which  I
   set out in summary. The first-tier Tribunal Judge failed to give adequate
   reasons for findings on material matters. It is stated in the case of  SM
   and Qadir that the respondent bears the evidential burden of proof and if
   it has been discharged that it is for  the  appellant  to  show  credible
   evidence that he or she had passed  the  ETS  test.  This  has  not  been
   adequately addressed. The Tribunal summarises the appellant's account  of
   taking the test at paragraph 46 however,  none  of  the  information  she
   provides at paragraph 15, 17  or  22  is  detailed  or  specific  to  the
   contents of the  test.  None  of  the  information  given  including  the
   explanation that the  appellant's  husband  drove  her  to  the  test  at
   paragraph 17, 35, and 47 precludes the use of a proxy test  taken  during
   the test. It is also not clear from the decision what her  test  involved
   as there is very little description of its contents and the appellant has
   not provided any evidence to support  her  version  of  events  as  being
   consistent with the TOEIC exam process.


15. The Tribunal refers to the IDI's on family life and states at  paragraph
   51 that consideration is to be  given  to  the  respondent's  criminality
   guidance in the European Convention on Human Rights cases.  This  section
   does not only apply  to  criminals.  The  appellant  does  not  meet  the
   suitability requirements of S-LTR 1. 6 of Appendix FM of the  Immigration
   Rules.


16.  The  Judge  made  a  material  misdirection  of  law  in  applying   an
   impermissible high standard of proof in determining the deception  issue.
   The decision notes that no voice recordings have been produced. The voice
   recordings are the property of ETS but in any case, it is submitted  that
   the respondent does not need to produce such evidence to establish fraud.
   Equally, the respondent does not need to provide a  name  for  the  proxy
   test  taker.  The  requisite  standard  of  proof  is  the   balance   of
   probabilities, which was clearly discharged in this case.


17. Permission to appeal was granted on  ground  8  which  states  that  the
   Tribunal has failed to reconcile the conflict between the result  of  the
   appellant speaking test on 18 September 2012 and her requirement  for  an
   interpreter at interview on 25 June 2015. The appellant's explanation  is
   not sufficient to discharge the evidential burden of proof order in  this
   case. She has not provided any credible evidence that she passed the  ETS
   test.


   The hearing

18. At the hearing, I heard submissions as to whether there is a material
   error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. Mr Rehman relied
   on his skeleton argument. Mr Stanton relied on the respondent's grounds
   of appeal.


Decision on error of law

  19. I have given anxious scrutiny to the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge who allowed the appellant's appeal under the  Immigration  Rules
      for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  as  a  spouse.  The  Judge
      essentially found that the respondent, on whom the  burden  lies,  had
      not proved that the  appellant's  application  was  correctly  refused
      under paragraph 321A of  the  Immigration  Rules  in  respect  of  the
      English language test and as such, the respondent had not demonstrated
      that the appellant employed fraud.


  20. This is the latest in a long line of cases arising from  action  taken
      by the Secretary of State in the wake of a BBC ``Panorama''  programme
      broadcast in February 2014. That programme  revealed  that  there  had
      been widespread fraud in the taking of language tests provided  by  an
      entity  called  Educational  Testing  Services  (ETS),  a   non-profit
      organisation  based  in  the  United  States.  The  fraud  principally
      consisted of the taking of tests by a person  other  than  the  person
      named  on  the  certificate  as  subsequently  issued.  Following  the
      programme ETS reviewed all of the tests taken at centres  in  the  UK.
      The conclusion of the review process was that many thousands of  tests
      had been  taken  by  someone  other  than  the  person  named  on  the
      certificate. ETS provided the results of its review to  the  Secretary
      of State.  The  appellant's  test  was  one  of  those  identified  as
      fraudulent by ETS. Whether deception was used by the appellant in this
      case is a precedent fact for the Tribunal  to  determine  because  the
      very existence of the Secretary of State's power as exercised in  this
      case depended on deception having been used.


21. The legal burden of proving that the appellant used  deception  lies  on
   the Secretary of State albeit that there is a  three-stage  process.  The
   Secretary of State first must adduce sufficient  evidence  to  raise  the
   issue of fraud. The appellant has then a burden of  raising  an  innocent
   explanation which satisfies the minimum level of  plausibility.  If  that
   burden is discharged, the Secretary of State must establish on a  balance
   of probabilities that this innocent explanation is to be rejected.


22. There is one civil standard of proof to be applied. The  seriousness  of
   the consequences does not require  a  different  standard  of  proof  but
   flexibility in its application will involve consideration of the strength
   and quality of the  evidence.  The  more  serious  the  consequence,  the
   stronger must be the evidence adduced for the necessary  standard  to  be
   reached. The Judge correctly identified that the burden of  proof  is  on
   the respondent and it is on a balance of probability. However, the  Judge
   failed to take into account, certain evidence  and  to  place  sufficient
   emphasis on material evidence and this brought him into material error.


23. The generic evidence provided by the respondent  was  a  statement  from
   Mrs Rebecca Collings  and  Mr  Peter  Millington  who  stated  that  "ETS
   described that any test characterised as cancelled  (which  later  became
   known as invalid) had the same voice for  multiple  test  takes.  witness
   statement of could not  be  relied  on  in  respect  of  this  particular
   appellant. Mr Peter Millington stated, "it is clear that in order  to  be
   characterised as 'invalid' on the spreadsheet provided to the Home Office
   the case has to have gone through a computer program analysing speech and
   then two independent voice analysts. If all three are in agreement that a
   proxy has been used then the test would be characterised as 'invalid'".


24. The respondent however had provided  additional  evidence  and  did  not
   only rely on the generic evidence of Mr Peter Millington and  Ms  Rebecca
   Collins. This evidence was the  interview  record  of  the  appellant  in
   respect of her claim that her marriage is subsisting, which was the basis
   of her claim in that application. The Judge failed to consider  that  the
   appellant gave evidence through an interpreter almost 3 years  after  she
   claimed to have passed her English language test with excellent results.


25. Mr Rehman in his submissions said that the  appellant  was  not  put  on
   notice at the interview, that her English language skills were also being
   considered  in  the  marriage  interview.  He  added  that  although  the
   appellant gave evidence through an interpreter, this should not be  taken
   as an indicia of the appellant's English-language skills. The  Judge  did
   not consider additional evidence. The Judge made a material error in  law
   by  not  considering  the  totality  of  the  evidence  produced  by  the
   respondent.


26. Furthermore, the Judge in his decision relied on  the  evidence  of  the
   appellant at her husband about the process of the test which he found  to
   be "detailed and clear." The Judge  found  credible  that  the  appellant
   could say how she travelled to the test centre, the layout of the  rooms,
   the number of candidates in the room, and each candidate had his  or  her
   individual computers and headphones. She described  the  headphones  that
   were given for listening and said that a small pencil  was  provided  for
   writing or putting marks on the paper.


  27. The Judge therefore relied  on  this  peripheral  evidence  about  the
      procedure of the English language tests but not about the contents  of
      the tests themselves. The Judge at paragraph 48 stated that "I have to
      balance the appellant's clear oral and evidence about  the  background
      to the test, and her spoken English. The Judge failed to  have  regard
      to the fact that knowledge of the test procedure can  be  subsequently
      acquired by the appellant.


  28. The Judge failed to consider that merely having this information about
      the procedure of  the  tests,  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  the
      appellant took the test. He failed  to  consider  that  the  appellant
      could have acquired this information by any other means and  it  would
      not have been necessary for her to take the test to know the procedure
      at the test centre.  The  Judge  also  failed  to  consider  that  the
      appellant did not provide other evidence as to how she  paid  for  the
      test, whether it was paid online or in cash.


29. The Judge stated, "I conclude  that  the  appellant's  evidence  carries
   more  weight  than  the  generic  evidence  of  the  respondent.".   This
   demonstrates that the Judge considered the evidence of the appellant  and
   the generic evidence provided by the respondent. He made  no  mention  of
   the additional  evidence  the  respondent  had  provided  which  was  the
   marriage interview record of the appellant and her dependent. Failure  to
   consider this material evidence provided by the respondent led the  Judge
   into material error.


30. The Judge at paragraph 52 said that the respondent's  decision  was  not
   in accordance with the law and allowed her appeal on the grounds that the
   respondent's decision is not in accordance  with  the  law  and  a  valid
   decision he is still outstanding.


31. Accordingly, I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   allowing the appellant's appeal and remit it to the  First-tier  Tribunal
   to be heard again including the appellants Article 8 claim.


DECISION

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  appellants
    appeals and remit them to the First-tier Tribunal.



                                                                       Dated
    this 10th day of July 2017
Signed by

.............................................

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs S Chana







