
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/26318/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 September 2015                 |On 3 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr KOLOLA KANGU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent's appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision  to
    revoke his  indefinite  leave  to  remain,  under  section  76  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ("the  2002  Act")  was
    allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hodgkinson  ("the  judge")  in  a
    decision  promulgated  on  19  February  2015.   In  short,  the  judge
    concluded that the decision of the Supreme Court in Gorje  [2014]  UKSC
    28 fell to be applied.  A deportation order  made  in  the  appellant's
    case on 19 December 2012 had the effect of invalidating  his  leave  to
    remain.  It followed that the Secretary of State's decision  to  revoke
    that leave under section 76 of the 2002 Act was misconceived.   As  the
    respondent's indefinite leave came to an  end  in  consequence  of  the
    deportation order, there was nothing for her to revoke.

2.   The Secretary of  State  applied  for  permission  to  appeal.  It  was
    contended on her behalf that the respondent's indefinite leave "was not
    in fact revoked" as  he  succeeded  in  an  earlier  appeal  against  a
    decision that section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 ("the 2007 Act")
    applied in his case and so  "the deportation order cannot  be  said  to
    have come into force".  Only when a deportation order came  into  force
    would it invalidate a person's leave to remain.

3.   Reliance was placed upon section 79 of the  2002  Act,  which  provides
    that a deportation order may not be made while an appeal "relating  to"
    a decision to make such an order may be brought or remains pending.

4.   It was also contended in  the  grounds  that  the  judge  misunderstood
    Gorje.  The appellant in that case had exhausted his appeal rights  and
    so the deportation order came into force, invalidating his leave.   The
    Supreme Court was clear in Gorje that a  deportation  order  could  not
    have been made until he was no longer able to pursue an appeal.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted on 6 May 2015.

6.   The respondent, Mr Kangu, appeared in person.  He was happy to  proceed
    and explained that he had not been able to instruct solicitors,  having
    received a letter regarding the appeal only two weeks ago.  I explained
    the procedure to be followed to him and he confirmed that he understood
    that he would  have  an  opportunity  to  respond  to  Miss  Fijiwala's
    submissions and to make submissions of his own, supporting the  judge's
    decision.  I made it clear to Mr Kangu  that  some  difficult  law  was
    involved and the discussion would  prove  to  be  rather  technical  in
    nature.  He remained content to proceed.

Submissions on Error of Law

7.   Miss Fijiwala said that Mr Kangu  was  the  subject  of  a  deportation
    order, made on 19 December 2012.  He won his appeal against a  decision
    to deport him and so the order was not pursued.   This had  the  effect
    of leaving Mr Kangu's indefinite leave intact.  It was not revoked.  He
    was always a person "liable  to  deportation".  In  that  regard,  Miss
    Fijiwala relied  upon  Ali  (Section  76  -  "liable  to  deportation")
    Pakistan [2011] UKUT 00250 (IAC). In that case, the Upper Tribunal made
    it clear that a person subject to automatic deportation is  "liable  to
    deportation" within the meaning of section 3(5) of  the  1971  Act  and
    therefore a person whose leave may be revoked under  section  76(1)  of
    the 2002 Act, so  long  as  the  Secretary  of  State  has  deemed  his
    deportation to be conducive to the public good.

8.   Reliance was also placed upon section 79(1)(a)  and  (b)  of  the  2002
    Act. It was clear that a deportation order may not be  made  against  a
    person while an appeal "relating to" the decision to make such an order
    is pending.  As Mr Kangu won his appeal, the deportation order was  not
    fully made as it would not be enforced.

9.   The Supreme Court judgment in Gorje concerned a deportation order  made
    under the 1971 Act, which  came  into  force  once  the  appellant  had
    exhausted his rights of appeal.  His indefinite leave then  fell  away.
    It was clear that the appellant in Georj could not be  removed  at  any
    earlier stage.

10.  The judge erred in concluding that the decision under  section  76  was
    misconceived.

11.  I asked Miss Fijiwala to address the absence of any  distinction  drawn
    by the Supreme Court in Gorje between the scheme provided  for  in  the
    1971 and 2002 Acts on the one hand,  and  the  "automatic  deportation"
    scheme in the 2007 Act on the other. She replied that there were policy
    differences and the Secretary of State was  under  a  duty  to  make  a
    deportation order under the 2007 Act.  The position was different under
    the 1971 Act.  The deportation order made against the respondent in the
    present appeal ought perhaps to have been revoked, in  accordance  with
    usual policy.  It was not clear why it had not been.  In any event, his
    indefinite leave survived and so the Secretary of  State  was  properly
    able to revoke it under section 76 of the 2002 Act.

Findings and Conclusions on Error of Law

12.  The critical question is this:  did  the  judge  err  in  applying  the
    conclusions reached by the Supreme Court in Gorje that the making of  a
    deportation order brings a person's indefinite leave to  remain  to  an
    end and that such leave is not revived following a successful appeal or
    even revocation of the order?

13.  As Miss Fijiwala submitted, the facts  in  Gorje  were  very  different
    from those in the present appeal.  Notice was served upon Mr Gorje that
    a decision to make a deportation order against him had been  made.   An
    appeal brought against that decision failed and  so  the  Secretary  of
    State proceeded to make an order, in April 2008.  Mr Gorje then made  a
    further application to the Secretary of State on the basis of his human
    rights and, in due course, there was a further appeal  which  succeeded
    in March 2009.  The deportation order was revoked.   Mr Gorje asked the
    Secretary of State to confirm that he still  had  indefinite  leave  to
    remain and was told in response that he would be given shorter  periods
    of leave instead.  His case before the Supreme Court  was  advanced  on
    the basis that his  indefinite  leave  revived  on  revocation  of  the
    deportation order.  The Supreme Court held that although the  words  of
    section 5 of the 1971 Act are, as words, capable  either  of  importing
    revival of leave or of not doing so, the correct construction  is  that
    there is no revival.  Mr Georj remained liable to deportation  although
    his removal could not be put into effect in the light of his successful
    human rights appeal.  The Secretary of State was entitled to  give  him
    successive periods of limited leave.

14.  Mr Kangu was served with a decision that section 32(5) of the 2007  Act
    applied in his case.  He  brought  an  appeal  against  that  decision.
    Section 82(3A) of the 2002 Act provides that  such  a  decision  is  an
    "immigration decision" for the purposes of  Part  V  of  the  2002  Act
    ("Appeals").  On the same day, 19 December 2012,  a  deportation  order
    was made by the Secretary of  State.  Section  5(1)  of  the  1971  Act
    provides that a deportation order invalidates  any  leave  given  to  a
    person before the order is made.

15.  I was handed a copy of the deportation order, which in terms refers  to
    the Secretary of State's duty under section 32 (5) of the 2007 Act  and
    goes on to explain to Mr Kangu that "once any right of appeal" has been
    exhausted, the order requires him  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  and
    prohibits him from entering so long as it remains in force.

16.  Mr Kangu won his appeal.

17.  Did the Supreme  Court  draw  any  distinction  in  Gorje  between  the
    "automatic deportation" scheme in the 2007 Act and the scheme in  place
    before that Act came into force?  The clear answer is "no".  There is a
    brief mention of the 2007 Act in paragraph 7 of the judgment  and  more
    detail in paragraph 17, where the 2007 Act scheme is described by  Lord
    Hughes as one which "provides another example of a case when section 76
    would be available without there being  any  deportation  order  to  be
    revoked".  If the Secretary of State  makes  a  decision  that  section
    32(5) of the 2007 Act applies, so as to render an individual liable  to
    deportation
         "... it is not the making of a deportation order but the antecedent
         decision that the provisions of the Act apply which  is  appealable
         ... So, if challenge were made to that decision and were upheld  on
         human rights grounds, there would be no  deportation  order  to  be
         revoked but the individual's indefinite leave to  remain  could  be
         removed and replaced with a different kind of leave by acting under
         section 76 (of the 2002 Act)".

18.  At first reading, this paragraph might appear to support the  Secretary
    of State's case that Mr Kangu's successful appeal against the  decision
    that section 32(5) applied in his case left  his  indefinite  leave  to
    remain intact, and therefore liable to be revoked by means of  a  later
    decision under section 76 of the 2002 Act.

19.  On a closer reading, however, it is clear  that  paragraph  17  of  the
    judgment, forming part of the reasoning towards the overall  conclusion
    reached by the Supreme Court, in fact supports the argument put  on  Mr
    Kangu's behalf in the First-tier Tribunal and  the  judge's  conclusion
    that he had no indefinite leave when the section 76 decision was  made.
    This is because the critical words  in  that  paragraph  are  "...  the
    antecedent decision ...", and, where a successful appeal  follows  "...
    there would be no deportation order to be revoked ...".

20.  In the present appeal, and  as  is  usual  in  "automatic  deportation"
    cases, the decision that section 32(5) applies  is  not  an  antecedent
    decision at all. It is  a  decision  made  contemporaneously  with  the
    deportation order itself. It is clear that Lord Hughes has  in  mind  a
    successful appeal against an antecedent decision which has  the  result
    that no deportation order is  made  and  so  there  is  nothing  to  be
    revoked. The usual 2007 Act case, and the case in this appeal, is  that
    a deportation order is made at the same time  as  the  decision  giving
    rise to an appeal. As noted above, the  order  invalidates  a  person's
    leave to remain by virtue of section 5(1) of the 1971 Act.

21.  Do the words contained in the deportation order, to the effect that  Mr
    Kangu was not required  to  leave  until  his  rights  of  appeal  were
    exhausted, make any difference?  In my view, they do not.  It was  made
    clear to him that there would  be  no  immediate  enforcement  but  the
    deportation order itself was not contingent upon success or failure  in
    any appeal.

22.  Nor does section 79 of the 2002 Act make any  difference.  It  provides
    that a deportation order may not be made in respect of a  person  while
    an appeal "relating to" the decision to make the order could be brought
    or remains pending. However, subsection (3) is perfectly  clear:  "This
    section does not apply to a deportation order which states that  it  is
    made in accordance with section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007."

23.  Does the decision in Ali bear on the issues in this appeal? I  conclude
    that it does not.  Ali is concerned with  the  meaning  of  the  phrase
    "liable to deportation" and  the  Upper  Tribunal  draw  a  distinction
    between the 1971 Act scheme and the provisions of section 32(4) of  the
    2007 Act.  The decision in Ali is not concerned with the  impact  of  a
    deportation order, or revocation  of  such  an  order,  on  a  person's
    indefinite leave.

24.  The deportation order made on 19 December 2012 has remained intact  and
    has not  been  revoked.  When  it  was  made,  it  had  the  effect  of
    invalidating Mr Kangu's indefinite leave  to  remain.   His  successful
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision that section 32(5)  of
    the 2007 Act applied in his case did not revive that  leave.   Nor  was
    his indefinite leave preserved in some way by the  explanation  in  the
    deportation order that he would not be  required  to  leave  until  the
    dismissal of any appeal and the exhaustion of his appeal  rights.   The
    analysis made by the Supreme Court in Gorje applies in Mr Kangu's  case
    and there is no sensible basis for concluding that it does not.

25.  It follows that the judge made no legal error in concluding as he  did.
     At the time the Secretary of State  purported  to  revoke  Mr  Kangu's
    indefinite leave, by means of a decision under section 76 of  the  2002
    Act, he had no leave at all. His indefinite leave came to an  end  when
    the deportation order was made on 19  December  2012.   The  judge  was
    right  to  conclude  that  the  Secretary  of  State's   decision   was
    misconceived and of no lawful effect.

26.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Notice of Decision

27.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, containing no  error  of  law,
    shall stand.

Anonymity

28.  There has been no application for anonymity and I make no direction  on
    this occasion.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

