
[pic]
IAC-AH-PC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/27025/2014
     IA/27026/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 July 2015                       |On 15 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                SM (Jamaica)
                                SS (Jamaica)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms J Howorth, Solicitor, Irving & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing their  appeals  against  a  decision  to
    remove them as persons subject to administrative removal under  Section
    10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999,  their  human  rights  claim
    having  been  refused.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity
    direction on account of the second  appellant  being  a  minor,  and  I
    consider it is appropriate that the appellants should continue to enjoy
    anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for Granting Permission

 2. On 20 April 2015  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chapman  granted  the
    appellants permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         "1.  The Applicants are  mother  and  daughter  (DOB  24.8.10)  and
             nationals of Jamaica.  The appeal was heard by Judge Doyle  on
             15 November 2014.  The grounds  of  appeal  allege  that:  (i)
             there were errors in consideration of delay on the part of the
             Respondent; (ii) failure to have regard to the best  interests
             of the child and  that  the  findings  on  Article  8  are  so
             confused as to amount to a material error of law.  The renewed
             grounds of appeal assert that the decision of FTTJ Frankish is
             an insufficient consideration of the application made.  It  is
             arguable that Judge Doyle  erred  materially  in  law  in  his
             assessment of the issue of delay  at  15(y)  in  that  he  has
             overlooked the fact that  representations  were  submitted  on
             behalf  of  the  Applicants  on  25.3.11  and  these  remained
             outstanding until 20 June 2014.  This may have  an  impact  on
             the assessment of proportionality under Article 8 of ECHR.

         2.   All the grounds may be argued."

The Appellants' Material Histories

 3. The first appellant is the mother of the second appellant.   The  first
    appellant was born in Jamaica  on  5  February  1987,  and  the  second
    appellant was born in  the  UK  on  20  August  2010.   As  the  second
    appellant is to a significant extent a dependant on her mother's claim,
    I shall hereafter refer to her mother as the appellant (save where  the
    context otherwise requires) and to the second appellant by the  initial
    S.

 4. The appellant arrived in the UK on 29 October  2002,  and  was  granted
    leave to enter as a visitor for one month until 27 November  2002.   On
    19 May 2003 the appellant applied for leave to remain as a dependant of
    her mother (S's grandmother) to whom I shall refer by  the  initial  M.
    The appellant's mother's status at  the  time  of  the  application  is
    unclear.  But M was granted ILR from 20 May 2004 following her marriage
    to a person present and settled here on 4 October 2002.

 5. There was a lengthy delay in the respondent making a  decision  on  the
    application for leave to remain.  Eventually it was refused on 17  July
    2007 with a right  of  appeal.   The  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    refusal decision was dismissed by a judge on 6 November 2007.

 6. The appellant did not leave the country once  her  appeal  rights  were
    exhausted.  On 27 May 2010 she was served with an  IS151A  notice  when
    she was encountered by immigration officials.  According to Home Office
    records, she was pregnant at that time and  she  told  the  enforcement
    officials that she was no longer with the child's father.   On  5  July
    2010 the appellant was granted leave outside the Rules until 2 November
    2010 in order to have her baby and to make arrangements  to  leave  the
    UK.

 7. S was duly born on 24 August 2010.  On 2  October  2010  the  appellant
    applied for further leave to remain, but the application  was  rejected
    as invalid on 17 November 2010.  The appellant made a valid application
    on 23 October 2010, and the application  was  refused  on  17  December
    2010.

 8. Although this is not  reflected  in  the  respondent's  record  of  the
    appellant's immigration history,  in  a  letter  dated  25  March  2011
    Lawmans Solicitors made  further  representations  on  the  appellant's
    behalf.  They said they were instructed to apply for  her  case  to  be
    reviewed as removal would lead  to  insurmountable  difficulties  given
    their client's circumstances and length of residence.  It was  accepted
    that they had imperfect immigration histories, but the Home Office  was
    asked to consider that within the context  of  the  previous  lives  in
    Nigeria (sic), the fact that they had been absent from  Nigeria  for  a
    considerable period of time should be taken  into  account.   The  same
    firm sent a chasing letter on 20 July 2011.

 9. On 13 May 2013 Zuriel Solicitors wrote to the CAAU in Liverpool, saying
    they were writing further to various letters written on behalf  of  the
    appellant for which they were still awaiting response.

10. On 13 November 2013 the MPs' Liaison Unit within the Home Office  wrote
    to Steve Reed MP responding to an enquiry that he had made  in  October
    on behalf of the appellant.  Mrs Sajeev of the MPs'  Liaison  Unit  set
    out the  appellant's  immigration  history.   She  explained  that  the
    appellant was not given a right of appeal against the refusal  decision
    made on  17  December  2010,  as  she  had  no  valid  leave  when  the
    application as made.  They had received a request  for  reconsideration
    of the decision on 10 June  2011,  which  had  been  allocated  to  the
    appropriate section.  She apologised for the delay in dealing with this
    matter.  As  the  appellant's  reconsideration  request  was  submitted
    before 13 November 2012, it would be considered under the  Home  Office
    policy on Legacy reconsideration requests.

11.  In  the  meantime,  Home  Office  records  showed  that  although  her
    application was refused with no right of appeal, an appeal  was  lodged
    with the First-tier Tribunal on 14 February 2011.  The appeal  was  due
    for a hearing on 1 April 2011, but it was withdrawn on 29  March  2011.
    There was no further information  available  on  the  appellant's  file
    regarding this matter.  If the appellant had  been  provided  with  any
    documentation in relation to this by the First-tier Tribunal, she  (Mrs
    Sajeev)  would  be  grateful  if  she  could  provide  copies  of  such
    documentation to her.

12. In fact, contrary to Mrs Sajeev's belief, the appeal was not withdrawn:
    it was dismissed.  On 1 April 2011 Designated Judge  Manuell  dismissed
    the appeals of both appellants on the grounds that they were not valid.

13. The appellants instructed new solicitors, Irving & Co, who wrote to the
    UK Border Agency on 22 January 2014.  They asserted that their  clients
    continued to await a decision on their application for leave to  remain
    in the UK made on 26 October 2010.  They complained that the  Secretary
    of State had also failed to confer on the appellant a right of  appeal.
    It was their view that the failure to issue an appealable decision  was
    unlawful.  They requested that the decision in respect of the appellant
    be reviewed, or that the  Home  Office  issue  a  removal  decision  in
    respect of her as soon as possible.

14. On 20 June 2014 the respondent gave her reasons for deciding to  remove
    the appellants upon  a  reconsideration  of  their  applications  under
    Article 8 ECHR, and taking into account  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

15. At the hearing before Judge Doyle at Richmond Magistrates' Court  on  5
    November 2014 the appellants were represented by Ms Jones  of  Counsel,
    and the respondent was represented by a Presenting Officer.  The  judge
    received oral evidence from the appellant, and he set out  his  primary
    findings of fact in  paragraph  11  of  his  subsequent  decision.   He
    concluded at paragraph 12 that the  appellants  could  not  fulfil  the
    requirements of  the  Rules.   Indeed,  he  recorded  Counsel  for  the
    appellants as candidly conceding that the appellants could  not  fulfil
    the requirements of the Rules that had existed in  2010,  nor  as  they
    existed in 2014.  The judge went on in paragraphs 14(a)  to  14(ac)  to
    consider at  some  length,  with  extensive  citation  from  authority,
    whether the appellants qualified  for  Article  8  relief  outside  the
    Rules.  In subparagraph (n) he concluded that family  life  within  the
    meaning of Article 8 did  not  exist  between  the  appellant  and  her
    mother.  At subparagraph (o) he addressed the question of whether there
    was family life between child S and her maternal  grandmother,  and  in
    particular whether the maternal grandmother fulfilled a  parental  role
    in child S's life.  The judge held that the weight of  evidence  placed
    before  him  indicated  there  was  a   normal   relationship   between
    grandmother and grandchild.  The weight of the evidence indicated  that
    the primary carer for child S was her mother.  But even if family  life
    did exist between child S and the maternal grandmother, when he weighed
    up the nature of their relationship, he could not see the  decision  to
    remove the appellants would amount to a breach of the right to  respect
    for family life.

16. From subparagraph (q) onwards,  the  judge  addressed  the  alternative
    submission  that  removal  of  the   appellants   would   represent   a
    disproportionate breach of the  right  to  respect  for  their  private
    lives.  It is convenient to set out verbatim the  judge's  findings  in
    subparagraphs (u) to (z).

         "(u) When I weigh all of the factors in this case, I  come  to  the
             conclusion  that  the   respondent's   decision   is   not   a
             disproportionate breach.  Family life and  private  life  both
             exist, but the family life that exists, exists between the two
             appellants.  They will not be separated, so there is no breach
             of that family life.  To a lesser extent, there is family life
             between the second appellant  and  her  maternal  grandmother,
             however  as  I  have  already  indicated,  there  is   nothing
             exceptional or unusual  about  that  relationship.   It  is  a
             relationship of love and affection  which  can  be  maintained
             form a distance just as the relationship  between  the  second
             appellant's maternal grandmother and her own 17 year  old  son
             has been maintained for many years.

         (v)  The key to this case is consideration of the first appellant's
             immigration history.   The  first  appellant's  mother,  in  a
             candid passage in cross examination, admitted  that  when  she
             arranged for the first appellant to come to the UK, she had no
             intention (and never has had any intention) of  returning  the
             first appellant to Jamaica.  In 2002, the first appellant  was
             a vulnerable young teenager  and  her  mother  was  acting  to
             protect her.  Although the extension of  that  protection  was
             not in accordance with the  law  or  in  accordance  with  the
             Immigration Rules, as a matter of fact,  the  first  appellant
             was able to complete her education and live out her teen years
             in the UK.  The turning point in this case is the respondent's
             decision in July 2007.  By that time, the first appellant  was
             an independent adult (as my brother immigration judge found in
             his   determination   promulgated   on   6   November   2007).
             Notwithstanding the terms of my  brother  immigration  judge's
             decision on 6  November  2007,  the  first  appellant  made  a
             conscious decision to stay in the  UK.   Everything  that  has
             come to pass since November 2007 must be  viewed  against  the
             decision of an independent adult  not  to  accept  my  brother
             immigration judge's decision and not to remove  from  the  UK,
             but instead to pursue life in the UK  in  the  full  knowledge
             that she had no right to remain in the UK.

         (w)  It is argued that the respondent's delay in dealing  with  the
             appellants' case weighs heavily  in  the  appellants'  favour.
             Counsel for the appellants stated that the delay comes in  two
             stages, the initial delay in the period to  2007  and  then  a
             delay from 10  June  2011  to  2014.   I  revisit  my  brother
             immigration judge's decision promulgated on 6  November  2007.
             He commenced the final paragraph of his determination with the
             following sentence, "I do  not  consider  that  the  delay  in
             reaching a  decision  in  this  case  a  disadvantage  to  the
             appellant in any material respect."

         (x)  In Devaseelan 2002 UKAIT 00702,  the  Tribunal  was  concerned
             with a human rights appeal which followed an asylum appeal  on
             the  same  issues.   The   Tribunal   said   that,   in   such
             circumstances, the first Tribunal's determination stands as an
             assessment of the claim the Appellant was making at  the  time
             of that first determination.  It is not binding on the  second
             Tribunal but, there again, the second Tribunal is not  hearing
             an  appeal  against  it.   The  Tribunal   set   out   various
             principles: the first decision is always the  starting  point;
             facts since then can always be considered; facts  before  then
             but  not  relevant  to  the  first  decision  can  always   be
             considered;   the   second   Tribunal   should   treat    with
             circumspection relevant facts that had not been brought to the
             first Tribunal's attention; if  issues  and  evidence  on  the
             first and second appeals are materially the same,  the  second
             Tribunal should treat the  issues  as  settled  by  the  first
             decision rather than allowing the matter to  be  re-litigated.
             The Tribunal also gave a caveat and said that  there  will  be
             occasional cases where the circumstances surrounding the first
             appeal were such  that  it  would  be  right  for  the  second
             Tribunal to look at the matter as if the  first  determination
             had never been made.  The question of delay  up  to  2007  has
             already been dealt with.

         (y)  It is argued that the respondent delayed between 10 June  2011
             and issuing a decision on 20 June 2014.  That argument must be
             viewed against the history of applications in  this  case.   I
             have already found in fact that the matters calling before  me
             for consideration commence when  the  appellant  submitted  an
             application  on  23  October  2010.   That   was   the   first
             appellant's last application for  leave  to  remain.   It  was
             refused on 17 December 2010.  There was no delay, the decision
             was issued within two months.  It  was  not  until  29  months
             later, in May 2013, that  the  first  appellant  submitted  an
             application for reconsideration.  The  clock  stopped  between
             December 2010 and May 2013.   The  passage  of  29  months  is
             marked by inactivity on the part of the first  appellant,  not
             by inactivity on the part of the  respondent.   There  was  no
             delay.

         (z)  The clock started to tick again in May 2013.  Nothing happened
             between May 2013 and January 2014; the appellants' solicitor's
             pre-action protocol letter was the catalyst which led  to  the
             respondent's letter of 20 June 2014.  13 months passed between
             May 2013 and June 2014.  I view those 13 months against the 12
             years that the first appellant has spent in the  UK  and  find
             that there was no disproportionate delay - and that even if  I
             am wrong about that, any delay that there was  forms  a  small
             fraction of the time that the appellant has spent  in  the  UK
             and did not  encourage  the  first  appellant  to  pursue  any
             further significant aspect of private life within the UK."

The Rule 24 Response

17. In response to the granting of permission to appeal, a  member  of  the
    Specialist Appeals Team settled an extensive Rule 24  response  on  the
    part of the Secretary of State opposing the appeal  for  the  following
    reasons:

         "2.  The respondent opposes the appellant's  appeal.   In  summary,
             the respondent will submit inter alia that the  judge  of  the
             First-tier Tribunal directed himself appropriately.

         3.   The respondent will submit that the grounds  advanced  by  the
             appellant raise no material arguable errors of flaw that would
             be considered capable of having a  material  impact  upon  the
             outcome  of  the  appeal.   Moreover  it  is  clear  that  the
             Appellants were legally represented at the hearing and the FTJ
             records correctly that the Appellant's counsel  conceded  that
             they could not succeed under the Immigration Rules.

         4.   As regards Article 8, it was properly open to the FTJ to  find
             that the first and second appellant will be returning together
             and conclude that there will not be  interference  with  their
             enjoyment of family life together.  It was also properly  open
             to the FTJ to find that family  life  within  the  meaning  of
             Article 8 ECHR does not exist between the first Appellant  and
             her mother, beyond ordinary familial ties.   [Paragraph  15(h)
             of  the  determination].   The  FTJ  further  finds  that  the
             relationship between the second appellant and her  grandmother
             is the normal relationship of a grandmother and  grand  child,
             the primary carer of the second appellant properly being found
             to be the first Appellant on the evidence.  Therefore the  FTJ
             provided sound  reasons  to  support  his  findings  that  the
             respondent's decision to remove the  appellants  from  the  UK
             would not amount to a breach  of  the  right  to  respect  for
             family life.  [Paragraph 15 (o) determination.]

         5.   As regard the Appellant's grounds relating to private life  it
             is submitted that the Judge had regard to all of the  relevant
             evidence, and applied the relevant principles to the facts  of
             the Appellants' case.   It  cannot  be  said  that  the  Judge
             conflated matters or failed to consider  relevant  factors  in
             respect of his findings  on  Article  8  private  life.   Read
             overall the determination shows a fair and  balanced  approach
             and does not reveal any material arguable errors of law.   The
             FTJ correctly directed himself to the application  of  Section
             117B of  the  Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
             [paragraph 15(s) determination] in finding that little  weight
             should be given to private life developed in the UK  when  the
             persons immigration status was precarious  because  the  first
             appellant made a conscious decision 'to pursue life in the  UK
             in the full knowledge she had no right to remain".  [Paragraph
             15(v) Determination.]

         6.   Moreover it is clear from paragraph 15(w, x, y and z)  of  the
             determination that  the  Judge  has  properly  considered  the
             impact of the delay in the round  and  provided  adequate  and
             sustainable  reasons   to   support   those   findings.    The
             appellants' grounds are advanced in mere disagreement with the
             negative outcome of the appeal."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

18. At the hearing before me, Ms Howorth developed the arguments raised  by
    her in the grounds of appeal, and Mr Melvin adhered to the  line  taken
    by his colleague in the Rule 24 response.

Discussion

19. Ground 1 is that the judge erred in law in considering  the  impact  of
    delay for which the respondent was responsible.   Ms  Howorth  has  two
    complaints.  Her first complaint is that the judge wrongly adopted  the
    finding of Judge Afako on delay in his decision on the appellant's 2007
    appeal.  Judge Afako found the lengthy  delay  preceding  the  eventual
    refusal decision in July 2007 did  not  cause  a  disadvantage  to  the
    appellant in any material respect.

20. There is no merit in Ms Howorth's first complaint.  In  adopting  Judge
    Afako's finding, the judge was not misapplying Devaseelan.  Apart  from
    the fact that the  period  for  which  the  appellant  was  awaiting  a
    decision  on  her  dependency  application  represented  a  significant
    proportion of the total period of residence which she  had  accrued  in
    the United Kingdom, the delay was otherwise  completely  irrelevant  to
    the assessment of proportionality in 2014.  The finding of Judge  Afako
    was completely sound, and Ms Howorth does not identify by way of appeal
    any consideration which undermines it.  She cites  EB  (Kosovo)  [2008]
    UKHL for the proposition that the House of Lords in that  case  decided
    delay was potentially relevant in three ways.  But she does not  go  on
    to explain how the analysis in EB (Kosovo) assists the appellant's case
    on proportionality. She indicated in oral  argument  that  the  lengthy
    delay had arguably given rise to a sense of permanence and a legitimate
    expectation that the appellant would be granted ILR. But the delay  was
    not long enough to bring the appellant within  an  applicable  Rule  or
    policy at the eventual date of decision.

21. Ms Howorth is on stronger ground in her second complaint, which relates
    to the second period of delay.  Ms Howorth  submitted  that  there  had
    been a delay of three years between the representations made on 10 June
    2011 and the issuing of a decision to remove the appellants on 20  June
    2014.

22. At the beginning of subparagraph (y) the judge  acknowledged  the  case
    that was being put forward by  Ms  Howorth.   But  when  reviewing  the
    history of the applications in the remainder of  subparagraph  (y),  he
    did not acknowledge that representations had been made  in  June  2011,
    and  that  in  2013  the  MPs'  Liaison  Unit  had  apologised  to  the
    appellant's local MP  for  not  responding  to  these  representations.
    Accordingly, the argument runs, the judge was wrong to  find  that  the
    clock stopped between December 2010 and May 2013,  and  wrong  to  find
    that this passage of 29 months was marked by inactivity on the part  of
    the appellant, as opposed to inactivity on the part of the respondent.

23. An oddity of this aspect of the case is that Ms Howorth was  unable  to
    show me in the extensive appellants' bundle  any  representations  that
    were made on 10 June 2011.   She  submitted  that  the  representations
    referred to are those which were made by Lawmans Solicitors on 25 March
    2011.  But these were purportedly posted on 28 March 2011.

24. As indicated earlier, the representations made by Lawmans Solicitors in
    March 2011 were inaccurate and confused, and they added nothing to  the
    application for leave to remain that had been refused  on  17  December
    2010.

25. So I am not persuaded there was any material  error  by  the  judge  in
    treating the appellant as being inactive between December 2010 and  May
    2013.  For in that period she  is  not  shown  to  have  submitted  any
    representations which were worthy of consideration.

26. What trigged the appealable decision to remove the appellants  was  the
    letter from the appellants'  current  solicitors  dated  January  2014.
    Before that, there was not a request to make a  removal  decision.   So
    arguably the judge was being generous in treating the clock as stopping
    at May 2013, rather than in January 2014.

27. But even if I am wrong about that, and even if it could  be  said  that
    the respondent culpably delayed in making  an  appealable  decision  to
    remove the appellants, I do not consider that this vitiates the judge's
    proportionality assessment.

28. As the judge held in subparagraph (v), the  simple  fact  is  that  the
    appellant, an independent adult, made a conscious decision in  November
    2007 to ignore the outcome of her Article 8 appeal,  and  to  carry  on
    pursuing her life in the UK in the full knowledge that she had no right
    to be here.  Her position is not improved by the fact  that  from  2010
    onwards  she  periodically   made   representations   through   various
    solicitors for a reconsideration of what  was  essentially  always  the
    same unmeritorious case, save  that  from  2010  the  appellant  relied
    additionally on her parental relationship with child S.

29. Ground 2 subdivides into an argument that  the  judge  failed  to  have
    regard to child S's best interests, and an argument  that  the  judge's
    findings on Article 8 are so confused as to amount to a material  error
    of law.

30. I do not understand Ms Howorth to pursue the first limb of ground 2  in
    oral argument before me.  But, for the avoidance of doubt, the argument
    has no merit.  The judge expressly addressed the child's best interests
    in subparagraph (h) where he  observed  that  it  had  never  been  the
    respondent's intention to separate child S from her mother.  It was  in
    the interests of child S to remain with the parent who was her  primary
    carer, namely the appellant, and the judge recorded that the parties in
    this case agreed that this was the correct approach.  The judge went on
    to address the circumstances which  mother  and  child  would  face  in
    Jamaica in subparagraph (ab).

31. Ms Howorth expanded on the second limb of ground 2  in  oral  argument.
    Essentially, her complaint was that the judge was inconsistent  on  the
    question of whether child S enjoyed family life with  her  grandmother.
    I cannot see that the judge was inconsistent  on  this  question.   His
    conclusion was that they did not  enjoy  family  for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8; but if he was wrong about that, the separation  of  child  S
    from her grandmother consequential upon her going to Jamaica  with  her
    mother would not constitute a disproportionate breach of family  and/or
    private life.  Ultimately, it is the  analysis  of  the  precise  facts
    which matters, not the label which is applied.  This is illuminated  in
    Singh v Secretary for the Home Department  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  630.   At
    paragraph [25], Sir Stanley Burnton, giving the leading the judgment of
    the court, said:

         "However, the debate as to whether an applicant has or  has  not  a
         family life for the purposes of Article 8 is liable to be arid  and
         academic.  In the present case, I am agreement  with  Solomon  LJ's
         comment when refusing permission to appeal,  the  issue  is  indeed
         academic, and clearly so.  As the European Court  of  Human  Rights
         pointed out in AA, in the judgment which I found most helpful,  the
         facts to be examined in order to  assess  proportionality  are  the
         same regardless of whether family or private life is engaged.   The
         question for the Secretary of State, the Tribunal and the court  is
         whether  those  factors  lead  to  the  conclusion  it   would   be
         disproportionate to remove the applicant from the  United  Kingdom.
         I reject Mr Malik's submission  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  Judge's
         assessment of proportionality was flawed because she, on  his  case
         wrongly, based it on the appellant's private life  rather  than  on
         their family and private  life.   In  my  judgment,  she  took  all
         relevant factors into account, and a conclusion on  proportionality
         is not able to challenge.  Indeed, I go further, in my judgment, no
         reasonable Tribunal, on the facts found, could properly  have  come
         to a different conclusion."

32. In conclusion, I find that the judge has  given  adequate  reasons  for
    dismissing the appeals of both mother and child, and that  the  grounds
    of appeal are no more than an expression of disagreement with  findings
    that were reasonably open to the judge, and which are entirely in  line
    with case law and with the public interest considerations  set  out  in
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  These appeals to  the  Upper  Tribunal
are dismissed.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

