
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA274242015
     IA274322015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 20 June 2017                       |On 14 July 2017                       |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

|                |Jaspreet Kaur                             |First Appellant |
|                |Jarmanjit Singh Kang                      |Second Appellant|


                        (anonymity direction not made)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Ballara, counsel instructed by Legend
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. I see no need for, and do not make, any order restricting  publicity
       about these appeals.

    2. The appellants are  married  to  each  other.  The  first  appellant
       appeals against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Geraint  Jones  QC)  dismissing  her  appeal  against
       decisions of the respondent on 16 July 2015 to refuse  to  vary  her
       leave to remain and to remove her by  way  of  directions  from  the
       United Kingdom.

    3. On 4 May 2011 the first appellant entered the United  Kingdom  as  a
       Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant in possession of a visa  conferring
       leave to enter until 28 July 2012. On 27 July 2012 she  applied  for
       leave to remain in the same capacity and the application was refused
       on 16 July 2015  because  the  first  appellant  had  supported  her
       application with a TOEIC certificate of competence  in  the  English
       language which had been declared invalid.

    4. The first appellants said that she was given the  certificate  as  a
       result of her passing a test that she sat at the London  College  of
       Media & Technology on 21 August 2012. However the TOEIC test  result
       had been declared invalid by the testing organisation.

    5. The second appellant appeals a similar  decision  on  the  same  day
       refusing him leave to remain as the dependant of a Tier 4 Migrant.

    6. It has always been the second appellant's case that he is  dependent
       on the first appellant and therefore if the decision in her case was
       correct the decision in his case is correct too.

    7. Although the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  at  paragraph  8  of  his
       decision  referred  to  the   respondent   having   "cancelled   the
       appellant's visa and leave to remain" a better  description  of  the
       decision of 16 July 2015 is that the respondent had refused to  vary
       her leave and decided to remove the appellant for the reasons given.

    8. Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul gave permission  because  he  found  it
       reasonably arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  erred
       because, for the reasons identified at paragraphs 7, 8 and 9b of the
       renewed grounds, the First-tier Tribunal Judge had misunderstood  or
       failed to take into account relevant evidence.

    9. Paragraphs 7 and  8  criticised  the  judge  for  finding  that  the
       appellants' representatives were unaware of the fact  that  she  had
       previously failed a language test even though it was  clear  to  the
       judge from the respondent's bundle  that  the  first  appellant  was
       shown to have failed and then later passed such a test.  Paragraph 8
       of the grounds refines the point by pointing out that the judge said
       the fact that the appellant had sat two different tests "only became
       clear once she was cross-examined" when it  was,  according  to  the
       judge, clear from the bundle that two tests were involved.

   10.  Paragraph  9b  criticises  the  judge  for   misunderstanding   the
       appellant's evidence that she had taken a test  in  Nottingham  even
       though she lives in Feltham.  The grounds aver that, contrary to the
       finding of the judge, the appellant  did  give  an  explanation  for
       having taken the first test in Nottingham and  the  explanation  was
       that the test centre at Nottingham offered her  an  early  date  and
       that suited her intended application.

   11. It is clear that the First-tier Tribunal Judge found it necessary to
       express his surprise at the way the case was presented.  It is often
       best if judges refrain from  observations  of  the  kind  that  have
       occurred here.  They were not necessary for the proper consideration
       of the case and have set up the suspicion  that  the  case  was  not
       determined correctly.

   12. It is a feature of  this  case  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was
       represented at the First-tier Tribunal by Ms  P  Ellis.   I  do  not
       think it at all controversial  to  say  that  Ms  Ellis  is  a  very
       experienced and respected Presenting Officer who could  be  expected
       to cross-examine  a  witness  calmly  and  professionally  but  with
       considerable rigour.  Mr Ballara said that his case depended on  the
       first appellant being believed when she said that she had taken  the
       second test and, in his professional judgment, it was  best  not  to
       ask questions in evidence-in-chief that could be expect to  rehearse
       answers to questions which Ms Ellis could be expected to ask. If the
       answers  were  satisfactory  they  might  be  thought  to  be   more
       impressive because they  had  been  elicited  in  cross-examination,
       rather than evidence-in-chief.  This may or  may  not  be  an  ideal
       approach but, in my judgment, is  an  entirely  realistic  one  when
       Counsel knew that the witness statement that should  have  stood  as
       evidence-in-chief was not particularly  illuminating  and  that  the
       Presenting Officer could be expected to ask all the  questions  that
       needed to be asked.  I have had the benefit of hearing Ms  Ellis  on
       many occasions when I sat in what is now the First-tier Tribunal and
       I am happy to record that I understand Mr Ballara's approach.

   13. I am not able to make any findings on the contention that the  judge
       misunderstood the evidence about the reasons for taking the test  in
       Nottingham.  They do not appear to be in the  witness  statement  or
       noted in the judge's notes.  I do not find it necessary to  resolved
       the point.  It has not been doubted that the appellant  did  take  a
       test in Nottingham and that the appellant failed that test.  If,  as
       might have been thought, she  was  travelling  a  long  distance  to
       attend a test centre where a  result  favourable  to  her  could  be
       obtained dishonestly, it clearly is not  what  occurred  here.   The
       unsuccessful "Nottingham" test was  taken  on  18  June  2014.   The
       successful test was taken on 20 August 2014 so it was  approximately
       two months later.  In June the appellant scored 120 marks out  of  a
       possible 200 in part of the test and 180 marks in  another  part  of
       the test.  In August she passed with full marks.  The "August"  test
       was taken at the London College of Media and Technology and  it  was
       the result of that test that was cancelled by ETS.

   14. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  accepted  the  respondent's  evidence
       that the test result had been invalidated and took that as  evidence
       that the certificate had been obtained improperly.  There can be  no
       criticism of that.  The judge gave two reasons for  being  satisfied
       that  the  test  was   obtained   improperly   beyond   the   simple
       identification of the result by the checking procedures.  First,  he
       did not believe it was credible that a person could, in two  months,
       improve to the extent that the examination  results  indicate  here.
       This is to some extent a subjective view on the part  of  the  judge
       but the point he is making is an obvious and fair one and I  see  no
       basis for challenging the lawfulness of the decision.   Second,  the
       test was not merely regarded as invalid but  it  came  from  a  test
       centre which was scoring a high number of invalid test results which
       suggested to the judge that it was a  centre  where  corruption  was
       rife and therefore it was inherently more likely that a  certificate
       obtained from there was obtained improperly than would be  the  case
       at other centres.  The judge  also  noted  that  it  was  the  first
       appellant's own case that she had not been required to  produce  any
       identification when she presented herself to take the  test  and  he
       said in paragraph 20(vi) "that, as it seems  to  me,  is  to  invite
       fraud and proxy testing  arrangements.   I am  satisfied  that  the
       appellant took advantage of same."

   15. The judge is criticised for expressing the view that the appellant's
       spoken English as it demonstrated when she gave evidence was in  his
       opinion "fair, but certainly not good or very good."  Again this  is
       a subjective judgment and it would have been helpful  if  the  judge
       had said something to explain his decision.  It may  not  have  been
       practicable to explain why he used the word "fair", rather than some
       other descriptive word but he could have explained how  the  answers
       were deficient. For example, it is not clear if the  deficiency  was
       the result of poor grammar or poor pronunciation or  what.   I  have
       reflected on this point but I am not persuaded that  the  judge  was
       perverse and I would have to  be  persuaded  that  he  was  perverse
       before I could interfere with the decision for this reason.  A  main
       point in calling oral evidence was for the judge to form a  view  of
       the competence of the person who  had  taken  the  test.   It  would
       require very poor behaviour indeed on the part of the judge to  take
       the view that the appellant's English was "fair, but uncertainly not
       good or very good" without there  being  good  reason.   Further  it
       needs  to  be  remembered  that  the  judge  was  not   particularly
       interested in the appellant's English speaking abilities in 2016 but
       in her ability to improve in  the  two  months  in  2012.   In  this
       context the absence of explanation does not matter.  All  the  judge
       was saying is that even three and a half years or so after the  test
       was taken the appellant had not mastered the English language yet he
       was asked to believe there was a very marked improvement in just  in
       two months in 2012.  The judge clearly understood that this was  the
       case and for the reasons he gave was not persuaded by it.

   16. It follows that although the judge's analysis of  the  evidence  has
       opened the door for a lot of circuitous criticism  of  his  decision
       arising from unnecessary criticism of the presentation of the  case.
       The judge has given lawful reasons for the parts that matter.  I  am
       alert to the possibility that the judge was in a negative  frame  of
       mind and improperly reached the decision but I am not persuaded that
       that is what happened here.  I am satisfied that the  reasons  given
       for  disbelieving  the  appellant's  case   are   cogent   and   are
       sufficiently separable from the  other  points  that  they  are  not
       contaminated by any errors in them.

   17. It follows therefore that I am satisfied the  judge  gave  a  proper
       reason for his decision and that he was right  to  dismiss  both  of
       these appeals.

   18. It follows therefore that I dismiss the appeal before me.

Notice of Decision

These appeals are dismissed.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 14 July 2017                   |







