
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27602/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th January 2015                         |On 4th February 2015          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                       miss Adebimpe Ganiyat Aderinto
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Adjarho - Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge M  A  Khan  issued  on  16th  September  2014
    relative  to  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent made on 18th June 2013 to refuse leave to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds and to remove her from the United Kingdom.  The decision
    of Judge Khan was to allow the appeal "to a limited extent in  that  it
    is not in accordance  with  the  law".   His  reason  for  making  this
    decision was that he found that the Respondent had failed  to  consider
    or to make any finding under the Immigration Rules in  force  prior  to
    July 9th 2012 and the pre-July 2012 case law on  Article  8  ECHR.   He
    proceeded on the basis that the application having  been  submitted  on
    7th July 2012 prior to the  introduction  of  the  amended  Immigration
    Rules on 9th July 2012, the Appellant was entitled  to  have  her  case
    considered under the  'old  classic'  Article  8  case  law  and  under
    paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.

 2. It is submitted in the Grounds of  Appeal  that  Judge  Khan  erred  in
    failing to direct himself to the decisions Odelola v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2009] UKHL 25 and Kumar, R (on the application
    of) the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2014]  EWHC  644
    (Admin) or any of the other numerous authorities where the  proposition
    that absent saving transitional provisions it is the Rules in force  at
    the date  of  decision  that  apply  and  not  those  at  the  date  of
    application.  It is submitted in the grounds that Edgehill and  Another
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 402 is not
    authority for the contrary proposition.  It is submitted that the judge
    erred in failing to hear the appeal properly.

 3. I do not intend to discuss all the relevant case law at this  juncture.
    Suffice it to say that what is submitted in the grounds is correct  and
    supported by several recent decided cases.   Judge Khan  clearly  erred
    in law. The Appellant has not had a fair or proper hearing in the First-
    tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

I therefore remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de  novo
before a Judge other than M A Khan.
No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date: 3rd February 2015

N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal







