
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27654/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18 July 2014                                 |On 4 August 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                             ROSE DEMENA MORRIS
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Aminu, Solicitor, Charles Hill & Co. Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant was born on 13 April 1951 and she is now  63  years  old.
    She is a national of Jamaica.  She had been a regular family visitor to
    the United Kingdom in the  period  spanning  1993  to  1998.   She  had
    parents and two children as well  as  other  relations  living  in  the
    United Kingdom.  She was however granted formal leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom on 14 August 1998  in  order  to  look  after  her  sick
    daughter and granddaughter who were  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    That position was extended until 14 September 2011.  That is now almost
    twelve years ago.

 2. She remained without leave in the period 14 September 2002  thereafter.
    She had no extant leave at the time she made an application on  3  June
    2013.  That application was on the basis  that  she  had  a  family  or
    private life in the United Kingdom such that it would  be  unlawful  to
    remove her.  It was in any event an application that was  made  outside
    the Immigration Rules on compassionate grounds.

 3. The decision that was made by the Secretary of State  is  seen  in  our
    bundle.  It is dated 17 June 2013.  It is said to be a refusal of grant
    of leave to remain and then reference is made to the Immigration  Rules
    and in particular the Immigration Rules introduced in July 2012 insofar
    as they relate to the appellant's human rights.   The  application  was
    refused because the requirements of the Rules were not met.

 4. The substance of the decision was set out in these terms.

         "Having spent 47 years in your home country and in the  absence  of
         any evidence to the contrary it is not accepted that in the  period
         of time that you have been in the United Kingdom you have lost ties
         to your home country and therefore the Secretary of  State  is  not
         satisfied that you can meet the requirements of Rule 276ADE(vi)."

 5. The Secretary of State also went on to consider the  appellant's  human
    rights under Article 8  as  a  freestanding  consideration  and  as  to
    whether there were any exceptional circumstances.  The merits  of  that
    part of the claim do not need to trouble me at this stage.  The  letter
    went on to say that the appellant's application for leave to remain  in
    the United  Kingdom  was  refused  and  that  since  she  had  made  an
    application on 3 June 2013 but her leave to  remain  had  expired  some
    eleven years before, on 14 September 2002, she did not  have  leave  to
    remain at the time of the application.  Accordingly the application for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom was refused and the Secretary  of
    State stated "There is no right of appeal against this refusal".

 6. Nevertheless there was an appeal that was brought by the  appellant  to
    the Tribunal and it was an appeal which was subsequently allowed  in  a
    determination  made  by   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Prior   whose
    determination was promulgated on 14 April 2014.   It is  the  Secretary
    of State that appeals against  that  decision.   For  the  purposes  of
    continuity I have used the expression "appellant"  as  indicating  Miss
    Rose Demena Morris.  In fact  the  appellant  in  this  appeal  is  the
    Secretary of State but for the purposes of continuity I  will  continue
    to refer to Miss Morris as the appellant.

 7. The statutory provisions are set out in  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.  There are rights of appeal which are  granted  in
    relation to a specie of decision. That is an immigration  decision  and
    it is only an immigration decision  that  gives  rise  to  a  right  of
    appeal.  An immigration decision is defined in 82(2) and as to  (a)  it
    is a refusal of leave to enter the United Kingdom;  as to (b) a refusal
    of  entry  clearance;   as  to  (c)  a  refusal  of  a  certificate  of
    entitlement,  as to (d) a refusal to vary a person's leave to enter  or
    remain in the United Kingdom if the result is that  the  refusal  would
    mean that the person has no leave to enter or remain.

 8. Pausing there, none of subparagraphs  (a)  to  (d)  can  apply  in  the
    appellant's case.  There are then grounds which I need not set  out  in
    (f), (g),  (h)  and  so  on,  none  of  which  are  applicable  in  the
    appellant's case.  However, there is Section 82(2)(e)  which  reads  as
    follows:

         "In this  part  immigration  decision  means  (e)  variation  of  a
         person's leave to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom  if,  when
         the variation takes effect, the person has no  leave  to  enter  or
         remain."

 9. Consequently the question in this case is was this decision a variation
    decision.  In my judgement it was not.   It  was  not  expressed  as  a
    variation decision and indeed it could not be as  a  matter  of  law  a
    variation decision  because  there  was  nothing  to  be  varied.   The
    appellant's extant leave had expired on 14 September  2002.   It  could
    not therefore be varied because her leave did not  exist.   Accordingly
    there was no decision to vary the appellant's leave.

10. Secondly, the decision itself which is in  conventional  form,  a  form
    which we often see when  there  is  an  application  made  outside  the
    Immigration Rules on Article 8 grounds. It is a decision which  is  not
    considered to be or treated as a variation decision.  It  is  a  simple
    refusal to grant leave to remain.  It is headed as  such  and  it  goes
    straight into the considerations of Article 8 both within the Rules and
    outside the Rules.  Furthermore, it would make no sense if this  was  a
    Section 82 decision if the decision maker had said there is no right of
    appeal against this refusal because Section 82 flatly contradicted that
    had it been a variation decision.

11. Finally the Tribunal is  constantly  confronted  with  decisions  where
    there is a Section 82 right of appeal and it is stated  that  there  is
    such a right of appeal and normally the subsection and the  subsections
    (ii) are identified in terms.   I  am  satisfied  therefore  that  this
    decision carried no right of appeal.

12. The judge, however, approached it on the basis that this was an  appeal
    against an immigration decision falling within Section  82(2)(e)  which
    is as I have already said inaccurate.  It was not  such  a  case.   The
    judge also pointed out accurately that there was no  removal  decision.
    Of course as soon as a removal decision is made then there  will  be  a
    right of appeal and that right of appeal will be pursued on  Article  8
    grounds if the appellant sees fit to do so.  However that stage has not
    been reached and we know from a series of cases including Daley-Murdock
    that there is no obligation upon the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  a
    removal decision at the same time as she chooses to make a decision  on
    refusing a person's leave to remain.

13. Accordingly nothing is lost.  There might well be a separate ground  of
    appeal but if the appellant is not subject to removal as she is not  at
    the moment, then there can be no violation of her human rights  because
    she is not in jeopardy at present  of  removal  and  it  is  only  that
    removal that would interfere with her private or family life. There  is
    nothing to assist the appellant in Section 92 of  the  2002  Act  which
    sets out various rights of appeal.  There are appeals which can be made
    from the United Kingdom but there are also appeals which  can  only  be
    pursued from outside and it is now well  established  that  an  out  of
    country right of appeal is an appropriate and valuable asset  and  that
    it does not therefore infringe the appellant's  human  rights  if  they
    have an out of country right of appeal rather than an in-country  right
    of appeal, if that is what is the statue permits.

14. There  is  an  in-country  right  of  appeal  in  relation  to  various
    categories of cases. In particular 92(4) provides that such a right  of
    appeal exists where there is

         "This section also applies to  an  appeal  against  an  immigration
         decision if the appellant (a) has made ...  a  human  rights  claim
         while in the United Kingdom."

15. The appellant has indeed made a human rights claim whilst in the United
    Kingdom.  However, it is clear that  the  section  is  predicated  upon
    there being  an  immigration  decision  and  there  is  no  immigration
    decision in this case, for the reasons that I have stated.

16. For this reason I consider that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  made  a
    material error in approaching the appeal in this  way.   There  was  no
    right of appeal to the Tribunal and the ruling that he should have made
    was that there was no such right of  appeal.   I  therefore  allow  the
    Secretary of State's appeal to the extent of setting aside the decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Prior and limiting to my consideration  to
    a ruling that there was no jurisdiction in the  Tribunal  to  hear  the
    appeal.





                                        Signed                          Date


                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan

