








Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/27559/2015

                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT

|Heard at Manchester                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th January 2018                   |On 06th February 2018                |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                               Mr Peter Kintu

                        (NO AnoNYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Clarke, Counsel instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Uganda. No anonymity direction  was  made
    previously. It appears that none was applied for. Having considered the
    circumstances I do not make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hussain promulgated on 20th February  2017  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse him leave to remain on the grounds of Article 8 of
    the ECHR, that is family and private life grounds.

 3. The grant of permission at paragraph 3 states:-

         "2 The grounds assert that the Judge erred in failing  to  consider
         the  Respondent's  delay  in  decision-making  in   assessing   his
         application. The respondent conceded on  23  March  2015  that  the
         Appellant's applications submitted in March 2008 had been lost  and
         the  decision  in  his  case  was  made  over  7  years  after  the
         application was submitted. It is asserted that the judge failed  to
         consider the relevance of  the  delay  in  both  strengthening  the
         appellant's private/family life and diminishing the public interest
         in immigration control...

         3  The grounds  are  arguable.  It  is  clear  from  the  appellant
         skeleton argument that the delay in determining the application was
         relied on in relation to article 8 and no reference is made to this
         argument in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal."

 4. It is on the basis indicated that  leave  was  granted.  Central  to  a
    consideration of the appellant's the fact that the  appellant  made  an
    application for leave to remain in the UK in 2008.  The decision letter
    of 14 July 2015 acknowledges on page 2 of the immigration history  that
    the appellant did make an application in March 2008. There is  also  in
    the appellant's  bundle  of  documents  at  page  142  a  copy  of  the
    respondent's letter  in  response  to  that  initial  application.  The
    respondent's letter is dated 10th March 2008. Further to that in  pages
    143 to 152 are a series of letters from the appellant, the  appellant's
    representatives and a Member of Parliament requesting some response  to
    the appellant's application from the Home Office.

 5.  Despite  the  application  have  been   raised   in   2008   and   the
    acknowledgement of the application,  there  appears  to  have  been  no
    action to  deal  with  the  application  by  the  respondent  until  an
    acknowledgement that the application had been lost and that  there  was
    no record of the application. At  that  stage  on  23  March  2015  the
    respondent acknowledged the loss of the application and requested  that
    a replacement application be made. Accordingly  a  renewed  application
    was made by the appellant on 25 May 2015. That is acknowledged  in  the
    decision by the First-tier Tribunal Judge at paragraph 2. That in  turn
    resulted in the decision of the 14 July 2015 refusing the application.

 6. In essence the appellant seeks to  rely  upon  the  delay  between  the
    application being made in 2008 and the final decision in July 2015.  In
    seeking to rely upon that delay the applicant relies upon EB (Kosovo) v
    SSHD [2008] UKHL 41 paragraphs 14-16; 27 and 32.  The  issue  of  delay
    commences within the case at paragraph 13 where a summary  is  made  of
    some of the earlier cases. At paragraph 14 the  following  guidance  is
    given as to the impact that delay may have:-

         "14      It does not, however, follow the delay  in  the  decision-
         making processes necessarily are relevant to the decision. It  may,
         depending on the facts, be relevant in any one of  3  ways.  First,
         the applicant may during the period of  any  delay  develop  closer
         personal and social  ties  and  established  deeper  roots  in  the
         community then he would have shown earlier. The longer  the  period
         of delay the likelier that this is to be true. To the  extent  that
         it is true, the applicant's claim under article 8 will  necessarily
         be strengthened. It is unnecessary to elaborate  this  point  since
         the respondent accepts it.

         15 Delay may be relevant in a 2nd, less obvious, ways. An immigrant
         without leave to enter or remain is in a very precarious situation,
         liable to be removed at any time. Any relationship into which  such
         an applicant enters is likely to be,  initially,  tentative,  being
         entered into under the shadow of severance by administrative order.
         This is more true where the other  party  to  the  relationship  is
         aware of the applicant's precarious position. This has been treated
         as relevant to the quality of the relationship. Thus in R (Ajoh)  v
         SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 655 para ,  it  was  noted  that  'is  it  was
         reasonable to expect that both [the applicant] and her husband will
         be aware of her precarious immigration status'. This  reflects  the
         Strasbourg   court's   listing   of   factors   relevant   to   the
         proportionality of removing an immigrant convicted of crime; ...  A
         relationship so entered into may well be imbued  with  a  sense  of
         impermanence. But if the months passed without a decision to remove
         being made, and months become years, and years succeed years, it is
         to be expected that this sense of impermanence will  fade  and  the
         expectation will grow that  if  the  authorities  had  intended  to
         remove the applicant they would have taken steps  to  do  so.  This
         result depends on no legal doctrine but on an understanding of how,
         in some cases, minds may work and it may affect the proportionality
         of removal.

         16 Delay may be relevant, thirdly, in reducing the weight otherwise
         to be accorded to the requirement  of  firm  and  fair  immigration
         control, if the delay is shown to be the result of a  dysfunctional
         system  which  yields  unpredictable,   inconsistent   and   unfair
         outcomes. In the present case the appellant's  cousin  who  entered
         the country and applied for asylum  at  the  same  time  and  whose
         position is not  said  to  be  materially  different,  was  granted
         exceptional leave to remain during the  two-year  period  which  it
         took the respondent to correct its erroneous decision to refuse the
         appellant's application on the grounds of  non-compliance.  In  the
         case of JL (Sierra Leone) , heard by the Court  of  Appeal  at  the
         same time as the present case, there was a somewhat similar pattern
         the facts. JL escaped from Sierra Leone with her  half  brother  in
         1999 and claimed asylum. In 2000  her  claim  was  refused  on  the
         grounds of non-compliance. As in the appellant's case this decision
         was erroneous, as the respondent recognised  18  months  later.  In
         February 2006 the half brother was granted humanitarian protection.
         She  was  not.  A  system  so  operating  cannot  be  said  to   be
         'predictable, consistent and fair  as  between  one  applicant  and
         another" or as  yielding  'consistency  of  treatment  between  one
         aspiring immigrant and another'. To the extent that this  is  shown
         to be so, it may have a bearing on the proportionality of  removal,
         or of requiring an applicant to  apply  form  out  of  country.  As
         Carnwarth LJ observed in Akaeke v SSHD:

             "Once it is accepted that unreasonable delay on  the  part  of
             the Secretary of State is capable of being a relevant  factor,
             then the weight to be given to it in the particular case was a
             matter for the tribunal"

         Lord Hope of Craighead

         27 I draw attention to this history in order to emphasise my  noble
         and learned friend's point that the weight which would otherwise be
         given to the requirements of firm and fair immigration control  may
         be reduced if the delay is shown to be due to  a  system  which  is
         dysfunctional. There is, of course, no right to a decision with any
         given period of time. Article 8 claimants or not to  be  advantaged
         merely because of the deficiencies in the  control  system,  as  my
         noble and learn it friend Lord Browne of Eaton-under-Heywood points
         out. Allowance must be made for the administrative burden  that  is
         unavoidable if the system is to be fair, in the case ought  not  to
         succeed merely because it might have been stronger if it  had  been
         determined earlier. But the shortcomings  that  have  affected  the
         appellant's case cannot be explained or excused on  these  grounds.
         On  the  contrary,  the  balance  in  the  appellant's  favour   is
         significantly strengthened by the fact that the explanation for the
         delay is so unsatisfactory.

         Baroness Hale of Richmond

         32 ... In particular, I agree that prolonged and inexcusable  delay
         on the part of the decision-making authorities must,  on  occasion,
         be capable of reducing the weight which would normally be given  to
         the need for firm, fair and consistent immigration control  in  the
         proportionality exercise. That  is  a  legitimate  aim  which  will
         normally  carry  great  weight  in  immigration  cases.  The  heavy
         administrative  burdens  which  such  a  system  entails  are  well
         understood. But in article 8 cases, one is  always  concerned  with
         whether the correct balance between  the  legitimate  aim  and  the
         means employed has been struck on the facts of the particular case.
         Where the aim has failed spectacularly as it did here, the  general
         importance which is normally attached to it must to some extent  be
         diminished. But it has still to be weighed  in  the  balance  along
         with everything else."

 7. As referred to in the skeleton argument the same point is made  in  the
    case of Agyarko 2017 UKSC 11 paragraphs 52 and 57 wherein the weight to
    be given to even a precarious family life will  be  greater  where  for
    example there is protracted delay.  Paragraph 57 provides:-

         "57      That approach is also appropriate when a court or tribunal
         is considering whether a refusal of leave to remain  is  compatible
         with  article  8  in  the  context  of  precarious   family   life.
         Ultimately, it has to decide whether the refusal  is  proportionate
         in the particular case before it, balancing  the  strength  of  the
         public interest in the removal of the person  in  question  against
         the impact on private and family life. In doing so, it should  give
         appropriate weight to the Secretary of State policy,  expressed  in
         the Rules  and  the  Instructions,  that  the  public  interest  in
         immigration  control  can  be  outweighed,  when   considering   an
         application for leave to remain brought by a person in  the  UK  in
         breach of immigration laws, only where  there  are  'insurmountable
         obstacles' or 'exceptional circumstances' as defined. It must  also
         consider all factors relevant to the  specific  case  in  question,
         including, where relevant, the matters discussed  in  paragraph  51
         and 52 above. The critical issue will generally be whether,  giving
         due weight to the strength of the public interest in the removal of
         the person the case before it, the article 8 claim is  sufficiently
         strong  to  outweigh  it.  In  general,  in  cases  concerned  with
         precarious family life are  very  strong  or  compelling  claim  is
         required to outweigh the public interesting immigration control."

 8. The appellant's representative argues that the judge has failed to take
    account of the delay between the application  in  March  2008  and  the
    decision in 2015 as a factor in determining  whether  the  decision  is
    proportionately justified. It  is  submitted  that  the  fact  that  at
    paragraph 2 of the decision the judge has identified the material  date
    for making the application as 20th May 2015 merely emphasises that  the
    judge has failed to take account of the delay in assessing the position
    of the appellant.

 9. In that respect however careful note has to be made of what he said  in
    the case of Agyarko. The 2nd part of  the  cited  paragraph  emphasises
    that where an individual, who does not have leave to remain and who  is
    in breach of immigration rules, is bringing an application it  is  only
    where there are insurmountable obstacles or  exceptional  circumstances
    as defined in the rules themselves or in the statutory provisions  that
    the public interest in removal will  be  outweighed  by  an  Article  8
    claim.

10. However in respect of the present circumstances  careful  consideration
    has to be given to a number of factors, which were taken  into  account
    by the judge. First and foremost it has to  be  noted  that  the  judge
    specifically found that there was no Article 8 right relating to family
    life that was engaged on the facts as presented. Whilst  the  appellant
    was in a relationship with  a  Ms  [N]  and  Ms  [N]  had  a  daughter,
    ostensibly from  another  relationship,  those  relationships  did  not
    qualify as family life. The parties did not live  together.  The  judge
    has specifically made that finding paragraph 12.

11. Consideration was given by the judge otherwise to whether  or  not  the
    appellant  could  fall  for  consideration  under  any  other  of   the
    provisions of appendix FM or  paragraph  276  ADE.  Clearly  in  making
    findings with regard to paragraph 276  ADE  the  judge  would  have  to
    consider not only the circumstances of the  appellant  in  the  UK  but
    whether there  were  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
    integration into society in the country to which he would have  to  go,
    if he had to leave the United Kingdom. The judge specifically considers
    the issues in paragraph 13 and concludes that there are no  significant
    obstacles to the appellant's reintegration into society in Uganda.

12. Given the findings of fact set out the appellant  can  only  rely  upon
    private life as an aspect of Article 8 as being engaged on  the  facts.
    In that respect since the case of EB further guidance have  been  given
    both within the Immigration Rules and in the  statutory  provisions  of
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  [as
    amended -introduced into the act in 2014].

13. Within the rules as pointed out paragraph  276  ADE  contains  specific
    provisions concerning private life and the factors  to  be  taken  into
    account. As pointed out one of those factors is whether  or  not  there
    are significant obstacles and if there  are  no  significant  obstacles
    than in accordance with the case of Agyarko and the  rules  the  public
    interest in maintaining immigration control would  not  be  outweighed.
    Delay of itself does not create a significant obstacle.  Delay  as  set
    out within EB allows an  individual  to  develop  more  meaningful  and
    substantial relationship; raises an expectation that an individual  may
    not be removed; and reduces otherwise the weight to  be  given  to  the
    public interest.

14. In considering this matter the provisions of section 117B are  relevant
    as indicated. Specifically 117B (4) and (5) which provide:-

         '(4)     Little weight should be given to-

             a)  a private life, or

             b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)       Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
         established by a person at a time  when  the  person's  immigration
         status is precarious.'

15. In  considering  the  circumstances  of  the  appellant  I  would  draw
    attention to the appellant's statement itself, specifically paragraph 5
    wherein the appellant states:-

         "5 On arrival in the UK I did not make a claim for asylum as I  was
         advised by the agent who brought me to the UK to lay  low  key  and
         accumulate some life here and understand the system  before  making
         an application. He also told me that I should make  an  application
         so soon as I am likely to be removed from the  UK.  I  realise  now
         that this was not good advice but at the time did not know better."

16. The appellant claims to have entered the United Kingdom  in  or  around
    January 2001. The appellant did not  enter  legally  and  it  does  not
    appear that the appellant ever had any lawful leave to be in the United
    Kingdom.

17. As recognised in the  decision  by  Judge  there  were  no  significant
    obstacles. The only factor which the  judge  allegedly  has  failed  to
    consider is the fact that the appellant made an application  and  there
    was a significant delay before that application  received  a  decision.
    Set against that are the statutory provisions which  make  quite  clear
    that where an individual is unlawfully in  the  United  Kingdom  little
    weight should be given to a private life established during that period
    of time. There is nothing exceptional on the facts as presented. Whilst
    the delay has got to be acknowledged it is not such that it places  the
    appellant in any less favourable position than he was  in  before.  The
    appellant still does not meet the requirements of the rules.

18. The appellant clearly could take advantage of the period of  time  that
    he has been in the United Kingdom but still that period  of  time  does
    not approach the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE.

19. In light of section 117B I find that the judge  was  entitled  to  deal
    with the appeal in the manner that he did. The  matter  may  have  been
    different if the appellant had entered into a significant  relationship
    and had brought that to the attention of the respondent in 2008 but the
    appellant's relationship  arises  long  after  that  time.  Indeed  the
    evidence was to the effect that it was less than 2 years and  that  the
    parties did not live  together.  I  can  see  that  there  would  be  a
    substantial and significant difference if a person had entered  into  a
    long-term relationship and had children, who were entitled to remain in
    the United Kingdom. However here the appellant is merely  relying  upon
    his private life and the  rules  make  specific  provisions  which  the
    appellant still cannot meet. To that extent the fact delay  would  have
    been to the advantage the appellant but such of itself does not  create
    a right, or a significant obstacle or an exceptional circumstance.

20. Accordingly taking all the matters into account  I  do  not  find  that
    there is any material error of law in the judgement.

    Notice of Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    material error of law. The decision  to  dismiss  this  appeal  on  all
    grounds stands.



Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

Dated 29th January 2018



