
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/27548/2015
     IA/27552/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 October 2017                            |On 26 October 2017            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                            MRS SAKUNTALA POUDYAL
                           mr Ghanashyam Bhattarai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Nath
For the Respondent:    Mr A Gondal (Legal Representative)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will  refer  to  the
    original appellants as the appellants herein.
2.   The appellants are husband and wife.  They are both citizens  of  Nepal
    born on 12 October 1988 and 27 February 1988 respectively.  A reference
    to the appellant is  a  reference  to  the  first  named  appellant-her
    husband's appeal depends on the outcome of hers.

3.   The appellant arrived in this country, accompanied by her  husband,  in
    November 2009 as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  She was granted leave  to
    remain until April 2013 in the same capacity.  However, in May 2012 her
    leave was curtailed and it expired on 30 July  2012.   Her  application
    for leave to remain as a student was refused  on  21  July  2015.   The
    Secretary of State claims that according  to  information  provided  by
    Educational  Testing  Services  (ETS)   her   Test   of   English   for
    International Communication (TOEIC) undertaken at New London College on
    6 February 2013 had been fraudulently obtained by the use  of  a  proxy
    test taker.  Her application was refused under paragraphs  322(1A)  and
    245ZX(a) of the Immigration  Rules.   The  appeal  of  the  appellant's
    husband was refused as he was a dependant on her application.

4.   The appellant's appeal came before a First-tier  Judge  on  25  October
    2016.  The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant.  She  set  out
    the respective submissions made by the  parties  and  in  paragraph  29
    confirmed that she had made her credibility findings shortly after  the
    hearing.  In  the  course  of  her  determination  she  made  extensive
    reference to SM and Qadir v Secretary of State (ETS - evidence - burden
    of proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC).  She directed herself  in  paragraph
    30 as follows:

         "30. I note that the Upper Tribunal  in  SM  and  Qadir  held  that
             despite the generic nature of the evidence from the  Secretary
             of State  the  evidential  burden  of  proof  resting  on  the
             Secretary of State has been narrowly  discharged.   They  then
             considered  if  the  appellants  discharged  their  burden  of
             raising an innocent explanation of the prima facie indications
             of  deception  on  their  part  in  the  Secretary  of  States
             evidence.  They then looked at whether the Secretary of  State
             established,  on  the  balance  of  probabilities,  that   the
             Appellant's  prima  facie  innocent  explanations  are  to  be
             rejected with  the  legal  burden  of  proof  falling  on  the
             Secretary of State to discharge."


    The judge had the benefit of the generic material  from  Mr  Millington
    and Ms Collings as well a report from Dr Harrison dated 5 February 2015-
    the report before the Upper  Tribunal  in  SM  and  Qadir.   The  judge
    reminded herself that each case of this type would invariably be  fact-
    sensitive, referring to paragraph 101  of  SM  and  Qadir.   The  Upper
    Tribunal had had the benefit of hearing oral evidence from Dr  Harrison
    and had accepted his expert opinion  and  conclusions.   On  the  other
    hand, short comings had been identified in the  generic  material.   No
    challenge had been mounted by the  Presenting  Officer  to  the  expert
    report from Dr Harrison.  The judge  accepted  his  criticisms  of  the
    generic material.  In paragraph 41 of her determination she states that
    the Presenting Officer's case "in a nutshell relies on the  appellant's
    oral evidence to show that the appellant never sat the  spoken  English
    language test because of her inability to recall details of that test."

5.   The  judge  accordingly  focussed  on  credibility  issues  noting  the
    difficulty in recalling details of a test sat three years ago.  After a
    lengthy assessment,  the  judge  resolved  matters  in  favour  of  the
    appellant stating in paragraph 60 of her decision  "taking  an  overall
    view of the evidence I therefore find the appellant is credible."   The
    judge accordingly allowed the appeal finding that the legal  burden  of
    proof falling on the Secretary of State had not been discharged.

6.   The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal and  permission
    was granted on 21 August 2017 by a First-tier Judge.  The  judge  noted
    that it was claimed that the First-tier Judge had erred in her approach
    to the burden of proof in a case involving alleged deception and  found
    it arguable that  she  had  failed  to  apply  the  correct  test  when
    considering deception in relation to an English test and had failed  to
    apply SM and Qadir.  It was submitted in the grounds that the  Tribunal
    had misinterpreted the evidence  and  had  properly  read  the  witness
    statements and the spreadsheet extract showed the  appellant's  English
    language test had been invalidated because of evidence of fraud in  the
    test taken by the appellant.  Had the  judge  properly  considered  the
    appellant's evidence it would have been clear that deception  had  been
    demonstrated to the standard of  the  balance  of  probabilities.   The
    burden would  theen  shift  to  the  appellant  to  raise  an  innocent
    explanation.  If that explanation were to be accepted the burden  would
    shift back to the Secretary of State in  order  to  address  the  legal
    burden.

7.   The judge had erred in relying on  the  appellant's  ability  to  speak
    English and there might be reasons why a person who was able  to  speak
    the language would nonetheless employ a proxy.   Adequate  reasons  had
    not been given for the finding that a person who  spoke  English  would
    have no  reason  to  secure  a  test  certificate  by  deception.   The
    Secretary of State had met the evidential burden and this had not  been
    appreciated by the First-tier Tribunal.  The  verification  system  was
    adequately robust.

8.   Mr Gondal submitted that the judge had  properly  directed  herself  on
    the evidential and legal burden and had  made  appropriate  credibility
    findings about the appellant's credibility.  In  paragraph  58  of  her
    decision the judge had expressly referred to paragraph  80  of  SM  and
    Qadir concerning the need for caution on relying on apparent fluency in
    and command of the English language.  Apart from the  appellant's  oral
    evidence the judge had had the report from Dr Harrison.

9.   The judge had found  the  appellant  had  given  her  evidence  without
    exaggeration and she was not evasive.  Having found the appellant to be
    credible she directed herself correctly on the burden and  standard  of
    proof and found that the legal burden of  proof  on  the  Secretary  of
    State had not been discharged.  She had applied the correct test as set
    out in SM and Qadir.

10.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Judge if it was materially flawed in law.

11.  I note that in paragraph 30 of her decision the  judge  refers  to  the
    correct approach as identified in SM and  Qadir  when  considering  the
    shifting burden of proof.   She  reminds  herself  as  I  have  already
    indicated  that  each  case  was  fact-sensitive.  In  considering  the
    spreadsheet evidence she bore in mind the criticisms made of it  by  Dr
    Harrison and she noted that no criticism of Dr  Harrison's  report  had
    been made by the Presenting Officer.  She refers to the arguments  made
    in the skeleton argument  before  her  and  to  specific  parts  of  Dr
    Harrison's report in paragraph 39 of her decision.  She did not err  in
    accepting the criticisms made of the evidence of the  generic  material
    for the reasons she  gives  and  focussed  on  the  argument  from  the
    Presenting Officer that the appellant's oral evidence  showed  she  had
    never sat the English language test because of her inability to  recall
    details of that test.  She explains the reasons  for  her  decision  at
    some length noting, for example, in paragraph 47 that given the passage
    of time she would have found it  unusual  for  the  appellant  to  have
    recalled very specific details of what had occurred  and  indeed  would
    have found it suspicious if she had been able  to  answer  all  of  the
    Presenting Officer's detailed questions.  She had sat two tests  within
    two days of each other making it even harder to recall the specifics of
    one test after the passage of so much time.

12.  The judge dealt with the submission  made  by  the  Presenting  Officer
    about the structure of the test in 2016 and was in my view entitled  to
    conclude that the test taken by the appellant  in  2013  had  not  been
    shown to be of the same format as the 2016 test and no particular point
    appears to have been taken on this aspect.  However, Mr Nath did  raise
    the issue of the judge's reliance on the appellant's  English  language
    ability.  The judge's consideration  of  this  aspect  is  set  out  in
    paragraphs 51 to  57  of  her  decision.   She  noted  the  appellant's
    educational background,  the  appellant  had  received  good  marks  in
    English and English had been one of  her  core  subjects  and  she  had
    obtained a reasonably high score in her English exam as  shown  by  her
    school leaving certificate.  She had been to an English school and  she
    had passed her IELTS in April 2009 on the first attempt.  She had found
    all the educational documents genuine.  The judge then referred to  the
    appellant's studies in this country and concluded  that  the  appellant
    would have acquired a reasonable level of proficiency in English.   The
    appellant had scored highly in the listening  and  reading  test  taken
    some two days after the disputed test in 2013.  She had been  found  to
    be proficient in English when admitted in 2009 and when granted further
    leave to remain in 2011  and  would  have  expanded  and  enhanced  her
    English language abilities thereafter.  She had no reason to jeopardize
    her career and future by cheating in the test.

13.  I am not satisfied that the judge erred in  law  by  referring  to  the
    appellant's English language ability.  As I have already mentioned,  in
    paragraph 58 the judge reminds herself of what is said in SM and Qadir.
     While there is a need for caution, English  language  ability  is  not
    necessarily an irrelevant consideration and I am not satisfied that the
    judge materially erred in law in referring to the appellant's education
    and so forth when reaching her conclusions.  The judge had the  benefit
    of hearing the appellant give evidence before her and  makes  it  quite
    clear that she  found  that  the  appellant  had  not  exaggerated  her
    evidence and was not evasive and gave her  answers  in  a  careful  and
    thoughtful manner.  The Presenting  Officer  had  concentrated  on  the
    appellant's credibility and the  judge  carefully  considered  all  the
    material and resolved this issue in favour of the appellant.  With  the
    greatest respect to the arguments advanced on the Secretary of  State's
    behalf I see no indication that the judge misdirected  herself  in  any
    way on the burden and standard of proof to which she makes reference in
    paragraph 30 of her decision and to which she returns in paragraph  61.
    In effect, the  grounds  amount  to  no  more  than  an  expression  of
    disagreement with this well reasoned decision.

14.  The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and the  decision  of
    the First-tier Judge stands.

Anonymity Order

15.  The First-tier Judge made no anonymity direction and I make none.



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made a fee award of any fee which had been paid by  the
appellant and this fee award stands.



Signed                                  Date 25 October 2017


G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
