
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27509/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 25th August 2017                   |On 19th September 2017                |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                             Mr MD MUMINUL ISLAM


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Bangladesh  who  appealed  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State dated 17th July  2015,  refusing  to
    grant leave to remain as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant.   The
    appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Blake  on  26th  October
    2016.  By a decision dated 2nd December 2016 that appeal was dismissed.



2.   The appellant seeks to challenge that decision on the  basis  that  the
    Judge failed to deal with the issue of human rights, which was part  of
    the appeal which he had lodged against  the  decision.   Permission  to
    raise that matter before the Upper Tribunal was granted  on  19th  June
    2017 and thus the matter comes before me to determine the issue.

3.   The appellant does not attend the hearing and no explanation  has  been
    offered as to why not.  He did not attend the hearing before the First-
    tier Tribunal, and I note that the date and place of the hearing before
    the Upper Tribunal was notified to him on 4th July 2017 by first  class
    post to his stated address.  He has had  ample  notification  of  these
    proceedings and accordingly I deem it to be in the interests of justice
    to proceed to determine the matter in his absence.

4.   In summary, the appellant came to the  United  Kingdom  in  2010  as  a
    student and had leave until 2012.  Various  further  applications  were
    submitted but would seem  not  to  have  dealt  with  properly  by  the
    respondent.  That was acknowledged in the course  of  the  hearing  but
    eventually there were two decisions, the first on  11th  February  2015
    noting that because the  licence  of  Birmingham  College  of  Law  and
    Management Limited had been refused  a  period  of  60  days  would  be
    granted to the appellant to obtain a further CAS in  order  to  further
    the application that had been made.  By a decision of  17th  July  2015
    permission to remain was refused not least because no further  CAS  had
    been provided.  Thus without a valid CAS the requisite points could not
    be awarded.

5.   A relevant document, which was before the Tribunal Judge, was a  letter
    from the appellant's solicitors dated 24th October 2016, which enclosed
    also a witness statement of the appellant dated 19th October 2016.  The
    letter made it clear that the appellant  would  not  be  attending  the
    hearing and asked for the  appeal  to  be  determined  on  the  papers,
    notwithstanding that originally an oral hearing had been requested.

6.    The  witness  statement  disagrees  with  the  Secretary  of   State's
    decision.  The statement noted that  the  appellant  had  received  the
    letter from the Home Office dated 11th February 2015,  indicating  that
    he was required to submit a new CAS letter if he wanted to extend leave
    to remain.  He said that he  was  not  prepared  as  it  involved  huge
    preparation and financial commitment.  He contacted a few colleges  but
    without success.  Complaint was made as to the length of time  that  it
    had taken to sort matters out.

7.   The statement concluded at paragraph 8 as follows:-

         "I came to the UK with a hope/expectation to  get  a  qualification
         from the UK.  My parents and family has invested most of their life
         savings for my well being.  My parents believe that if  I  returned
         to Bangladesh with a UK approved qualification then I will be  able
         to fulfil their desire".


8.   The Judge noted the errors on behalf of the Secretary of State  between
    2012 and 2015 but found that the decisions of February  2015  and  July
    2015 were lawful and fair.

9.   The appeal, therefore, against the  Immigration  Rules  was  dismissed.
    There has been no grounds of appeal against those  matters  seeking  to
    identify any error in approach.

10.  What is contended, however, is that the  Judge  was  in  error  in  not
    considering the appellant's human rights.  It seems to me that that  it
    is a challenge that is fundamentally misconceived,  as  it  clear  from
    paragraphs 47 and 48 of the  determination  that  the  Judge  expressly
    looks at private and family life.  The Judge says "I do not find  there
    was any evidence before me in respect of  the  appellant's  private  or
    family life  in  the  UK  such  as  to  warrant  consideration  of  his
    application outside of the Rules".  The Judge goes on to say  "I  found
    that even if I had considered the application outside the Rules, I  did
    not find that there were any facts before me to show  that  there  were
    any exceptional circumstances that would warrant the grant of leave  in
    the UK outside of the Rules".

11.  It is entirely clear  therefore  that  the  Judge  has  regard  to  the
    current jurisdiction to determine whether there are any  matters  of  a
    compelling or exceptional nature outside the Rules  that  would  render
    removal disproportionate or inappropriate.   There  is  simply  nothing
    that was placed before the Immigration Judge, other than the  statement
    containing the passage to which I have made  reference.   There  is  no
    detail as to the appellant's private  life  other  than  his  expressed
    hopes for qualification.  It has been well settled that simply a desire
    to remain to further education is not a ground upon which  to  found  a
    successful application under Article  8.   The  matter  was  considered
    indeed by the Supreme Court in Patel and Others [2013] UKSC 72,  indeed
    at paragraph 57 it was specifically stated that the opportunity  for  a
    promising student to complete  his  course  in  this  country,  however
    desirable in general terms, is not in itself a  right  protected  under
    Article 8.

12.  Whilst I find it entirely clear that the Judge had paid regard  to  the
    proper considerations in relation to human rights, there simply was not
    and is not any material upon which a conclusion could  safely  be  made
    that removal did engage Article 8.

13.  I find therefore  that  the  determination  was  proper  and  contained
    proper regard to all relevant matters including human rights.  In those
    circumstances the appeal of the appellant before the Upper Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

Appeal before Upper Tribunal dismissed.  Original  decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal is to stand, namely that  the  appeal  is  dismissed  both  in
terms of the Immigration Rules and Article 8 of the ECHR.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                 [pic]                 Date  18 September 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

