
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber    Appeal Number: IA/27075/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 18 September 2015                |On: 21 September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   BETWEEN

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              MR SOHAIL SARWAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Spurling, counsel instructed by Goodfellows
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision, promulgated on 16 March
         2015, of First-tier Tribunal Judge Samimi (hereinafter referred to
         as the FTTJ).

      2. Permission to appeal was granted by FTTJ Lambert on 13 May 2015.

    Background

      3.  The  respondent  to  this  appeal  sought  a  residence  card   as
         confirmation of a right to reside in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the
         basis of his marriage to Sanna Butt (a Danish national), which  was
         said to have taken place, by proxy, on 18 May 2013. The  respondent
         and Ms Butt were interviewed by the Secretary of State  on  19  May
         2014, following which the residence card application was refused on
         the basis that  the  respondent  was  a  party  to  a  marriage  of
         convenience.

      4. At the hearing  before  the  FTTJ,  the  respondent's  counsel,  Mr
         Spurling, conceded that owing to the conclusions in  Kareem  (proxy
         marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 24), the respondent was not able to
         discharge the burden of proving that the marriage was legitimate in
         Denmark. It was common  ground  that  the  issue  was  whether  the
         parties were in a durable relationship.   The  FTTJ  remarked  that
         there had been no challenge to the "formal validity  of  the  Nikah
         marriage  ceremony;"  notwithstanding  the  discrepancies  in   the
         interview records and oral evidence  the  parties  had  been  in  a
         "genuine and durable"  relationship  and  she  allowed  the  appeal
         "under the EEA Regulations 2006."

      5. The grounds of application raise three grounds.  The  first  ground
         argued was that the FTTJ materially misdirected  herself  in  twice
         referring to the issue before her being one of  dependency  and  in
         addition, it was said that she erred in finding that  the  marriage
         was valid, despite counsel's concession to the contrary.  Secondly,
         it was argued that the FTTJ failed to provide adequate reasons  for
         her finding  that  the  parties  were  in  a  genuine  and  durable
         relationship given the "considerable" inconsistencies noted in  the
         reasons for refusal letter  and  those  which  emerged  during  the
         course of the appeal hearing. Thirdly, it was argued that the  FTTJ
         erred in allowing the appeal of an extended family member  outright
         rather than remitting the matter to the Secretary of State.

      6. FTTJ Lambert granted permission specifically on the first and third
         grounds, commenting that the reasoning of the FTTJ in  [13-14]  was
         not "obviously inadequate" but nonetheless not excluding the second
         ground.

      7. Those representing the respondent did not lodge a Rule 24 response.



      8. At the hearing before me, Mr Clarke accepted that the FTTJ had made
         distinct findings regarding the durability of the relationship.  He
         did not seek to expand upon the FTTJ's erroneous reference  to  the
         issue of dependency at [2] and [3] of the decision. With regard  to
         the Nikah marriage, Mr Clarke stated that  there  was  no  evidence
         that this marriage would be recognised in  Denmark  and  he  argued
         that the FTTJ ought to have put the Home Office on  notice  if  she
         was intending to find that it would be, given the  concession  made
         by counsel on this issue.

      9. With regard to the second ground, Mr Clarke drew  my  attention  to
         the areas of concern as set out in the reasons for refusal  letter;
         arguing that not all these points were fully addressed by the  FTTJ
         in her decision.  He accepted that the  FTTJ  had  dealt  with  the
         "contraception issue" which emerged during oral evidence, but  that
         this was only one of a number of credibility issues of concern.

     10. Finally, Mr Clarke argued that the FTTJ  had  exercised  discretion
         when not in a position to do so.

     11. Mr Spurling urged me to read the decision  as  a  whole  and  reach
         conclusions in the round.  He  submitted  that  the  FTTJ  was  not
         required to note every point made and she set  out  enough  of  her
         findings to make it clear what those  findings  were.  He  accepted
         that some elements of her findings could  have  been  more  clearly
         expressed. The mention of dependency was no more  than  a  cut  and
         paste error.

     12. With regard to the FTTJ's view of the Nikah marriage,  Mr  Spurling
         argued that there were no wider repercussions on the respondent  as
         a result of this comment and the respondent had not raised a  point
         with regard to the formal validity of the marriage in  the  reasons
         for refusal letter. However, the representatives at the hearing had
         taken a pragmatic view, given the changes to  the  legal  landscape
         and the only  issue  before  the  FTTJ  was  that  of  whether  the
         respondent was in a durable relationship.

     13. Mr Spurling argued that the FTTJ had provided adequate reasons  for
         her findings. He took me through [10-17] of the decision and  asked
         me to note the lack of specific examples in the grounds of matters,
         which the Secretary of State was of the view the FTTJ was bound  to
         consider. He argued that the parties were consistent  and  credible
         on core issues.

     14. In relation to ground 3, Mr Spurling asked me to note that the FTTJ
         had not directed the Secretary of State to issue a residence  card.
         He was also of the view that there was no difficulty with the  FTTJ
         allowing the appeal under the  Regulations,  as  the  Secretary  of
         State would consider the exercise of her discretion in any event.

     15. In reply, Mr Clarke argued that the FTTJ regarded the  marriage  as
         being substantive, she had referred to Regulation 2 in her decision
         and the Secretary of State had not been  given  an  opportunity  to
         argue that the marriage was not legitimate. Those findings could be
         relied upon subsequently owing  to  Devaseelan  and  could  not  be
         allowed to stand. Mr Clarke also stressed that  the  FTTJ  did  not
         have  jurisdiction  to  exercise  discretion  in  the  respondent's
         favour.

     16. Mr Spurling sought leave to make a further submission;  that  being
         that the Secretary of State had had the opportunity to consider the
         validity of the marriage but had refused  the  application  on  the
         basis that it was a marriage of convenience. Mr Clarke did not wish
         to reply to this point.

     17. I find that the FTTJ erred solely in relation to  her  decision  to
         allow the appeal under the EEA Regulations, which  I  will  address
         below.

     18. In terms of ground 1, I find  that  the  FTTJ  did  not  go  behind
         counsel's concession that there was  no  evidence  that  the  Nikah
         proxy marriage was in accordance with Danish  law.  There  are  two
         references to the marriage. The first at [14] refers to there being
         "no  challenge  to  the  formal  validity  of  the  Nikah  marriage
         ceremony" and the second at [17] includes the remark that  "I  find
         that the Appellant and  Sponsor  have  provided  a  consistent  and
         truthful account of events and issues regarding the genuineness  of
         their Nikah marriage."  The FTTJ was correct on  the  first  point,
         given that the respondent had not formally challenged the  validity
         of the marriage in the reasons for refusal letter. The issue at the
         hearing was whether the marriage would be valid in relation to  the
         sponsor, as a Danish  national.  Those  issues  are  separate.  The
         second mention of the marriage refers to  the  genuineness  of  the
         Nikah marriage ceremony. In this, I find that the FTTJ was doing no
         more than indicating that the parties had undergone  this  ceremony
         for genuine  reasons  rather  than  to  engage  in  a  marriage  of
         convenience. It is obvious from reading the decision  as  a  whole,
         that the FTTJ was in no doubt as to the issue before her,  that  of
         whether the parties had a  durable  relationship.  As  Mr  Spurling
         stated, the FTTJ could have expressed matters more clearly, however
         I find that her findings in relation to the Nikah marriage  do  not
         amount to a material error of law.

     19. The second ground relied  upon  related  to  the  adequacy  of  the
         reasons provided by the FTTJ for  finding  that  the  parties  were
         truthful  and  that  the  discrepancies  did  not  undermine  their
         accounts. As noted by Mr Spurling, the application  for  permission
         did  not  descend  to  detail  of  the  considerable  discrepancies
         referred to. Mr Clarke asked me to  consider  seven  out  of  eight
         matters listed in the reasons for refusal letter. He accepted  that
         the issue with regard to the bank account had been addressed in the
         FTTJ's decision.

     20. The FTTJ said as follows regarding the matters referred to  in  the
         reasons for refusal letter, at [10], "Although there are  a  number
         of discrepancies between the answers given  by  the  Appellant  and
         Sponsor at the marriage interview, I find that they have sought  to
         address those issues in their statements as well as in  the  course
         of the oral evidence before me."  The FTTJ goes on to set  out  the
         parties' explanation for the discrepancy in relation to the  health
         conditions suffered by each party, which is one of the more serious
         issues set out in the refusal letter.

     21. I have considered the witness statement of the respondent  to  this
         appeal and  consider  that  very  detailed  explanations  were  put
         forward to address the issues identified as inconsistencies in  the
         reasons for refusal letter. It is said by the  respondent  to  this
         appeal that the parties were asked "hundreds" of questions. In this
         context, seven or eight inconsistencies do not appear to me to be a
         considerable number. In view of  the  detail  in  the  respondent's
         statement, I find that the FTTJ cannot be said  to  have  erred  in
         referring to that document as part of her findings on credibility.

     22. The FTTJ also acknowledged apparent inconsistencies, which  emerged
         during the oral evidence and these she addressed in some detail  at
         [11] to [13] of her decision, in particular.  The  FTTJ's  decision
         does not suffer from a dearth of adequate reasons  in  relation  to
         the issues at large before her. Quite the  reverse.  I  accordingly
         conclude that her reasoning was entirely adequate  in  relation  to
         her finding  that  the  parties  were  in  a  genuine  and  durable
         relationship. Her findings stand.

     23. In Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC) it  was
         found that Regulation 17(4) made the issue of a residence  card  to
         an extended family member a matter of discretion. As in this  case,
         where the Secretary of State has yet to exercise that discretion, a
         judge allowing the appeal  can  do  no  more  than  find  that  the
         decision was not in accordance with the law.

     24. I accept that the FTTJ, at [18], found that the "decision is not in
         accordance with  the  EEA  Regulations  2006,"  However,  she  went
         further in proceeding to allow the appeal under the Regulations and
         in this she materially erred. I therefore allow  the  Secretary  of
         State's appeal on this basis alone.

     25. I therefore remake the FTTJ's decision by substituting  a  decision
         to allow Mr Sarwar's appeal on the  basis  that  the  Secretary  of
         State's decision was not  in  accordance  with  the  law.  All  the
         findings of the FTTJ as to the durability of the  relationship  are
         preserved. Therefore it is now a matter for the Secretary of  State
         to exercise her discretion as to whether or not to issue him with a
         residence card.

    Conclusions

    The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision to be re-made.

    I substitute a decision allowing the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with the law.

    No application for anonymity was made and I saw no reason to make  such
    a direction.






    Signed:      Date: 19 September 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
