
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/27992/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons  Promulgated |
|On 5 January 2018                     |On 17 January 2018              |
|                                      |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                              SAMUEL NANA OWUSU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Waithe (counsel) instructed by Bernard Wiseman
                    Family solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Ruth promulgated on 14  October  2016,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 6 June 1974 and is a  national  of  Ghana.  The
appellant entered the UK as a visitor  on  7  March  2007.  That  leave  was
extended as a voluntary worker and then as a  probationary  spouse  until  5
February 2010. On 11 February 2010  the  appellant  applied  for  indefinite
leave to remain but, because his marriage to a British  citizen  had  broken
down, that application was refused on 31st of March 2014.

4. The appellant appealed the decision of 31  March  2014.  His  appeal  was
successful to the limited extent that his application was  returned  to  the
respondent to consider the appellant's family life with his current  partner
and two children. On 21 July 2015 the respondent  issued  a  fresh  decision
refusing the appellant's application.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed the decision of 21 July  2015  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal. First-tier Tribunal Judge Ruth ("the Judge") dismissed the  appeal
against the Respondent's decision.

6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and  on  23/10/2017  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
Reed gave permission to appeal stating

      1. The appellant is the father of two children and all are citizens of
      Ghana. As noted in the determination the children had been in  the  UK
      for over seven years (the eldest child had  been  in  the  UK  for  12
      years) and the issue under section 117B(6) and EX.1 (a) was the  issue
      of reasonableness of return. It is arguable, that in the light of  the
      length of the residence of the children and that they had been born in
      the UK that the Judge failed to carry out an assessment of their  best
      interests as a primary consideration.


      2. Furthermore, it is apparent from the determination that the  mother
      of the children had limited leave in the UK but nothing has been  said
      about the children's status and the evidence from the children related
      to their father's removal and not the reasonableness or  otherwise  of
      their own removal. Thus it is arguable that the decision  reached  did
      not take into account the family  circumstances  (see  PD  and  others
      (article 8-conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC).
      Whilst the grounds do not expressly raise  this,  it  is  a  "Robinson
      obvious" point and requires further consideration.

The Hearing

7.  Mr Waithe, counsel for the appellant, moved the grounds  of  appeal.  He
told me before the hearing commenced that he had found  some  common  ground
with the senior Home Office presenting officer. He provided me with  a  copy
of the respondent's letter dated 10 August  2017  granting  the  appellant's
partner leave to remain in the  UK  until  14  February  2020.  He  tendered
letters dated 16 November and 21 December 2017 confirming that both  of  the
appellant's children have been granted British citizenship.

8. Mr  Walker  told  me  that  the  grant  of  British  citizenship  to  the
appellant's children and the  grant  of  further  leave  to  remain  to  the
appellant's partner was such a significant change in circumstances  that  he
could no longer oppose the appeal and concedes that there  is  an  error  of
law.

9. Mr Waithe asked me to set  the  decision  aside  and  substitute  my  own
decision. He told me that because the  appellant's  children  are  not  just
qualifying children but British citizens, the appellant  now  meets  E-LTRPT
2.2 & 2.4 of the rules. He told me  that  a  different  approach  should  be
taken to EX.1(a) and to section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act. He urged me to  set
the decision aside and substitute my own decision allowing the appeal.

Analysis

10. At [28] the Judge correctly focuses on the question of  whether  or  not
it is reasonable to  expect  the  appellant's  children  to  leave  the  UK.
Between [29] and [30] he considers the evidence and concludes at [32] that

      There will be no genuinely negative consequences to their welfare as a
      result of the decision in this case.

11. In R (on the application of MA (Pakistan) and Others) v  Upper  Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) and Another [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  it  was
held (notwithstanding reservations) that when  considering  whether  it  was
reasonable to remove a child from the UK under  rule  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the
Immigration Rules and section 117B(6) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
Asylum Act 2002, a court or tribunal should not simply focus  on  the  child
but  should  have  regard  to  the  wider  public  interest  considerations,
including the conduct and immigration history of the parents.  It  was  also
confirmed however that if section 117B(6) applies  then  "there  can  be  no
doubt that section 117B(6) must be read as  a  self-contained  provision  in
the  sense  that  Parliament  has  stipulated  that  where  the   conditions
specified in the sub-section are satisfied, the  public  interest  will  not
justify removal." It was additionally held, however, that the  fact  that  a
child had been in the UK for seven years should be given significant  weight
in the proportionality exercise because of its relevant to  determining  the
nature and strength of the child's best interests and as it  established  as
a starting point that leave should be granted  unless  there  were  powerful
reasons to the contrary. The Court of Session has approved and followed  the
approach taken in MA (Pakistan) in the case of SA, SI,  SI  and  TA  v  SSHD
[2017] CSOH 117.

12. At [22] the Judge records that both  of  the  appellant's  children  had
made applications to register  as  British  citizens.  The  Judge  correctly
notes that at the date of hearing  those  applications  remain  outstanding.
The children are now British citizens.

13. The Judge's assessment of reasonableness of return for the  children  is
not sufficiently detailed. It is carried out in three short  paragraphs  and
relies entirely on the cohesiveness of the family  unit.  Inadequate  weight
is placed on the fact that both children were born in the  UK  &  have  only
ever lived in the UK.  Inadequate weight is placed on  the  fact  that  both
children are qualifying children. There is inadequate  analysis  of  section
117B(6) of the 2002 Act. I therefore find that the decision is tainted by  a
material error of law.

14. Because the decision is tainted by a material error  of  law  I  set  it
aside.

15. Although I set the decision aside, there is sufficient  material  before
me to substitute my own decision.

16. The undisputed facts are that the appellant has been present in  the  UK
since 2007. His first marriage to a  British  citizen  broke  down,  but  he
established a relationship with his partner who now has leave to  remain  in
the UK  until  February  2020.  The  appellant  and  his  partner  have  two
children, born in 2004 and 2006. Those children are now British citizens.

17. The respondent's IDIs on Family Migration deals  with  British  children
at Paragraph 11.2.3. The August 2015 version  states  that,  save  in  cases
involving criminality, the decision  maker  must  not  take  a  decision  in
relation to the parent or primary carer of a  British  Citizen  child  where
the effect of that decision would be to force that British  child  to  leave
the EU, regardless of the age of that child. However, it  also  states  that
"where a decision to refuse  the  application  would  require  a  parent  or
primary carer to return to a country outside the EU, the  case  must  always
be assessed on the basis that it would be unreasonable to expect  a  British
Citizen child to leave the EU with that parent or primary carer".

18. The Upper Tribunal in SF and others (Guidance,  post-2014  Act)  Albania
[2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC) held, considering this guidance, that  even  in  the
absence of a "not  in  accordance  with  the  law"  ground  of  appeal,  the
Tribunal ought to take the Secretary of State's guidance into account if  it
points clearly to a particular outcome in the instant case.   Only  in  that
way can consistency be obtained between  those  cases  that  do,  and  those
cases that do not, come before the Tribunal
19. E-LTRPT.2.2. says
   The child of the applicant must be-
        (a) under the age of 18 years at the date of application, or where
        the child has turned 18 years of age since the applicant was first
        granted entry clearance or leave to remain as a parent under this
        Appendix, must not have formed an independent family unit or be
        leading an independent life;
        (b) living in the UK; and
        (c) a British Citizen or settled in the UK; or
        (d) has lived in the UK continuously for at least the 7 years
        immediately preceding the date of application and paragraph EX.1.
        applies.
20. E-LTRPT.2.4. says
      (a) The applicant must provide evidence that they have either-
           (i) sole parental responsibility for the child, or that the
           child normally lives with them; or
           (ii) direct access (in person) to the child, as agreed with the
           parent or carer with whom the child normally lives or as ordered
           by a court in the UK; and
      (b) The applicant must provide evidence that they are taking, and
      intend to continue to take, an active role in the child's upbringing.
21. There has been a  significant  change  in  circumstances.  Both  of  the
appellant's  children  are  British  citizens,  and  they  live   with   the
appellant. That means that the appellant needs the requirements of  both  E-
LTRPT 2.2 & E-LTRPT 2.4. The appellant therefore meets the  requirements  of
the immigration rules.

Article 8 ECHR


22. In Hesham Ali (Iraq)  v SSHD   [2016] UKSC 60 it  was  made  clear  that
(even in a deport case) the Rules are not a  complete  code.  Lord  Reed  at
paragraphs 47 to 50 endorsed the structured approach to proportionality  (to
be found in Razgar) and said "what has now become the established method  of
analysis can therefore continue to be followed..."

23. I have to determine the following separate questions:

         (i) Does family life, private life, home or  correspondence  exist
        within the meaning of Article 8
        (ii) If so, has the right to respect for this been interfered  with


        (iii) If so, was the interference in accordance with the law
        (iv) If  so,  was  the  interference  in  pursuit  of  one  of  the
        legitimate aims set out in Article 8(2); and
        (v) If so, is the interference proportionate to the pursuit of  the
        legitimate aim?


24. Section 117B of the 2002 Act tells me that  immigration  control  is  in
the public interest. None of the factors set out in s.117B of the  2002  Act
weigh against the appellant.

25. By virtue of section 117D a "qualifying child" means  a  person  who  is
under the age of 18 and who- (a) is a British citizen, or (b) has  lived  in
the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years  or  more.   If  a
child is a qualifying child for the purposes of section  117B  of  the  2002
Act as amended, the issue is whether it is not reasonable for that child  to
return.

26. The appellant's children  are  qualifying  children,  because  they  are
British citizens. The remaining question for me is  whether  or  not  it  is
reasonable to the appellant's children to leave the UK.

27. In R (on the application of Mansoor) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
Department [2011] EWHC 832 (Admin) it was said that a national  enjoyed  the
international human right as well as the domestic human right  to  live  and
remain in their own country (para 42).

28.  I remind  myself   of  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
Immigration Act 2009. In ZH  (Tanzania)  (FC)  (Appellant)  v  Secretary  of
State for the Home Department (Respondent) [2011] UKSC  4   Lady  Hale  said
that "Although nationality is  not  a  "trump  card"  it  is  of  particular
importance in assessing the best interests of any child".

29.  In R(on the application MA (Pakistan)  and  Others)  v  Upper  Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) and Another [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  it  was
held that in light of the jurisprudence of the  Supreme  Court,  courts  and
tribunals were not mandated to approach the proportionality  exercise  where
the best interests of the child were in issue in any particular  order  such
that it was an error of law for them to fail to do so:.  Although  it  would
usually be sensible to start with the child's best interests, ultimately  it
did not matter how the balancing exercise was conducted  provided  that  the
child's best interests were treated as a primary  consideration  (paras  49,
53-57 and 72).   In  Kaur  (children's  best  interests  /  public  interest
interface) [2017] UKUT  14  (IAC)  in  which  it  was  held  that  the  best
interests assessment should normally be carried out at the beginning of  the
balancing exercise.

30. In Kaur (children's best interests / public interest  interface)  [2017]
UKUT 14 (IAC) it was held that the "little weight" provisions in Part 5A  of
the 2002 Act do not  entail  an  absolute,  rigid  measurement  or  concept;
"little  weight"  involves  a  spectrum  which,  within  its  self-contained
boundaries, will  result  in  the  measurement  of  the  quantum  of  weight
considered appropriate in the fact sensitive context of every case.

31. In AA v Upper Tribunal (Asylum and Immigration Chamber) [2013]  CSIH  88
it was held that there was  no  error  where  significant  weight  had  been
accorded to the Claimant child's British nationality. In Sanade  and  others
(British children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC) the  Tribunal
held that Case C-34/09 Ruiz Zambrano , [2011] EUECJ C-34/09  "now  makes  it
clear that where the child or indeed  the  remaining  spouse  is  a  British
citizen and therefore a citizen of the European Union, as  a  matter  of  EU
law it is not possible to require the family as a unit to  relocate  outside
of the European Union or for the Secretary of State to submit that it  would
be reasonable for them to do so".

32. The impact of the respondent's decision is either that  the  appellant's
children will be separated from the appellant, or the  appellant's  children
will leave the UK. The  weight  of  reliable  evidence  tells  me  that  the
appellant's children will find separation from  the  appellant  to  be  more
than temporarily distressing. They will lose a parent.  That  cannot  be  in
the best interests of the child.

33.  The  alternative  is  that  the  appellant's  children  accompany   the
appellant to Ghana. If they do that, then two British citizen children  will
be required to leave the UK.

34. The respondent produces no evidence to explain why the  removal  of  two
British citizens is  justified.  It  is  arguable  that  they  will  all  be
returning to  their  country  of  origin,  but  that  argument  ignores  the
respondent's own decision to confer British Citizenship on  the  appellant's
children. That argument runs counter to the respondent's own IDI's.

35.  As the impact of the respondent's decision  would  cause  upheaval  and
distress to young British citizen children, and as on the facts  as  I  find
them to be it is  not  in  the  children's  best  interest  to  suffer  such
distress and upheaval, then it cannot be reasonable to expect  the  children
to leave the UK. The appellant benefits from the  terms  of  s.117B  of  the
2002 Act.

36. I therefore find that the public  interest  in  immigration  control  is
outweighed by the interests of the appellant's children.  I  therefore  find
that  the  respondent's  decision  is  a  disproportionate  breach  of   the
appellant's right to respect for family life.

37. In the light  of  the  above  conclusions,  I  find  that  the  Decision
appealed against would cause the United Kingdom to be in breach of  the  law
or its obligations under the 1950 Convention.

CONCLUSION

38. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 14  October  2016
is tainted by a material error of law. I set it aside.

39. I substitute my own decision.

40. The appeal is allowed on article 8 ECHR grounds.


Signed  Paul Doyle                                               Date  12
January 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

