
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/27662/2014
                                                               IA/27663/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9 September 2015                  |On 18 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                     MS MARY MOGBONJUBOLA IDOWU OJEDIRAN
                       MISS ELIZABETH ABISOLA OJEDIRAN
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms S. Akinbolu of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss. E. Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against a decision  promulgated  on
    16  March  2015  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  NMK  Lawrence,  which
    dismissed  the  Appellants'  appeals  against  the  decisions  of   the
    Respondent to refuse leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  under
    Article 8 ECHR.

 2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  on  the  basis
    that it was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal failed to follow  the
    approach outlined in Razgar,  namely  that  subsequent  questions  only
    arise if Article 8 is engaged.

 3. I announced at the hearing, having heard submissions from both parties,
    that I found that the decision did not contain any material  errors  of
    law capable of affecting the outcome of the decision.   I  set  out  my
    reasons below.

Submissions

 4. It was submitted in the grounds of  appeal  that  the  judge  had  made
    irrational and unreasoned findings.  In particular, I was  referred  by
    the Appellants' representative to paragraph [16(ii)]  where  the  judge
    found that there would be continuity of educational provision  as  "the
    educational system is similar to that which exists in the  UK,  Nigeria
    being a former colony of the UK".  It was also submitted  that  it  was
    irrational to find that that because the second  Appellant  lived  with
    her mother, who retained  ties  to  Nigeria,  she  had  therefore  also
    retained ties to Nigeria.  It was  submitted  that  he  had  failed  to
    consider the evidence of the second  Appellant's  strong  ties  to  the
    United Kingdom, and  that  there  was  no  reference  to  the  details,
    including the school letters.   I  was  referred  to  page  20  of  the
    Appellants' bundle, a letter from Globe Academy dated 22 October  2010,
    and page 22, a letter from St  Charles  Catholic  Sixth  Form  College,
    which is undated, but refers to enrolment in September  2012.   It  was
    submitted that these letters were evidence of  the  second  Appellant's
    educational progress and expectations.

 5. It was also submitted that the  judge  had  diminished  the  length  of
    residence  of  the  second  Appellant  (paragraph  [16(iv)]).   It  was
    submitted that he had reversed the position whereby the  older  that  a
    child is, the more important her ties.   It  was  submitted  that  this
    paragraph detracted from the fact that the second Appellant  had  spent
    nine years in the United Kingdom.

 6. In relation to his findings under Article  8,  it  was  submitted  that
    these were "even more irrational".  There had been no lawful assessment
    of the Article 8 claim and the second Appellant's ties  to  the  United
    Kingdom such as school, her brother and membership of a choir  had  not
    been considered.  It was submitted that her nine  year  residence,  her
    education and prospects, and her  ties  to  friends,  family,  culture,
    society and church should all have been considered.  I was referred  to
    paragraph [16(iii)].  The linguistic difficulties which would be  faced
    by the second Appellant had not been resolved by the judge.

 7. It was submitted that neither the decision under paragraph  276ADE  nor
    the decision under Article 8 were sustainable on the findings made.

 8. In relation to the judge's consideration of the immigration rules,  the
    Respondent's representative submitted that this  was  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with the findings of the judge who had properly considered
    reasonableness in paragraphs [15] to  [21].   The  case  law  had  been
    referred to in paragraphs [16], [17], [20] and [21], and  his  decision
    had been well reasoned and in accordance with the case law.

 9. In particular, in relation to paragraph 4.1 of the grounds  of  appeal,
    it was open to the judge, having  heard  the  evidence  of  the  second
    Appellant, to find that she was used to Nigerian norms and culture.  He
    was entitled to find that education was available in Nigeria,  and  any
    error in his finding that the systems were similar because Nigeria  was
    a former colony could not be material.  The fact that  education  would
    not be of the same standard as that in the United Kingdom did not alone
    render the decision unreasonable.

10. In relation to paragraphs 4.2 and 4.5, it was open to the judge to find
    that, as the second Appellant had lived in Nigeria  until  she  was  10
    years old, she would be able to pick up the  language  again.   It  was
    submitted that it was difficult to see  how  this  could  have  made  a
    difference to the decision as  English  is  the  official  language  of
    Nigeria.

11. In relation to paragraphs 4.3 and 4.7,  the  guidance  in  Azimi-Moayed
    (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197  (IAC)
    had been taken into  account  by  the  judge  in  paragraph  [16].   In
    particular paragraph (iv) of the  headnote  to  Azimi-Moayed  had  been
    taken into account.  In relation to paragraph 4.4, seven years was  not
    a trump card.

12. It was submitted that, taking into account all of the judge's findings,
    the criticisms in relation to his  consideration  of  paragraph  276ADE
    were only a disagreement with his findings.

13. In relation  to  Article  8  outside  the  immigration  rules,  it  was
    submitted that the decision that there was  no  interference  with  the
    family life of the Appellants was open  to  the  judge.   Other  family
    members had been considered in paragraphs [32] and [33].  Relevant case
    law had been taken into account and his findings were open to him.

14. In relation to private life, the judge's  finding  that  there  was  no
    interference in the Appellants' private lives was  given  detailed  and
    cogent reasoning by reference to the case law of Nnyanzi v UK  21878/06
    [2008] ECHR.  It was submitted that it was open to the  judge  to  find
    that Article 8 was not engaged in respect of private life.  The grounds
    failed to identify an error of law in the judge's general  approach  to
    Razgar set out at paragraph  [34].   Whilst  the  judge  had  found  no
    interference,  nevertheless   the   alternative   position   had   been
    considered.  Even  if  there  was  an  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    consideration of Article 8, this was not a material error, as detailed,
    cogent and sustainable reasons had been given by the judge  as  to  why
    the decision was proportionate.

15.  In  relation   to   accommodation   in   Nigeria,   the   Respondent's
    representative submitted that  there  had  been  inconsistent  evidence
    between the Appellants and that the judge's finding that  accommodation
    was available was open to him (paragraph [41]).

16. In response, it was submitted that there were two errors,  the  failure
    to establish from what the second Appellant would be removed,  and  the
    failure to consider to what she would be returning. There was a lack of
    factual findings regarding her best  interests.   The  judge's  finding
    that the decision would not interfere with her  private  life  coloured
    the remainder of his assessment under Article 8.

Findings

17. It is apparent from the decision that the judge considered all  of  the
    circumstances of both Appellants in his consideration of their  Article
    8 rights both under the immigration rules and outside  the  immigration
    rules.

18. In relation to his consideration of  the  second  Appellant's  position
    under paragraph 276ADE, having found that she had been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for seven years at the date of application, the judge correctly
    identifies that the issue is whether it would be reasonable  to  expect
    her to leave the United Kingdom [15].  He states that this issue is  to
    be determined in the light of her best interests [15].  He sets out the
    case law in relation to the best interests  and  considers  the  second
    Appellant's circumstances as against each specific guideline.

19. His findings in paragraph [16(ii)] were open to him on the basis of the
    evidence before him.  He correctly stated the length of time for  which
    the second Appellant had lived in Nigeria.  He found that there was  an
    education system in Nigeria where the second Appellant  could  continue
    her education.  The fact that he found that the educational system  was
    similar to the UK as Nigeria was a  former  colony  is  not  a  finding
    capable of affecting the decision, given that he had found  that  there
    would be continuity of educational  provision  as  there  is  education
    available in Nigeria. His finding that the second  Appellant  continued
    to be involved in Nigerian social and cultural norms was  open  to  him
    given the evidence.

20. In relation to the issue of the second Appellant's language  (paragraph
    [16(iii)]) his finding that she would be able to  pick  up  her  native
    tongue again, given that she grew up speaking it in Nigeria  until  the
    age of 10, was open  to  him.   In  any  event,  as  submitted  by  the
    Respondent's  representative,  the  official  language  of  Nigeria  is
    English.

21. In relation to time spent by the second Appellant in  Nigeria  and  the
    United Kingdom, it is clear from the decision that the judge was  aware
    of the periods of time that she had spent in each.  He correctly states
    that she had spent over 10 years in  Nigeria  [16(ii)],  [18(ii)].   He
    refers to the guidance relating to the significance of time spent  when
    a child is older.  The judge was aware that the  second  Appellant  had
    been in the United Kingdom from the age of 10 onwards.  As submitted by
    the Respondent's representative, having spent seven years in the United
    Kingdom is not a trump card.

22. In paragraph [17] the judge considered the Court of  Appeal's  guidance
    in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874, and once again considered  the
    guidance alongside the circumstances of the second  Appellant.   Again,
    the decision shows that he was aware of how long she had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom.  He considered her education and found, as was open  to
    him, that she was not at any critical stage  of  her  education  having
    completed secondary school.  His finding that she has grown up  in  the
    Nigerian environment in the UK was open to him  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before him.  He  found  in  paragraph  [20]  that  the  second
    Appellant has continued to  be  exposed  to  the  Nigerian  environment
    "sufficient to keep her familiarised with it" so  that  her  return  to
    Nigeria is not adverse to her best interests.

23. It was submitted that the judge had  failed  to  consider  all  of  the
    evidence in detail and I was referred to the school letters  (paragraph
    [4] above).  The judge stated in paragraph [6] that he had  taken  into
    account the evidence in the Respondent's and Appellants' bundles.   The
    fact that he has not referred specifically to these letters is  not  an
    error of law.  The first letter is dated October 2010 and refers to the
    second Appellant's education.  It refers to her being a member  of  the
    school choir, but the fact that she was a member of a choir in 2010  is
    not enough to affect the decision.  The  second  letter  offers  her  a
    place in September 2012 at  Sixth  Form  College.   It  refers  to  her
    progress in her BTEC programme.  However again, this letter alone,  and
    the information in it, cannot be said to make a material difference  to
    the outcome of the decision.

24. There is no error of law in the fact that these two  letters  were  not
    specifically referenced.  The judge was aware that the second Appellant
    had received education in the  United  Kingdom.   The  fact  of  having
    received this education and having been in school choir are not  enough
    for him to find that it would be unreasonable  for  her  to  return  to
    Nigeria.  Her educational progress and expectations are not  enough  to
    affect the outcome of the  decision,  given  the  point  that  she  had
    reached in her education, and the totality of the evidence  before  the
    judge.

25. I do not find that there is any error of law capable of  affecting  the
    outcome of the decision in the  judge's  consideration  of  the  second
    Appellant's position under the immigration rules, paragraph 276ADE.

26. In relation to the consideration under Razgar,  the  judge  found  that
    there was no interference with the Appellants' Article 8  rights.   His
    finding that there would be no interference with their family life  was
    open to him given that they would be returning together.  He considered
    other family members in paragraphs  [32]  and  [33].   In  relation  to
    private life, even though he found that there was no interference  with
    their private lives, nevertheless he went on to  consider  the  further
    Razgar questions, and to consider the issue  of  proportionality.   Any
    error of law in  continuing  with  the  consideration  of  the  further
    questions in Razgar is not material given his full consideration of the
    Appellants' circumstances in his assessment of proportionality.

27. It is clear both from the findings in relation to paragraph 276ADE  and
    to the findings in relation to  proportionality,  that  the  judge  has
    taken into account  all  of  the  Appellants'  circumstances.   It  was
    submitted  that  he  had  failed  to  take  into  account  the   second
    Appellant's period of residence in the United  Kingdom.   There  is  no
    merit in this.  It is clear from the decision that the judge  is  aware
    of the length of time the second  Appellant  has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It was submitted that he had failed to take into account  the
    second Appellant's education and prospects.  Again, there is  no  merit
    in this.   The  judge  found  that  she  had  completed  her  secondary
    education in the United Kingdom and therefore that she  was  not  at  a
    critical stage of her education ([18(i)]).  He  found  that  there  was
    education available in Nigeria.  It was submitted that he had failed to
    take into account her ties to friends,  family,  culture,  society  and
    church.  The judge took into account her family in paragraphs [32]  and
    [33].  He took into account her church activities in the United Kingdom
    in paragraph [16(ii)].  As stated in paragraph 7, he considered all  of
    the evidence in the bundle.  It is clear from his findings that he  had
    taken into account the second Appellant's ties to the United Kingdom.

28. Given that the judge fully considered  the  Appellants'  circumstances,
    there can  be  no  material  error  of  law  in  his  consideration  of
    proportionality, given that he was aware  of  all  of  the  Appellants'
    circumstances, and took them into account in the balancing exercise.

29. In relation to the question of accommodation in Nigeria the judge found
    that the evidence of the two Appellants  was  contradictory  (paragraph
    [41]).  The second Appellant believed that accommodation was  available
    in Nigeria.  The judge's finding that they would not be  destitute,  as
    claimed by the first Appellant, but that they would have family members
    who would be able to accommodate them was open to him on the  basis  of
    the evidence before him.

30. The judge correctly considered section 117B of the 2002  Act.   He  was
    required to consider the fact that the Appellants had been  overstayers
    for the majority of their time in the United Kingdom.

31. Taking the decision as a whole, the judge has  considered  all  of  the
    Appellants' circumstances and has made findings which are reasoned  and
    cogent.  Neither the grounds nor the decision point to any error of law
    capable of affecting the outcome of the decision.

Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not involve an error on  a
    point of law capable of affecting the outcome  of  the  decision.   The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.




    Signed:
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


    Date:  17 September 2015
