
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/27469/2014
                                                               IA/27471/2014
                                                               IA/27475/2014
                                                               IA/27479/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th June 2015                    |On 24th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                            SP (first appellant)
                           NWD (second appellant)
                       SP (A Minor) (third appellant)
                       IP (A MINOR) (fourth appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss Smith, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are  citizens  of  Sri  Lanka.   The  first  and  second
    Appellants are husband and wife and the  third  and  fourth  Appellants
    their minor children who were born respectively on 1st August 2002  and
    8th October 2008.  The Appellants have  a  very  extensive  immigration
    history.  The first Appellant first landed in the United Kingdom on 5th
    September 2006 in possession of a visa conferring leave to enter  until
    31st October 2007.  The visa was subsequently extended until  26th  May
    2014.  The first Appellant arrived with the second and third Appellants
    whose visas were subsequently extended  in  line  with  his  own.   The
    fourth Appellant was born in the UK and thereafter her  visa  was  also
    extended.

 2. On 1st April 2014 solicitors instructed by the  Appellants  applied  on
    their behalf for leave to remain  in  the  UK  based  on  human  rights
    grounds.   In  Notices  of  Refusals  issued  on  10th  June  2014  the
    Appellants' applications were refused.

 3. The Appellants appealed and the appeals came before Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Davies sitting at Manchester on 9th October 2014.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 20th October 2014 the Appellants'  appeals
    were allowed to the extent that in paragraph 12 of the learned  Judge's
    determination he submitted the appeal back to the  Secretary  of  State
    for him to consider all the evidence that had been put before  him  and
    to reach conclusions as to whether it  was  reasonable  to  expect  the
    third Appellant to leave the United Kingdom after considering all  that
    evidence.

 4. On 29th October 2014 the Appellants appealed that decision.

 5. On 3rd  December  2014  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Zucker
    refused permission to appeal.  Further Grounds of Appeal were lodged on
    19th December 2014.

 6. On 27th March 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor granted permission  to
    appeal.  His reasons noted that the First-tier Tribunal had allowed the
    Appellants' appeal on the basis that the Secretary of State's  decision
    was not in accordance with the law for failure to lawfully consider the
    application  at  paragraph  276ADE  as   to   the   third   Appellant's
    circumstances.  The Grounds of Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    O'Connor noted asserted that the Secretary of State's decision was  not
    in accordance with the Immigration Rules and that it  was  arguable  in
    light of Section 86(2)(a) of the 2002 Act that the First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in failing to determine such ground.

 7. The Secretary of State has somewhat surprisingly lodged  two  responses
    to the Grounds of Appeal under Rule 24.  The first dated 14th May  2015
    merely opposes the appeal and submits that the decision  to  remit  the
    case back to the Secretary of State for reconsideration  was  one  that
    was open to the judge to make.  The latter Rule 24 response dated  12th
    May 2015 is more extensive and contends that the grounds have no  merit
    and merely disagree with the  adverse  outcome  of  the  appeal.   They
    contend that the judge considered all the evidence that  was  available
    to him and came to a conclusion open to him based on that evidence  and
    the Rules, based on the balance of probability and do not disclose  any
    error.

 8. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law.  The Appellants appear
    by their instructed Counsel Miss Smith.  The Secretary of State appears
    by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Harrison.  I  am  considerably
    assisted in this appeal by the concession  made  by  Mr  Harrison  that
    there is a material error of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  failed  to
    analyse the evidence and make relevant findings of fact.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

11. It is incumbent upon a judge to make findings of fact and unfortunately
    in this instant case the First-tier Tribunal Judge has failed to do so.
     I accept that at the appeal the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  bundles
    of all the papers submitted to the Secretary of State as well as having
    the benefit of oral evidence from the Appellants themselves.  Therefore
    the judge did have all the necessary evidence and the ability  to  make
    the decision on the matter at the time.  The judge clearly indicates at
    paragraph 10 of his determination that bearing in mind the decision  he
    proposes to make that it is not necessary for him to set out or analyse
    the evidence.  It is the contention of the judge that the Secretary  of
    State has not in relation to the third Appellant conducted a  reasoning
    process in relation to that Appellant so that he is able to demonstrate
    that it is not considered unreasonable to expect the third Appellant to
    leave the United Kingdom.  That finding does not sit  comfortably  with
    the Notice of Refusal where at pages 4 and 5 the Secretary of State has
    set out her reasons why the third Appellant cannot meet the Immigration
    Rules and has latterly in the Notice of Refusal gone on to consider the
    position of the family as  to  whether  exceptional  circumstances  are
    constituted and concluded the family could return to  Sri  Lanka  as  a
    family unit and continue to enjoy family life together.  It seems clear
    unfortunately that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  has  not  given  due
    consideration to the original findings made by the Secretary  of  State
    which constituted the subject matter of the appeal before him  when  in
    fact they were there and available for him to consider.

12. In such circumstances I find that there is a material error of law  and
    it is agreed by both legal representatives that the correct approach is
    to remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by  any
    other judge than Judge M Davies.

Decision and Directions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and is set aside.  Directions are set out below for the  future  conduct  of
this appeal.

 1) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Manchester
    to be heard by any First-tier Tribunal  Judge  other  than  Immigration
    Judge M Davies.

 2) That to the extent that there have been any  findings  of  fact  (which
    there are not) none are to stand.

 3) That the appeal be heard on the first available date 28 days hence with
    an ELH of two hours.

 4) Leave to either party to lodge an  up-to-date  bundle  of  evidence  at
    least seven days prehearing.

 5) No interpreter is required.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

