
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
ia/27270/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham    |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 18th September 2017                    |  On 16th October 2017            |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                            Muhammad Asad Khalil
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe, Counsel, instructed by Law & Justice
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan born on 25th November 1985.
     He first arrived in the United Kingdom on 27th January  2011  when  he
    was granted leave to enter until 14th April 2013 as a spouse.  On  13th
    March 2013 he applied for indefinite leave to remain as the  victim  of
    domestic violence.  That application was refused for the reasons  given
    in the Respondent's Refusal Letter dated 13th June 2013.  The Appellant
    appealed, and his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Chohan
    (the Judge) sitting at Birmingham on 23rd  November  2015.   The  Judge
    decided to dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules and on  human
    rights grounds for  the  reasons  given  in  his  Decision  dated  10th
    December 2015.  The Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and
    eventually such permission was granted on 17th July 2017  following  an
    order of the High Court.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The decision of the Judge to dismiss the appeal under  the  Immigration
    Rules is not in issue in this appeal.  The Judge decided to dismiss the
    appeal on human rights grounds because although he found the  Appellant
    had a family life with his  daughter,  Memoona  Shazedi  born  on  10th
    August 2012, and that the decision of the  Respondent  amounted  to  an
    interference with such family life of sufficient gravity to engage  the
    Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights, such interference was  proportionate
    even taking into account the best interests of that child.  In reaching
    that conclusion, the  Judge  considered  the  provisions  of  paragraph
    117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  and  found
    the Appellant's child to be a qualifying child.   However,  he  decided
    that there were no compelling circumstances justifying a grant of leave
    to remain as the Appellant did not live with his daughter and had  been
    granted only indirect contact with her by the Family Court.

 4. At the hearing, Mr Pipe referred to Ground 2  of  the  application  for
    Judicial Review and the Order of the High Court  and  argued  that  the
    Judge had erred in law in his decision relating to  the  provisions  of
    Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.   At  paragraphs  22  and  24  of  the
    Decision the Judge found family life  between  the  Appellant  and  his
    daughter, and that such family life would be  interfered  with  by  the
    refusal of the Appellant's application for indefinite leave to  remain.
    In his decision, the Judge had failed to make a finding in  respect  of
    Section 117B(6)(a) as to  whether  the  Appellant  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with his daughter, a qualifying child.
     Section 117B(6) was a "stand alone" provision and therefore provided a
    complete answer to the question  of  proportionality.   The  Judge  had
    therefore erred in law materially  by  failing  to  decide  all  issues
    raised by the Section.

 5. In response, Mr Mills argued that the decision of the Judge could  only
    be rationally read to imply that the  Judge  found  the  provisions  of
    Section 117B(6)(a) not to be met.  The contents of paragraphs 22 and 28
    of the Decision indicated that the Judge found the relationship between
    the Appellant and his daughter to be something less  than  genuine  and
    subsisting.

 6. I do find a material error of law in the decision of the Judge which  I
    therefore set aside.  It is not in dispute that the Judge did not  make
    a specific finding as to whether there was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  his  daughter,  a
    qualifying child, as required by Section 117B(6)(a) of  the  2002  Act.
    It is true that the Judge referred extensively to the decision  of  the
    Family Court to allow the Appellant  only  indirect  contact  with  his
    daughter,  implying  something  less  than  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship, but elsewhere in the Decision  the  Judge  found
    family life between the Appellant  and  his  daughter  which  would  be
    interfered with to  a  degree  of  gravity  sufficient  to  engage  the
    Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights, implying some sort  of  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship.  These  decisions  are  contradictory
    and therefore amount to a material error of law.  The error is material
    as  a  flawless  decision  in  respect  of  Section  117B(6)   can   be
    determinative of the appeal.

 7. I did not proceed to remake the decision in the appeal but to remit the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for the decision to be  remade  there
    in accordance with paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statements as fact-
    finding is still necessary.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside that decision.

The decision in the appeal will be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Date   13th October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
