
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27352/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 October 2015                            |On 27 October 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                          BIDEMI BOLAJI OLANREWAJU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABUJA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss C Record, Counsel (Chambers of Celia Record)
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 26 September 1985.   She
    appeals the decision of  First-tier  Judge  Hillis  determined  on  the
    papers on 29 September 2014 to dismiss her appeal against a decision of
    the respondent to refuse her application as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
    under paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration  Rules  on  the  basis  that
    deception had been  used.   The  application  was  also  refused  under
    paragraph 320(7B) of the Rules and any  future  applications  would  be
    automatically refused under  paragraph  320(7B)  until  ten  years  had
    elapsed.

2.   It was noted that the appellant's husband only  had  limited  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom until 30 September 2014 and the  appellant
    had stated that she intended to return to Nigeria on 29 September 2014.
     In such circumstances it was considered that  the  appellant's  family
    and private life would not be infringed under Article 8.

3.   It appears that the appellant in fact  entered  the  UK  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) dependant on 7 February 2013 and an application for leave  to
    remain had been submitted prior to that date and the  First-tier  Judge
    appears to have accepted in paragraph  15  a  submission  made  by  the
    appellant to that effect in her grounds of appeal.  She  had  travelled
    to the UK to stay with her husband.

4.   The First-tier Judge recorded the appellant's submission that  she  was
    the innocent victim of an attempted fraud committed  by  her  financial
    backers in Nigeria.  She had lived with her husband in the  UK  as  his
    dependant  for  three  years  and  during  that  time  the  couple  had
    established a private and/or family life in the UK.

5.   The judge set out the material parts of paragraph 320(7A) in  paragraph
    18 of his decision.  Paragraph 320(7A) reads as follows:

         "Where false representations have been made or false  documents  or
         information have been submitted (whether or  not  material  to  the
         application, and whether or not to the applicant's  knowledge),  or
         material  facts  have  not  been  disclosed,  in  relation  to  the
         application or in order to obtain documents from the  Secretary  of
         State or a third party required in support of the application."

6.   The judge observed in  the  concluding  sentence  of  paragraph  18  as
    follows:

         "It is therefore clear that the respondent is not required to  show
         the appellant has personal knowledge of the false submission  of  a
         document for the terms [of] this paragraph to be engaged."

7.   In paragraph 9 the judge concluded "I find on the evidence  before  me,
    the appellant has failed to submit genuine documents  as  required  and
    that no points can be allocated to her application."

8.   The judge was not persuaded that the appellant's human rights had  been
    breached given the lack of any persuasive evidence before  him  of  her
    current private life nor had she shown that her  social  and  financial
    ties to Nigeria had been broken.  He added:

         "Although the appellant has been in the UK from 7 February 2013  as
         a dependant of her husband I find that both his  and  her  presence
         here has always been subject to visas of a limited duration. The UK
         government has done no more than apply its valid Immigration  Rules
         and Law to  the  appellant's  application  in  furtherance  of  its
         legitimate aims of proper immigration control."

9.   The appeal was accordingly dismissed.

10.  In the grounds of appeal settled by Miss Record reliance was placed  on
    AA (Nigeria) v Secretary of State [2010] EWCA Civ 773 on the basis that
    false was held to mean  dishonesty  and  the  appellant  had  not  been
    dishonest and had not been party to the fraud.   Permission  to  appeal
    was granted by the First-tier Judge on the point taken in  relation  to
    AA (Nigeria).  In relation to the arguments under Article 8  the  judge
    observed:

         "As to the second ground, the judge's consideration under Article 8
         was somewhat cursory, although  his  conclusion  might  be  thought
         inevitable (and thus any error immaterial) if A could  not  succeed
         on the other issues in the appeal.  I will not exclude  the  second
         ground at this stage."

11.  The respondent filed a response on 21  November  2014  submitting  that
    the judge had directed himself correctly  in  the  light  of  paragraph
    320(7A) as referred to in paragraph 18 of the  determination.   Counsel
    said that the appellant was on temporary admission in the UK.   It  was
    necessary to prove deception on the  part  of  the  appellant  and  the
    appellant had merely made an innocent mistake.  She  had  reported  the
    fraud to the Nigerian police. She was an innocent dupe.  The point  was
    a very succinct one.   There  was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision.

12.  Miss Everett submitted that paragraph  67  of  AA  (Nigeria)  made  the
    matter quite clear.  The appellant might have used "in all innocence" a
    false document but the fact that she was unaware was irrelevant.    She
    also relied on the concluding words of paragraph  76  of  the  decision
    "... dishonesty or deception is needed, albeit not necessarily that  of
    the applicant himself, to render a 'false representation' a ground  for
    mandatory refusal."

13.  There was nothing in the Article 8 point in the premises.

14.  Counsel submitted that the appellant had made an innocent  mistake  and
    she was not party to the fraud and that dishonesty was required.

15.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved  my  decision.   I  can
    only interfere with the judge's  determination  if  it  was  materially
    flawed in law.  This was a case in which  there  was  no  dispute  that
    there was a fraud but the appellant says she was an innocent victim  of
    their  fraud.   With  respect  to  the  First-tier  Judge  who  granted
    permission, the point is clearly dealt with in AA  (Nigeria)  and  Miss
    Everett aptly refers to paragraph  67  of  that  case  which  reads  as
    follows:

         "First, 'false representation' is aligned in the Rule  with  'false
         document'. It is plain that a false document is one  that  tells  a
         lie about itself. Of course it is possible for a person to make use
         of a false document (for instance a counterfeit currency note,  but
         that example, used for its clarity,  is  rather  distant  from  the
         context of this discussion) in total ignorance of its  falsity  and
         in perfect honesty.  But the document itself is  dishonest.  It  is
         highly likely  therefore  that  where  an  appellant  uses  in  all
         innocence a  false document for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  entry
         clearance, or leave to enter or to remain, it is because some other
         party, it might a parent, a  sponsor,  or  agent,  has  dishonestly
         promoted the use of that document. The response of a requirement of
         mandatory refusal is entirely understandable in such  a  situation.
         The mere fact that a dishonest document has been used for  such  an
         important application is understandably a sufficient reason  for  a
         mandatory refusal. That is how the rule expressly  emphasises  that
         it applies 'whether or not to the applicant's knowledge."

16.  The words at the conclusion of paragraph 76 to which Miss Everett  also
    referred are also in point. What the First-tier Tribunal Judge said  in
    paragraph 18 is entirely correct.

17.  This was a case in which there was no dispute there was a fraud but  it
    was a fraud with which the appellant said she had nothing to  do.   The
    fact she was an innocent victim is not relevant.

18.  Issues are also taken in the grounds with the  question  of  burden  of
    proof but this was a case where there was no dispute about the fraud.

19.  In the light of this it is not  perhaps  necessary  to  deal  with  the
    Article 8 issues since the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  considered  that
    the assessment in relation to those issues might be inevitable  if  the
    conclusions were otherwise  not  flawed.  As  I  have  found  that  the
    approach of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  to  paragraph  320(7A)  was
    entirely correct, I can see no flaw in his approach to  issues  arising
    under Article 8.  This was a matter determined on  the  papers  and  no
    doubt it would have been open to  the  parties  to  put  more  evidence
    before the judge had they so wished.

20.  The decision under  paragraph  320(7A)  carries  consequences  for  the
    future.  When making a further application it is of course open to  the
    appellant to draw the respondent's attention that she was not party  to
    the fraud and make reference to the fact that she reported  the  matter
    to the police, for example.

Notice of Decision

21.  For the reasons I have given, the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge is not materially flawed in law and I direct that it shall stand.



22.  No anonymity order is made.

Fee Award

23.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed   Date 23 October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Warr

