
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27535/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Notice Promulgated            |
|On 21 September 2017                         |On 27 September 2017          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before


                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                HARPREET KAUR
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. H. Kannangara, Counsel instructed by Malik Law
                    Chambers Solicitors

                                   NOTICE

  1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
     First-tier Tribunal Judge N. J.  Bennett,  promulgated  on  27  January
     2017, in which he allowed Mrs. Kaur's appeal against  the  Respondent's
     decision to refuse to issue a residence card  as  confirmation  of  her
     right to reside in the United Kingdom.


  2. At the outset of the hearing, having already spoken to Mr.  Kannangara,
     Mr. Jarvis stated that he wished to withdraw  the  appeal  pursuant  to
     rule 17 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   He
     submitted that the grounds of appeal were misconceived.  The judge  had
     to consider the situation as at the date of the hearing.  At  the  date
     of the hearing the judge had found  that  the  Sponsor  was  exercising
     Treaty rights, albeit as a worker, not as a student.  This finding  had
     not been challenged, and was a lawful finding.


  3. Under rule 17(1)(b) a party may give notice of the  withdrawal  of  its
     case orally at a hearing. Under rule 17(2) notice  of  withdrawal  will
     only take effect if the Upper Tribunal consents to the withdrawal.


  4. At the hearing I consented to the withdrawal of the appeal pursuant  to
     rule 17(2).


Notice


  5. The appeal is withdrawn.



Signed                                  Date 25 September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
