

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                    Appeal
Number: IA/27391/2015
                                                               IA/27394/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 5 May 2017                       |On 17 May 2017                        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MAHENDRAM THANANJEYAN
                             THURKA THANANJEYAN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Staunton Senior Hine Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: Mr Solomon instructed by Jein Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of
        First-tier Tribunal Judge Lingam ('the Judge') who  in  a  decision
        promulgated on 10  October  2016  allowed  the  above  respondents'
        appeals under the EEA Regulations 2006.
     2. The first respondent was born on 9 March 1983  and  his  wife,  the
        second respondent, was born on 17 June 1983.  Both are citizens  of
        Sri  Lanka.  The  respondents  applied  for  a  Residence  Card  in
        recognition of a right  to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  under
        Regulation  8(2)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
        Regulations  2006  as  Extended  Family  Members   of   the   first
        respondent's  uncle,  a  naturalised  citizen  of  Norway,  who  is
        exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.
     3. The application was refused as it was said the first respondent was
        unable to show that he was dependent upon and/or had  resided  with
        his sponsor prior to residing with him in the UK: and/or that  they
        had entered the UK with the EEA national sponsor.
     4. The Judge noted the oral and documentary evidence  received  before
        setting out the findings of fact at [21] to [49]  of  the  decision
        under challenge. The Judge concluded at [43] that on  the  evidence
        he was satisfied the first respondent had shown past membership  of
        the sponsors household and financial dependency on his sponsor. The
        Judge found at [46] current membership  of  the  household  in  the
        United Kingdom and ongoing dependency.
     5. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on  two  grounds
        relating to both appellants (the above respondents) and one  ground
        specifically relating to the second  appellant  (the  above  second
        respondent).



Grounds



     6. The grounds are as follows:


        Grounds for both appellants


        Ground 1. No jurisdiction to hear appeals - case of Sala.


        Between the First-tier Tribunal hearing and the promulgation of the
        determination the Upper Tribunal  reported  the  decision  in  Sala
        (EFM: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC),  in  which  it  was
        held that the definition of "EEA  decision"  at  EEA  Regulation  2
        meant that no right of  appeal  lies  against  a  decision  not  to
        recognise a person as an Extended Family member under Regulation 8.
        Although the case could not have played any part at the hearing the
        Tribunal erred by not having regard to its principles.


        Ground 2. Limited jurisdiction to allow appeals in Extended  Family
        member case.


        In any event the Judge erred in not referring to  the  need  before
        documentation of an extensive examination  of  circumstances  under
        Regulation 17(4) and (5) and allowing the appeal on the basis  that
        simple  findings  of  necessary  relationship  was  sufficient.  In
        respect of the second appellant this compounded the error  that  in
        fact there was no eligibility at all under Regulation 8.


        Grounds specifically for the second appellant


        Ground 1:  Material  misdirection  as  to  the  relevant  statutory
        framework


        Irrespective of jurisdiction or  scope  of  permitted  allowing  as
        alleged in Ground 1 (for both appellants), there is simply  no  way
        on the Judge's fact-finding that the second appellant could succeed
        in her appeal. Regulation  8(2)  requires  for  any  appellant  the
        relevant dependence/membership  of  household  outside  the  United
        Kingdom (Regulation 8(2)(a), a prerequisite to succeed under (b) or
        (c). It was accepted that the second appellant was not dependent on
        the sponsor until after she married  the  first  appellant  in  the
        United Kingdom. She thus had no possible claim to  be  an  extended
        family member. This right does not pass side wards to relatives  of
        those who are documented under Regulation 7(3) as  a  Regulation  8
        Extended Family member,  and  consideration  for  this  status  was
        acknowledged to be the only issue  in  the  appeal.  For  the  same
        reason the couple's child (born in the United  Kingdom)  could  not
        possibly have a claim to be a Regulation 8 extended family member.


     7. Permission to be appeal was granted to the Secretary  of  State  on
        the basis that all grounds are arguable.



Discussion



     8. In relation to the jurisdiction point,  in  Sala  (EFMs:  Right  of
        Appeal) [2016] UKUT  411  (IAC)  it  was  held  that  there  is  no
        statutory right of appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of
        State not to grant a Residence Card to a person claiming to  be  an
        Extended Family  Member.  The  Judge  therefore  erred  in  law  in
        proceeding to hear the  appeal  against  the  refusal  to  issue  a
        Residence Card to persons claiming to be  Extended  Family  Members
        when there was no jurisdiction so to do.
     9. In Virk v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  EWCA
        Civ 652 it was held that although the Secretary of State had failed
        to  raise  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  issue  of   that
        Tribunal's jurisdiction to entertain  a  family's  application  for
        leave to remain, the Upper Tribunal was  entitled  to  dismiss  the
        family's  subsequent  appeal  against  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
        decision on the basis that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  not  had
        jurisdiction, notwithstanding that the point had  not  been  raised
        below.
    10. In relation to the point that Sala  was  handed  down  between  the
        hearing of  the  appeal  and  publication  of  the  decision  under
        challenge, a judicial decision is given at the date  that  judgment
        is handed down or promulgated. The obligation upon the Judge was to
        ensure that at  the  date  that  occurred,  10  October  2016,  the
        decision was in accordance with the law. Had the  Judge  noted  the
        decision in Sala and understood the impact upon this appeal, it was
        always open to the  Judge  to  reconvene  the  hearing  to  receive
        further submissions, if required. At  the  date  the  decision  was
        handed down the Judge  had  no  jurisdiction  to  make  a  decision
        allowing or dismissing the appeal.
    11. In his skeleton argument, Mr Solomon asserts the decision  in  Sala
        was wrongly decided for the reasons set out at [4] of the  skeleton
        argument. Such matters have been considered but do  not  appear  to
        warrant this tribunal finding in Mr Solomon's favour on this point.
    12. For the sake of completeness, but no further, the ground  asserting
        the Judge erred in allowing the appeal outright also  has  arguable
        merit. In Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011]  UKUT  00340(IAC)
        it was held at paragraph (iii)  that  regulation  17(4)  makes  the
        issue of a Residence Card to an extended family member a matter  of
        discretion. Where the Secretary of State has not yet exercised that
        discretion the most an immigration judge is entitled to  do  is  to
        allow the appeal as being not in accordance with  the  law  leaving
        the  matter  of  whether  to  exercise  this  discretion   in   the
        appellant's favour or not to the Secretary of State.
    13. In relation to the ground relating solely to the second respondent,
        the facts as found by the Judge support the  Secretary  of  State's
        argument  that  the  second  respondent  could  not   satisfy   the
        definition of an extended family member. Mr Solomon challenges this
        finding in that the first and second appellants  before  the  Judge
        were not married  in  the  UK,  as  asserted  in  the  respondent's
        application for permission to appeal, but were married in Sri Lanka
        on 11 February 2013 leading to the second respondent  named  above,
        being granted leave to  enter  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Dependent
        Partner on 30 November 2013.  That  party  stated  in  her  witness
        statement "I have not taken up any employment since I got  married"
        [13]. It was also stated that that party's husband's uncle has been
        her sole provider since marriage and  that  her  husband  has  been
        responsible for all her financial needs and because  her  husband's
        uncle  is  responsible   for   her   husband's   financial   needs,
        automatically  she  is  dependent  on  her  husband's   uncle   for
        everything. The Judge accepted the relationship between this  party
        and her husband was formed only after  the  marriage  and  although
        there  has  been  clear  exaggeration  regarding  the   length   of
        dependency in the witness statement where it  is  claimed  "he  has
        been my sole provider for as long as I can remember" it is said the
        core account has remained  consistent.  Whether  the  uncle  making
        provision to the husband and the husband making  provision  to  his
        wife would infer that the wife was in fact dependent upon  the  EEA
        national rather than dependent on  her  husband,  as  appears  more
        likely to be the case, is a moot point.
    14. Even if both parties  were  Extended  Family  Members  of  the  EEA
        national exercising treaty rights there would still  have  been  no
        jurisdiction for the Judge to have  heard  the  appeals.  For  that
        reason, the Secretary of State has made out  arguable  legal  error
        such that the decision allowing the appeal is set aside. There  are
        no preserved findings.
    15. The observations made by the Secretary of State regarding the  two-
        stage process required when considering the grant  of  a  Residence
        Card to an Extended Family Member also has  arguable  legal  merit,
        but need not be taken any further in light  of  the  jurisdictional
        issue.
    16. The Upper Tribunal has no jurisdiction to remake the decision.
    17. The Judge refused to consider an Article 8 application for  reasons
        given in [50] which are legally sustainable and which has not  been
        challenged by way of cross-appeal by the above respondents.
    18.  Mr  Solomon,  in  his  grounds,  claimed  the  Judge  should  have
        considered  article  8  ECHR  as  a  new  matter,   notwithstanding
        Armiteymour, given the change in the appeal regime  in  April  2015
        but such claim has no arguable merit. The decision relied  upon  by
        the Judge in the decision under challenge was  that  of  the  Upper
        Tribunal [2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC) which has been recently upheld  by
        the Court of Appeal in Nasrolah  Amirteymour  v  The  Secretary  of
        State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 353.
    19. The application to the Secretary of State was for the  issue  of  a
        Residence Card on the basis of  being  an  Extended  Family  Member
        under the EEA Regulations, not an application for leave  to  remain
        on article 8 grounds. The new regime  confers  a  right  of  appeal
        against the refusal of an article 8 application but  this  requires
        such application to be made or for an individual to fall within  an
        exempt class where such issues can be considered even if  a  formal
        application has not been made. Mr Solomon fails to  make  out  that
        his clients fall within any such category or to show that they have
        satisfied the requirements identified in the case law  which  would
        enable the Judge to consider article 8. On the facts known  to  the
        Upper Tribunal it therefore appears arguable that  this  is  not  a
        matter in relation to which the Judges conclusions are infected  by
        arguable legal error for the reasons set out in the decision  under
        challenge.


Decision

    20. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the original Judge. I cannot remake the decision as
        the Upper Tribunal has no jurisdiction to hear  an  appeal  against
        the refusal of the Residence Card by an Extended Family  Member  of
        an EEA national exercising treaty rights or the appeal on Article 8
        grounds, for the reasons set out above.


   Anonymity.


    21. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 4 May 2017












