

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal Number: IA/27624/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester              |          Decision & Reasons       |
|                                 |Promulgated                        |
|On 19 June 2017                  |          On 20 June 2017          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 VARDA SHAH
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

       1. This is an appeal by the SSHD against a  decision  of  the  First-
          tier Tribunal ('FTT') dated 26 July 2016, in which it allowed  Mrs
          Shah's appeal against the SSHD's decision dated 22  July  2015  to
          refuse her application for a residence  card  as  confirmation  of
          her right to reside  in  the  UK  as  an  extended  family  member
          ('EFM')  of  an  EEA  national  under  the  Immigration  (European
          Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended).

FTT decision

       2. The FTT heard oral evidence from Mrs Shah,  her  husband  and  her
          father-in-law and considered extensive  documentation  in  support
          of the appeal. The FTT accepted the evidence adduced on behalf  of
          the appellant to be credible and concluded that there is a  wealth
          of evidence to support Mrs Shah's  dependence  on  her  father-in-
          law, with whom she lived together with her husband and  child,  in
          the same household.  The First-tier Tribunal found Mrs Shah to  be
          an EFM and allowed the appeal.

Issues arising

       3. In a  decision  dated  2  November  2016,  the  SSHD  was  granted
          permission to appeal on the basis that  the  FTT  failed  to  deal
          with Mrs Shah's position before her arrival to the UK  and  in  so
          doing failed to apply Dauhoo (EEA-reg 8(2)) [2012] UKUT 79  (IAC).
           This decision also drew attention to the "jurisdictional  issues"
          raised in Sala (EFMs: Right of  Appeal)  [2016]  UKUT  411  (IAC).
          The headnote to Sala states:


              "There is no statutory right of appeal against  the  decision
              of the Secretary of State not to grant a Residence Card to  a
              person claiming to be an Extended Family Member."

       4. In a decision dated 14  March  2017  DUTJ  McGinty  adjourned  the
          appeal before the Upper Tribunal for two reasons: first, the  SSHD
          only provided a copy of a decision made by  FTTJ  Levin  regarding
          Mrs Shah that morning;  second,  to  enable  further  time  to  be
          provided  for  further  appellate  authority  regarding  the  Sala
          point.

Hearing

       5. At the hearing before me Mr Brown applied for a stay on the  basis
          that there remained an absence of any further appellate  authority
          addressing Sala.   To  his  knowledge  the  issue  may  have  been
          considered by the Supreme Court, when  addressing  another  issue.
          No further information  was  available.   Mr  Brown's  alternative
          argument was that if I was minded to find an error of law  in  the
          FTT decision, I should do so and remit the matter to be remade  by
          the FTT, by which time further authority might be available.


       6. Mr Bates invited me to reject the application for a  stay  and  to
          find that the FTT did not have jurisdiction in line with Sala.


       7. I indicated at the hearing that a stay is not  appropriate  or  in
          the interests of justice.  This is a matter of some vintage.   The
          application was refused nearly  two  years  ago.   Sala  has  been
          available for a relatively lengthy period and there  has  been  no
          clear indication that it is to be revisited or if it is,  when  it
          will be.  In a reported decision the Upper  Tribunal  has  clearly
          decided that EFM appeals do not carry a statutory right of  appeal
          to the FTT.  This is the law to be applied.  It is  also  open  to
          Mrs Shah to  make  a  new  application,  relying  upon  the  FTT's
          positive findings of  fact.   She  therefore  has  an  alternative
          remedy available to her.  For these reasons, I declined  to  grant
          a stay.
Jurisdiction

       8. Mrs Shah applied for a  residence  card  as  the  EFM  of  an  EEA
          national with whom she claimed to have a  "durable  relationship".
          As such, for the purposes of any appeal against the decision,  she
          was an EFM under reg 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations.  I accept  that
          the FTT did not have jurisdiction to consider the appeal  for  the
          reasons set out in Sala.


       9. As there was no jurisdiction to hear  the  appeal  at  all  it  is
          inappropriate to consider  whether  if  there  was,  there  was  a
          material  error  to  support  a  remittal  to  the  FTT.    Absent
          jurisdiction, I have no power to remit to the FTT.

Disposal

      10. The appellant has no right of appeal. The FTT had no jurisdiction
          to hear the appeal. It erred in law in doing so.


      11. I set aside the decision to allow the appeal and substitute a
          decision that there was not a valid appeal before the FTT.


Signed:
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
19 June 2017


