
[pic]
IAC-AH-co-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/27980/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th October 2015                 |On 28th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     deputy upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                               Siddharth Mohan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of India born on 26th April  1987.   He
    first arrived in the UK on 22nd January 2011 when he was granted  leave
    to enter as a  student  until  30th  September  2012.   Thereafter  the
    Appellant was granted successive periods of leave to remain until  13th
    April 2014.  On 15th March 2014 the Appellant applied for further leave
    to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.  That application  was
    refused for the reasons given in a Notice of Decision dated  17th  June
    2014.  The Appellant appealed, and his appeal was heard by Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Ennals (the Judge)  sitting  at  Stoke-on-Trent  on
    13th October  2014.   He  decided  to  dismiss  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules for the reasons given in his Decision of  that  date.
    The Appellant sought leave to appeal that Decision, and on 4th December
    2014 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the Decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The application for leave to  remain  was  refused  by  the  Respondent
    because the Appellant had  failed  to  score  sufficient  points  under
    Appendix A  (Attributes)  and  Appendix  C  (Maintenance  (Funds))  and
    therefore the Appellant failed to meet the  requirements  of  paragraph
    245ZX(c) and (d) of  HC  395.   This  was  because  the  Appellant  had
    submitted a Confirmation of Acceptance  for  Studies  (CAS)  issued  by
    Midlands Business Management College,  but  that  institution  did  not
    appear on the Tier 4 Sponsor Register checked on 17th June 2014.

 4. At the hearing before the Judge, there  was  no  appearance  by  or  on
    behalf of the Appellant.  The Judge was satisfied  that  the  Appellant
    had been properly notified  of  the  hearing  in  accordance  with  the
    provisions of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
    2005, and proceeded to hear the appeal.  On the evidence before him, he
    decided to dismiss the appeal for the reasons given in  the  Notice  of
    Decision.

 5. At the hearing before me, there was yet again no appearance  by  or  on
    behalf of the Appellant.  There was no explanation for his absence.   I
    was satisfied that the Appellant  had  been  notified  of  the  hearing
    properly in accordance with the provisions of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and I proceeded to  hear  the  appeal.   Mr
    Smart made a brief submission to me.

 6. I find no material error of law in the Decision of the Judge so that it
    should be set aside.  The sole ground of application upon  which  leave
    was granted was that the Appellant's appeal had  been  decided  in  his
    absence and he had been denied the opportunity of presenting his  case.
    The  Appellant  claimed  in  the  grounds  that  he  had  received   no
    notification of the hearing.

 7. I am satisfied that the Judge heard  and  decided  the  appeal  in  the
    absence of the Appellant properly and in a way which did not entail  an
    error of law.   There  was  no  explanation  for  the  absence  of  the
    Appellant before the Judge, and he checked that the Appellant had  been
    properly notified of the hearing in  accordance  with  the  appropriate
    Procedure Rules.  In any event, any error  of  law  as  argued  by  the
    Appellant would have been immaterial.  The submission of a valid CAS at
    the time the application for leave to remain was made was essential  to
    the success of the application, and there was no  evidence  before  the
    Judge that the Midland Business Management College was  an  institution
    appearing on the Tier 4 Sponsor Register.  Therefore the Judge had  had
    no alternative but to dismiss the appeal.

Decision

The making of the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.  It is not set aside.  The  appeal  to
the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity and  I  find  no
reason to do so.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

