
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27963/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 20 January 2015                            |On 28 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                            MUHAMMAD ADEEL BASHIR
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Lemer of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan promulgated on 24 June 2014 in which
    he dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State made on 26 June 2013 to curtail his leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom pursuant to paragraph 323A(a)(ii)1)  and  323(ii)
    of the Immigration Rules.  The decision was also taken to  set  removal
    directions against the appellant under Section 47 of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The Secretary of State's case is set out in the refusal  letter  of  26
    June 2013 and it recites the appellant was granted leave to remain as a
    Tier 4 (General) Student until 17 February 2015 in order to undertake a
    course of study at  Access  London  College.   On  25  June  2013,  the
    respondent curtailed his leave with immediate effect on the basis  that
    the appellant had not commenced his studies,  and  that  she  had  been
    informed of that in a letter from the college. The  appellant  disputes
    that any such letter had been sent; the respondent has yet to produce a
    copy of it.

 3. The matter was first appealed and came before First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Pears on 22 January 2014.  The  appellant  successfully  appealed  that
    decision to the Upper Tribunal.  The  matter  came  before  Judge  Alis
    after I had granted permission on 26 March 2014.   Judge  Alis  allowed
    the appeal to the extent that it was remitted to the First-tier  for  a
    fresh decision.  It was on that basis that  the  decision  came  before
    Judge M A Khan.  The appellant appealed against that  decision  on  the
    basis that the judge had erred in that he had reversed  the  burden  of
    proof, in effect requiring the appellant to prove that he had commenced
    studies, it being submitted that was contrary to the law set out in  JC
    (China) [2007] UKAIT 27 and that in any event the respondent had failed
    to provide the relevant document, that is a letter from Access  College
    which is mentioned in the refusal letter as evidence.

 4. By chance the matter  came  before  me  upon  further  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and  on  1  October  2014  I
    granted permission to appeal stating that it was  arguable  that  Judge
    Khan had erred in law  in  requiring  the  appellant  to  show  he  had
    commenced studying at the relevant college. It  was  arguably  for  the
    respondent to prove that was so pursuant to paragraph 323.

 5. When the  matter  came  before  me  Mr  Lemer  relied  on  the  grounds
    submitting that the point in this case was narrow.  Mr Walker  for  the
    Secretary of State did not resist this challenge with any strength  and
    I  am  satisfied   having   regard   to   the   submissions   of   both
    representatives that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    involve the making of an error  of  law  in  that  Judge  Khan  in  his
    determination in his determination in effect placed the burden  on  the
    appellant to show that he had not commenced  his  course  when,  as  is
    established law, it is for  the  respondent  to  demonstrate  that  the
    requirements of paragraphs 323 are met..

 6. At paragraph 34 the judge said

         "The respondent's case is that the Access London  College  informed
         him on 31 May that the appellant had failed to commence his studies
         with them. The appellant states that he attended the Access  London
         College for about a month after he was granted an extension of  his
         leave to remain.  He decided that because the respondent has failed
         to adduce the college's letter as evidence the decision to  curtail
         the appellant's leave is not  in  accordance  with  the  law.   The
         appellant has not produced any evidence that he actually  commenced
         his course of study."

 7. I am satisfied that this was in effect a  reversal  of  the  burden  of
    proof and for that reason the decision is set aside.  I  consider  that
    this is an appropriate case for me to  remake  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
    given that the issues are narrow.

 8. Mr Walker accepted the Secretary of State is still not in  a   position
    to adduce the letter which it is said indicates that the appellant  had
    not commenced studies, that being the sole basis on  which  curtailment
    of leave is justified.

 9. Having had regard to this and having had regard to the evidence   which
    was before the  First-tier  on  both  occasions  I  consider  that  the
    Secretary of State has not  proved  to  the  civil  standard  of  proof
    applicable in this case that the appellant's leave fell to be curtailed
    on the basis of his failure to commence studies.  On that basis I allow
    the appeal.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside. I remake it by allowing the appeal under the
    immigration rules.


Signed                                  Date:    27 January 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable as this  is  a  case  given
the failure of the respondent to provide  any  evidence  supportive  of  her
case which has resulted in unnecessary appeals. .

Signed                                  Date:  27 January 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
