
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/27404/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 7th October 2017                      |     On 30th October 2017           |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                    o a t
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss A Basharat, Counsel instructed by Farani-Javid
Taylor      Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Mr OAT is a citizen of  Nigeria  born  on  22nd  October  1980  and  he
    appealed against a decision of  First-tier  Tribunal,  dated  19th  May
    2016, dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  of  13th
    June refusing his application for further leave to remain.

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom with a visit visa  valid  from
    14th June 2005 but overstayed the six months  leave  conferred  on  him
    next coming to light when he  made an application for leave  to  remain
    outside the Rules on 7th September 2009.  That application was  refused
    on 5th July 2010 and he was notified of his liability to removal as  an
    overstayer on 26th July 2013.  A Pre-Action Protocol letter  challenged
    the Home Office decision and ultimately his  application  for  judicial
    review resulted in a reconsideration of  his  case  which  led  to  the
    refusal from which this appeal stands.  That is a refusal dated is 13th
    July 2014.

 3. The appellant had a son born on 24th November 2007 and referred  to  as
    AOOUT and aged 6� at the date of the application.  AOOUT was born  from
    a former relationship with A B O a Nigerian citizen  without  leave  in
    this country (although different representations were made  before  the
    Upper Tribunal).

 4. It was asserted by his representatives that not only did the  appellant
    have a son but he also had strong ties with his mother, brother,  close
    friends and extended family and was at ease with  the  British  culture
    and norms.  He was integrated  here  and  had  no  subsisting  ties  in
    Nigeria.  They had no family assets, property or  a  job  to  which  to
    return.  On 29th May 2014 a letter clarified that the appellant had  in
    fact had no contact with his son for over a year and at that  time  did
    not know his whereabouts the mother having refused  to  keep  in  touch
    with him.

 5. On 9th May 2017 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes found an error of law
    in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  basis  that  no
    reference  had  been  made  to  Section  117(6)  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act.  It was noted that the First-tier  Tribunal
    accepted the concession made by Counsel before it  that  there  was  no
    viable case under the Immigration Rules given that the appellant lacked
    sole responsibility for AOOUT and given that they did not live together
    and he was not the primary carer.  Nonetheless,  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal was set aside and the matter subject to a  transfer
    order and came before me  on  7th  October  2017  to  re-determine  the
    matter.

 6. At the hearing Mr Nath cross examined the appellant  about  his  recent
    contact with his son and the appellant confirmed that he had  seen  his
    son four times recently on 19th July, 20th July, 1st September and 29th
    September 2017.  He explained the gap during  August  because  his  ex-
    partner had gone to Nigeria.  He had had contact with his son over  the
    phone through WhatsApp.  He was asked whether he  could  maintain  that
    contact when he was in Nigeria and he said that he felt that  he  could
    not.  The appellant lived with his mother and the appellant  maintained
    that he had never worked in Nigeria and had never worked in the  United
    Kingdom.  It was his mother and family who had supported him.

 7. At first he stated that he had no family in Nigeria but  then  accepted
    that he had a grandmother in Lagos.  His grandmother  would  travel  to
    and from America because she had a "green card" there.   The  appellant
    had a desktop publishing course of three months when he left school  at
    the age of 19 to 20 and had been offered a job in a hotel but  had  not
    taken it up.  He had not been employed.

 8. He had obtained a contact order to visit  his  son  in  2016  but  that
    contact was stopped in July 2016 because the ex-partner had moved.  The
    appellant had made efforts to track down the ex-partner and his son  by
    using a tracing agency in July 2016 and had restored contact  with  the
    mother.

 9. Mr Nath's submissions were that the relationship with  the  appellant's
    son could be  maintained  from  Nigeria.   He  could  maintain  contact
    through WhatsApp conversations.  The status of the appellant  had  been
    precarious since 2005.  It was important to take into account the  head
    note of AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260  (IAC)  with  reference  to
    children.  The appellant could use his skills  to  support  himself  in
    Lagos.  It was important  to  consider  the  public  interest  and  the
    reliance placed on the child which was being used as a trump card.  The
    appellant  had  not  mentioned  emotional  support  or   schooling   or
    education.

10. I asked the appellant why he could not go to Lagos and  his  son  visit
    him there as it was clear that the ex-partner and  mother  would  visit
    Nigeria  and  he  stated  that  that  would  not  be  possible  as  his
    grandmother was old and it would be expensive.

11. Miss Basharat submitted that there  was  a  witness  statement  in  the
    previous court bundle referring to the contact that the  appellant  had
    with his child.  Contact had only  recently  been  reinstated  and  the
    contact had previously been interrupted because the appellant  and  the
    ex-partner had fallen out but their relationship was  more  civil  now.
    He had produced photographs to show his contact with his son and he was
    fully and entirely dedicated to him.  He had no prospect of  employment
    in Nigeria and it was unreasonable to expect him to leave.

Conclusions

12. This appeal is considered outside the Rules. When considering Article 8
    however I must consider all relevant factors Singh v SSHD  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 74  and the Supreme Court in Agyarko & Ors v SSHD  [2017]  UKSC  11
    has emphasised that the approach to Article 8 should  consider  whether
    the decision would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences. From the
    five stage test in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 the appellant does have
    an engaged family life in the UK and the threshold for interference  is
    low.  The decision by the Secretary of State (the refusal) was taken in
    accordance with the law and for a legitimate purpose  (the  maintenance
    of rights and freedoms of citizens in the UK).

13. I note that the appellant cannot meet the Immigration Rules  and  those
    rules set out the Secretary of State's position in relation to  Article
    8.  At the date of his initial application which was  in  fact  on  7th
    September 2009 the child had not lived in the UK for  7  years  at  the
    date of the application.  The application was the subject  of  judicial
    review proceedings which resulted in the reconsideration of  his  human
    rights.  At the date of decision which was on 13th  June  2014  it  was
    confirmed that the child had not lived in the UK for seven years  prior
    to the date of the application.  It was also asserted that he  had  not
    seen the child for over a year.  There has been considerable  delay  in
    the  resolution  of  this  case  although  this   is   not   only   the
    responsibility of the Secretary of State.

14. The initial refusal in 2014 noted the child had not been in the UK  for
    7 years at the date of application but would appear that this applicant
    still could not qualify for leave under the Immigration Rules (Appendix
    FM) as a parent.  The appellant has had a brief relationship  with  the
    child's mother, he does not have sole custody and  although  he  has  a
    contact order he entered the UK as a visitor.   He  does  have  contact
    with his child.

15. Under the 'Appendix FM Section 1.0b - Family  Life  (as  a  Partner  or
    Parent) and Private Life: 10-Year Routes' (updated)

    'Direct access in person
    An applicant can qualify for leave as a parent if they have direct
    access in person to the child, as agreed with the parent or carer with
    whom the child normally lives or as ordered by a court in the UK. The
    applicant must prove they have direct access in person to the child by
    submitting evidence such as:

    . a residence order or contact order granted by a court in the UK;
    . a letter or sworn affidavit from the UK-resident parent or carer of
the child; or
    . evidence from a contact centre detailing contact arrangements.

    The above evidence, or a reasonable equivalent, should seek to confirm
    that the applicant parent has direct access in person to the child, and
    describe in detail the arrangements which allow for this. If a sworn
    affidavit is submitted, it should be certified by a legal officer.

    It is not enough for an applicant to provide evidence  only  that  they
    have been granted direct access  to  a  child.  The  Rules  require  an
    applicant to show they have direct access in person with the child, are
    currently taking an active role in  the  child's  upbringing  and  will
    continue to do so'.

16. From the witness statements and the previous evidence given before  the
    First-tier Tribunal it was clear that the appellant had regular contact
    with his son in the early years of his life before 2012 and for example
    up to his age of 5 or 6.  Once the mother moved away to Leicester  this
    became infrequent and had apparently resumed pursuant to a court  order
    on 26th February 2016 obtained by the appellant.  It would appear  from
    the witness statement of the appellant dated 18th March  2016  that  he
    did have a much greater part in the care of his son when his ex-partner
    was living with his mother.  The appellant  would  visit  his  mother's
    house on a daily basis to see his son and for example  was  present  at
    his first birthday.  His son was registered at a nursery when he was  2
    years old in Camberwell and the appellant would drop  him  and  collect
    him from nursery three times a week and when the  ex-partner  had  some
    immigration issues and was detained and was unable to take care of  him
    he reached an agreement with Social Services in 2010 whereby he and his
    mother would have care of the son and  that  they  would  take  him  to
    school, hospital appointments and other care involved.  I note from the
    Southwark Children' Services Report dated  27th  July  2010   that  the
    child was living with the appellant's  mother,  his  upbringing  rather
    unsettled but that when taken from the mother and put into foster care,
    the child 'kept asking for his father'.  This  report  emphasised  then
    the need for stable care arrangements for  AOOUT.   When  the  son  was
    enrolled in primary school the appellant maintains he was also involved
    in taking him and collecting him.  There are primary school letters  on
    file.  When the son was 3 to 4 years old the child went  to  live  with
    the  mother  in  Loughborough  whilst  the  appellant  was  living   in
    Camberwell.

17. After December  2012  the  ex-partner  prevented  contact  between  the
    appellant and his son without informing him and she moved  out  of  the
    last known  address.   She  did  not  attend  court  hearings  but  the
    appellant did see his son on 24th January 2016 after three years.

18. I had sight of a court order dated 26th February 2016 from  the  Family
    Court at Coventry which made a contact order  under  the  Children  Act
    1989 in respect of AOOUT and which detailed visiting and overnight  and
    holiday contact on at least a monthly basis  if  not  more  frequently.
    Indeed half of all school holidays were to be spent with the father and
    arrangements were to be agreed in writing between the parties.

19. Once again the arrangement broke down but  subsequently  the  appellant
    had tracked down the ex-partner and re-established contact.

20.  I  do  accept  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting
    relationship with the child (albeit he does not live with him) and  the
    appellant  is  an  important  figure  in  his  son's  life.   From  the
    solicitor's letter dated 5th July 2017 to the  ex-partner  there  would
    appear to have been difficulties with the contact through the moving of
    the ex-partner and her blocking of WhatsApp.

21. I accept from the documentary and oral evidence that this contact is at
    a delicate and fragile stage and this is quite clear  from  the  letter
    sent by the solicitors  of  5th  July  2017  which  spells  out  in  no
    uncertain terms the action that will be taken if the ex-partner did not
    comply.  I accept this is a genuine attempt to reinstate and secure the
    contact arrangements. The relationship with the mother is  said  to  be
    more civil now. I do accept that it would be far more difficult for the
    appellant to have contact with his son should he be removed to Nigeria.



22. I also accept that it would be indeed in the child's best interests  to
    have access to both parents even  though  he  lives  with  his  mother.
    Bearing in mind the  photographs  and  the  earlier  contact  that  the
    appellant has had with his son it would be in the best interests of the
    child to have continued and continual access to his father and not just
    on the basis of visits. Indeed that has been determined by  the  Family
    Court. There is a court order dated 26th February 2016  and  this  must
    have been made with the best interests of the child in mind and I  must
    have regard to that order.

23. I do take into account the fact that the appellant and his son live  at
    some distance from each other but the  train  tickets  and  the  access
    established by the appellant recently with his son leads me to  believe
    that this will be facilitated by his remaining in the UK.

24. At the hearing before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes it was conceded
    by the Secretary of State that the appellant's ex-partner  and  AOOUT's
    mother had been granted leave under Appendix FM but it  was  not  clear
    whether AOOUT had been granted leave in line with her.  What  is  clear
    is that by the date of decision that the child has been residing in the
    United Kingdom for a period of nearly ten years having been born in the
    UK.  Although the child is not a British citizen it  appears  that  the
    mother has been granted some form of limited leave it  is  likely  that
    for the foreseeable future the child will stay in the UK.

25. I take into account Azimi-Moayed (decisions affecting  children  onward
    appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC) when assessing  the  child's  interests.
    The child is at school here, will have friends here and has only  known
    life in the United  Kingdom  and  will  shortly  be  transferring  into
    secondary education.

26. I am obliged to take  into  account  Section  117  of  the  Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and

           Section 117B of the 2002 Act provides:

           "(1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
           public interest.

           (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
           able to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

           (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

           (b) are better able to integrate into society.

           (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
           financially independent, because such persons-

           (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

           (b) are better able to integrate into society.

           (4) Little weight should be given to-

           (a) a private life, or

           (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that is
           established by a person at a time when the person is in the
           United Kingdom unlawfully.

           (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established
           by a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
           precarious.

           (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

           (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
           relationship with a qualifying child, and

           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
           United Kingdom."

27. This is not a deportation decision.  I note the appellant  has  a  poor
    immigration history - he entered and overstayed his visit visa in  2005
    and did not attempt to regularise his status until 2009.  He can  speak
    English but does not appear to be financially independent and that is a
    factor I should  consider  under  Section  117(3)(a)  and  (b)  of  the
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

28. From the evidence put before me, however, not least the statement,  the
    court order, solicitor's letters and photographs  and  the  appellant's
    oral evidence, it is clear, that he does have a genuine and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child that is a child  who  has
    been in the UK for over seven years (Section 117 (6)).

29. In line with the dictum in MA Pakistan v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705  from
    Elias LJ the fact that a child has been in the UK for seven years  must
    be given significant weight in the  proportionality  exercise  for  two
    related reasons; first because of  its  relevance  in  determining  the
    nature and strength of the  best  child's  best  interests  and  second
    because it establishes the starting point that leave should be  granted
    unless there are powerful reasons to  there  contrary.   The  fact  is,
    however, that this child will not be departing from  the  UK.   He  was
    born in the United Kingdom on 24th November 2007 has now been here  for
    weeks short of 10 years.  At no point did the Home Office challenge the
    fact that the child would remain in the UK.

30. The appellant has had an active participation, where he could,  in  his
    son's welfare and upbringing  and  has  indicated  that  he  wishes  to
    continue to do so.  The appellant has been  active  previously  in  the
    child's upbringing when the child was young.  I therefore  accept  that
    there have been no powerful reasons presented to me  contradicting  the
    fact that leave should be granted to the appellant.

31. AM (Pakistan) Oths v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 180 confirmed  at  [20]  that
    the wider public interests considerations can only come into  play  via
    the concept of reasonableness in Section 117B (6) itself.

32. It is not a question that it may be reasonable to require the child  to
    leave and I do not find that AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260  (IAC)
    assists here. The child is settled at school, has always lived  in  the
    UK, has had a somewhat disrupted upbringing and to disrupt him  further
    by the removal of his father would undermine his  best  interests.   He
    lives with his mother and the Home Office Presenting  Officer,  in  the
    hearing before Deputy Tribunal Judge Symes confirmed  that  the  mother
    had been granted leave to remain  in  the  UK.  In  the  error  of  law
    decision it was recorded thus at [9]

    'Mr Jarvis... enquired into the information held by the Home Office  as
    to the mother's situations, and  had  established  that  she  had  been
    granted leave under Appendix FM, although it was not  so  far  apparent
    whether AOOUT had been granted leave in  line  with  her.   Before  the
    appeal was finally determined , the Respondent would wish to  have  the
    opportunity to look into the  application  leading  to  that  grant  of
    leave, as it could be expected to cast  light  on  the  extent  of  the
    Applicant's relationship with his son'.

33. The Secretary of State was directed to produce evidence to that  effect
    but after the representations before Judge Symes produced  nothing  and
    subsequently did not provide evidence to the contrary. It would  appear
    that the child has now been in the United Kingdom for a fraction  short
    of 10 years.

34. I take into account the position of the Secretary of State as  set  out
    in the Immigration Rules but conclude that the best interests  of  this
    child are an important factor in  the  determination  of  this  appeal,
    although not a trump card. The Family Court  has  determined  that  the
    child's best interests are to have a continuing relationship  with  his
    father.  The appellant's human rights are  to  be  interpreted  in  the
    light of statute.  If, in line with the reading of Section 117B (6)  in
    MA  Pakistan  v  SSHD  and  AM  (Pakistan),   wider   public   interest
    consideration are confined to this provision and the child will not  be
    departing I am governed by Section 117B(6) and the public interest does
    not require the appellant's removal.

35. Separately, I am mindful of the dicta in Huang v SSHD  [2007]  UKHL  11
    and consider  the  proportionality  of  the  decision,  and  find  that
    although no great weight should be attached to the private life of  the
    appellant,  certainly  his  family  life  has  been  enhanced  by   his
    relationship with his son and the presence of his mother  and  siblings
    in the UK and I take this into account further to  Beoku-Betts  v  SSHD
    [2008] UKHL 39.  In relation to proportionality, any  assessment  would
    require an analysis of the strength of  the  relationship  between  the
    father and child and balance that against  the  public  interest.   The
    difficulty for the appellant is that his relationship, as can  be  seen
    from the court orders, has been frustrated by the moving of the  child.
    Clearly in  the  proportionality  assessment  Statute  through  Section
    117(6) tilts the scales in the favour of the appellant.

36. For  the  reasons  I  have  given  above,  however,  I  find  that  the
    appellant's appeal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

I remake the decision and allow the appeal of Mr OAT.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court  proceedings.   This  is
because this appeal involves a minor.

Signed Helen Rimington                                   Date  25th  October
    2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington







TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
because of the complexities of the case.



Signed       Helen  Rimington                                    Date   25th
    October 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


