

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/27930/2014
                                                               IA/27931/2014
                                                               IA/27932/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre         |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 31 March 2015                              |On 22 May 2015               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                               Shaza qazi (1)
                              shahzad amir (2)
                              aroon shahzad(3)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Haji, instructed by European Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. As I announced at the end  of  the  hearing,  I  have  found  that  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Juss, promulgated on 12 September
    2014 contains an error on law that requires it to be set aside and  for
    the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  an  entirely
    fresh hearing.  Although I indicated my  reasons  at  the  end  of  the
    hearing, they are as follows.

 2. Judge Juss came to the appeal on  the  papers,  the  appellants  having
    elected for that approach.   He  had  no  opportunity  to  explore  the
    evidence other than to  examine  the  documents  on  the  appeal  file.
    Unbeknown to him, and in fact to the appellants, the  papers  submitted
    were incomplete.  The appellants had sent documents to the Home  Office
    with the applications that included evidence from the first appellant's
    accountant confirming her role as  a  director  and  of  the  financial
    investment she had made.

 3. The appellants had not been legally represented at the time  and  would
    have been entitled to assume that the Home  Office  had  complied  with
    rule 13 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005
    (that applied at that time).  They did not know that the documents were
    not with the Tribunal.  In fact, Mr Smart  candidly  admitted  that  it
    would appear that not all of the documents submitted to the Home Office
    had actually  made  it  to  the  Home  Office  file.   The  attachments
    mentioned in the accountant's letter seem to have become separated.

 4. It is clear that these documents would have been  material  insofar  as
    they might have shed light on  the  first  appellant's  activities  and
    whether she met the NQF level 4 whilst holding leave as a Tier 1  (Post
    Study Work) Migrant.  Mr  Smart  accepted  that  it  was  a  procedural
    failure that the documents had not been presented  to  Judge  Juss  and
    that  undermined  the  determination.    He   agreed   that   in   such
    circumstances the proper approach would be to remit the appeals to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 5. Ms Haji agreed.  Like all of us, she had been taken by surprise by  the
    fact that there had been a procedural error.  It had not been  part  of
    the grounds of appeal but was uncovered whilst we discussed the case in
    detail because the grounds of appeal and her skeleton  argument  seemed
    so at odds with the decision.  Once it was  realised  that  a  relevant
    piece of evidence had unwittingly been omitted  from  the  Home  Office
    bundle the problems became clear and easy to resolve.



Decision

The determination of First-tier Tribunal Juss contains an error on  a  point
of law and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh by  any
judge other than Judge Juss.

I direct that the appeals in the First-tier Tribunal should proceed  by  way
of an oral hearing.

The parties are at liberty to submit additional evidence as long  as  it  is
submitted more than 14 days prior to the next hearing.


                               Signed                     Date


                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McCarthy


