
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27782/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd  February 2016                        |On 13th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                              MR Mohammad Fiaz
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not represented. Mr C Wells - McKenzie friend
For the Respondent:    Ms R Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 4 September 1967.  On 24
    April 2014 he made an application for leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    studentStudent.  That application was refused in a  decision  dated  23
    June 2014.

 2. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Moan ("FtJ") on  16  July  2015  whereby  the
    appeal was dismissed.

 3. The respondent's decision to refuse leave to remain was  on  the  basis
    that the  appellant  failed  to  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    245ZX(c), and paragraph 117  of  Appendix  A  because  he  was  not  in
    possession of a valid Confirmation of Acceptance for  Studies  ("CAS"),
    and accordingly he was not able to meet the requirements of  the  Rules
    for leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student.  The  maintenance  requirement
    of the Rules was correspondingly not assessed.

 4. The appellant did not attend the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal
    ("FtT"), and the  FtJ  proceeded  in  the  absence  of  the  appellant,
    concluding that although there was medical evidence in  relation  to  a
    health condition, that evidence did not indicate that the appellant was
    unfit to travel or to attend the hearing.  On the merits, she concluded
    that because the appellant did not have a CAS as required, he  was  not
    able to meet the requirements of the Rules.

 5. The appellant's grounds before the Upper Tribunal contend that the  FtJ
    erred in law in proceeding in the appellant's absence in the  light  of
    his medical condition.  It is also submitted that the  judge  erred  by
    failing to consider Article 8 of the ECHR.

 6. At the hearing before me, the appellant was  not  legally  represented.
    He was assisted by counsel who had appeared in another  appeal  in  the
    list, helping the appellant as a McKenzie friend.

 7. Ms Petterson, in summary, argued that the FtJ was entitled  to  proceed
    in the absence of the appellant, having regard to the  evidence  before
    her as to his  medical  condition  and  taking  into  account  previous
    adjournments.  The evidence did not reveal that he was unfit to  travel
    or attend the hearing.

 8. So far as the merits are concerned, the appellant did not have  a  CAS.
    The judge took this into account in terms of the appellant's grounds of
    appeal, as revealed by [23] of the judge's decision.

 9. The appellant effectively had two months in order to obtain a  CAS  but
    none was ever submitted.  The judge pointed out at [26] that there  was
    no discretion to waive the requirement of the CAS  and  the  respondent
    was not obliged to hold onto an application forever.

10. Even if the appellant  had  attended  the  hearing  and  explained  his
    situation, the appeal would inevitably have been dismissed.

11. The judge dealt with Article 8, albeit briefly, and  pointed  out  that
    the  appellant  could  reapply  for  entry  clearance  as  a   student.
    Furthermore, this was not an Article 8 case or an application  made  on
    Article 8 grounds, but a student application for leave to remain.

12. Before me, the  appellant  explained  the  medical  complaint  that  he
    suffered from, stating that at the time of the hearing before  the  FtT
    he was not able to sit or stand in order to make the journey.

13. He explained that he had not been provided with his results by City and
    Guilds and he had had to sit another test in July 2014.  He had written
    to the Home Office asking for his passport to be returned so  that  his
    results could be released to him.  However, the Home Office  failed  to
    provide him with his passport.

14. Although the Home Office had delayed for a period of about  two  months
    before making the decision in his case, City and Guilds  did  not  give
    him the complete results, only giving him the speaking result which  he
    sent to the Home Office.  They did not provide the reading, writing and
    listening result.

15. He would not be able to  go  back  to  Pakistan  and  apply  for  entry
    clearance because he had spent a lot of money on his education  and  on
    three occasions his test results had not been provided.

16. So far as the hearing before the Upper Tribunal is  concerned,  he  had
    only received the letter for the hearing on 6 February 2016.  He  would
    like to be given a period of a few  weeks  in  order  to  obtain  legal
    representation so that his case could be put more strongly.

17. With the assistance of Mr Wells (counsel who was appearing  in  another
    matter before me), he explained that it was only after the respondent's
    decision on his application for leave to remain that he asked  for  his
    passport to be returned. That might have had a bearing on why his  test
    results had not been  released  in  the  first  place,  if  the  matter
    concerned an identification issue.

    My assessment

18. The application for an adjournment before the FtT was based on  medical
    evidence to the effect that the appellant had been  suffering  from  an
    anal fistula, since 24 April 2015.  There was a letter  dated  14  July
    2015 from his GP stating that it caused  him  pain  in  the  anal  area
    particularly when he sat down.  He reported to his GP that it was worse
    after 10 minutes of sitting.  The fistula was  said  to  be  constantly
    leaking and the appellant had it dressed weekly.   He  was  on  an  NHS
    waiting list.  The GP further reported that the appellant was concerned
    that it would be too painful for him to sit for long  periods  of  time
    and was worried about the journey to Birmingham and how he was going to
    manage to sit for long periods of time.

19. The appellant's own letter to the Tribunal dated  14  July  2015  added
    that he  had  surgery  scheduled  for  11  August  2015,  although  the
    appellant said that he has to visit his GP on a daily basis to have the
    bandage changed, in contrast to the letter from the GP which said  that
    it was dressed weekly.  The appellant's letter stated  that  travelling
    made his condition worse and that he would be unable to travel  to  the
    Tribunal to attend the hearing.

20. There had been a previous adjournment of the  hearing  before  the  FtT
    fixed for 18 September 2014, in the light of medical appointments  that
    the appellant had.  Although it is not clear from  the  Tribunal  file,
    those appointments do not appear to have been related to the  condition
    which I have just described.

21. A further hearing fixed for 29  December  2014  was  adjourned  on  the
    appellant's  application,  he  having  had  a  diabetic  eye  screening
    appointment on that date.  The matter  was  then  listed  before  Judge
    Moan, following which the matter came to the Upper Tribunal.

22. Judge Moan dealt with the adjournment issue at [10]-[17].  At [12]  she
    summarised the appellant's letter, in terms of the  assertion  that  he
    was in severe pain and could not sit for  prolonged  periods,  and  she
    referred to medical appointment notes and the letter from his GP.   She
    noted that that application for an adjournment had already been refused
    by a judge.

23. Judge Moan was satisfied that the appellant had notice of the time  and
    place of the hearing, and also noted that the matter had been adjourned
    on two previous occasions.  She noted  the  date  of  the  respondent's
    decision, being 23 June 2014.

24. At [16] she concluded that it  was  in  the  interests  of  justice  to
    proceed with the appeal, having regard to the delay, and  stating  that
    the appellant had been  given  numerous  opportunities  to  attend  the
    hearing and had given no indication of when he would be able to  attend
    another hearing.  She concluded  that  the  medical  evidence  did  not
    suggest that he was not fit to travel or attend a hearing and  observed
    that appeals should be heard within a reasonable period of time.

25. At [17] she further  concluded  that  she  did  not  believe  that  the
    prospects  for  the  appellant's  appeal  would  be  enhanced  by   his
    attendance or by any further evidence that could be provided.  She also
    observed that compliance with the Immigration Rules is to be judged  at
    the time of the application and not at the time of the appeal  hearing.



26. Although Judge Moan did not refer to the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014, she clearly  had
    in mind the overriding objective set out  at  rule  2,  the  overriding
    objective being to deal with cases "fairly and justly".  That  includes
    under rule (2)(2)(e) avoiding delay, so far as compatible  with  proper
    consideration of the issues.

27. I am satisfied that the  FtJ  gave  appropriate  consideration  to  the
    evidence in relation to the appellant's ability to attend the  hearing,
    not only in terms of the appellant's account of his  circumstances  but
    also in respect of the medical evidence that was provided.  The  letter
    from Dr Abubacker, his GP, dated 14 July 2015, although describing  the
    appellant's  medical  condition  and  the  appellant's  concerns  about
    travelling, does not actually say that he  was  not  fit  to  attend  a
    hearing and was not fit to travel. Thus, where the judge  concluded  at
    [16] that "The medical evidence did not suggest that he was not fit  to
    travel or attend a tribunal hearing", she was correct.

28. Furthermore, the judge was entitled also  to  take  into  account  that
    there had been two previous adjournments of hearings before the FtT.  A
    further relevant factor was the extent to which any evidence  from  the
    appellant could have had any material bearing on  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.

29. I am not satisfied that there is  any  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision to proceed with the hearing in the absence of  the  appellant.
    It is evident that the judge did decide that issue on the basis of what
    fairness demanded.  There is no error of law in her conclusions in that
    regard.

30. So far as the merits of the appeal are concerned,  I  similarly  cannot
    see that there is any error of law in the judge's assessment.  The fact
    of the matter is that the  appellant  was  required  by  the  Rules  to
    provide a CAS with his application for further leave to  remain.   This
    he did not do.  Whilst he  explained  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  his
    reasons for not having done so, it is evident that the judge took  that
    information into account, she having summarised the position at [23].

31. The appellant made his application for leave  to  remain  on  24  April
    2014.  In a letter dated 21 May 2014 to the respondent he  stated  that
    his results from the English language test would  be  processed  in  32
    days from the date of the test (23 April 2014) and that  since  he  had
    not received the English language certificate he had not yet been  able
    to obtain a new CAS.  He therefore requested the  respondent  to  "hold
    your decision" until such time as he was able to  forward  the  English
    language test result and the CAS.

32. There was also a letter dated 19 May 2014 from the administrator of the
    London College stating that the appellant had  taken  his  test  on  23
    April 2014 and that the results would be processed in 32 working  days.



33. From the date of the appellant's application,  24  April  2014,  was  a
    period of two months until the respondent's decision.  At the  time  of
    the  application  the  appellant  did  not  have  a  CAS.    In   those
    circumstances, the application for leave to remain was  bound  to  have
    been refused.

34. The information provided to me by the appellant at the hearing, to  the
    effect that he had written to the Home Office asking for  his  passport
    to be returned, does not advance his appeal at all.  He  accepted  that
    any such letters in  that  regard  were  sent  after  the  respondent's
    decision.  The appellant was required to demonstrate  his  meeting  the
    requirements of the Rules  as  at  the  date  of  the  application  and
    decision.  This he was not able to do.

35. Although it may well be, as the appellant suggested before me, that his
    test results had not been released by the test provider, that is not  a
    matter that the respondent is responsible for.

36. In his grounds of appeal before the FtT, the appellant said that it was
    due to the high volume of English tests which resulted in the delay  in
    the processing time of 32 days.  That, and the letters to which I  have
    referred, was the information before the FtJ upon which  she  made  her
    decision.  Even if the appellant had explained the issue in relation to
    the Home Office being asked to provide his passport,  that  was  not  a
    matter that could have affected the outcome of the appeal.

37. In any event, the issue in relation to the passport was  not  something
    that  was  raised  by  the  appellant  in  his  correspondence  to  the
    respondent post-application, and is  not  a  matter  mentioned  in  the
    letter from the London College in terms of why there was any  delay  in
    providing the test result.

38. What the appellant stated in his grounds before  the  FtT  about  there
    having been no assessment of funds, again does not take his appeal  any
    further, since whether or not he was in possession of sufficient  funds
    to meet the maintenance (funds) requirement of  the  Rules  is  neither
    here nor there if he was unable to meet the requirement  of  having  to
    have a CAS.

39. So far as Article 8 is concerned, as was pointed out on behalf  of  the
    respondent before me, this was not an application for leave  to  remain
    on the basis of Article 8.  In addition, it does not  appear  that  any
    evidence of any Article 8 rights was put before the respondent.

40. Whilst the FtJ's decision in relation to Article 8 was  brief,  it  was
    legally sufficient in the circumstances.  The judge said at  [28]  that
    the appellant is not known to have any family or private life  ties  to
    the UK.  He had arrived in the UK in 2009 but she pointed out  that  it
    was not known whether he had been in the  UK  continuously  since  that
    time.  She correctly pointed out that the appellant  can  have  had  no
    legitimate expectation of remaining in the UK.  Her conclusion was that
    it was not disproportionate to require him to leave the UK, and that he
    would be able to reapply for leave to  remain  or  entry  clearance  as
    appropriate when in possession of a CAS.

41. I do not consider that the judge was in fact even required to undertake
    an Article 8  assessment,  that  not  having  been  the  basis  of  the
    application for leave to remain, and not being a matter raised  in  the
    grounds of appeal before  the  FtT.   Her  conclusion  in  relation  to
    Article 8 was in any event one that is free from any error of law.

42. In the circumstances, I am not satisfied that there is any error of law
    in the judge's decision in any respect.  Her decision  to  dismiss  the
    appeal therefore stands.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point  of  law.   Its  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    therefore stands.





Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                      23/03/16


