
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27856/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 June 2014                                |On 11 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                                 master p a
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
ANONYMITY ORDER MADE

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Ahammed (Legal Representative RMS Immigration
Ltd)
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant whose date of birth is 11 January 2007 is a  national  of
    India.  This matter comes before me for consideration as to whether  or
    not there is a material error of law in a determination  before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Devittie promulgated on  5  March  2014.   In  that
    determination the judge allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.

Background

2.    In  a  decision  dated  19  June  2013  the  respondent  refused   the
    appellant's application for leave to remain  under  the  provisions  of
    Appendix FM relating to children.  On 21 November 2012 he  was  granted
    limited leave to enter the UK until 14 May  2013  as  a  visitor.   The
    appellant's parents had been granted leave outside of Appendix FM Rules
    and the application was refused because the appellant was not  able  to
    meet E-LTRC1.6 which states that one of the applicant's parents must be
    in the UK and have leave to enter or  remain  or  indefinite  leave  to
    remain or is at  the  same  time  being  granted  leave  to  remain  or
    indefinite leave to remain under this  Appendix  (except  as  an  adult
    dependent relative).

3.   Consideration was also given to  private  life  under  Article  8  with
    reference to paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.  The Appellant entered  the
    UK on 10 December 2012 and had not lived continuously  in  the  UK  for
    twenty years.  He was age 6 at the time of the application and had  not
    lived continuously in the UK for seven years.  He spent five  years  of
    his life living in India and there was no evidence  that  he  had  lost
    ties in that  country.   The  respondent  did  not  consider  that  the
    appellant's   application   raised   or   contained   any   exceptional
    circumstances outside  of  the  Rules  warranting  consideration  under
    Article 8.

4.   In his determination First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Devittie  acknowledged
    that  the  appellant  was  unable  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules and went on to consider the  claim  under  Article  8
    ECHR following the five stage process outlined in Razgar.  He concluded
    that the  appellant  had  established  family  life  with  his  parents
    residing in the UK with limited leave and that  all  the  other  stages
    were met.  He  assessed  proportionality  having  regard  to  the  best
    interests of the minor child.  He found that it would not be reasonable
    to expect the appellant's father to  abandon his studies to  return  to
    live in India and that it would not be reasonable to expect his  mother
    who was  granted limited leave as a dependent to return to  India  with
    the appellant until such time  as  the  studies  of  her  husband  were
    complete.  There  were  no  compelling  considerations  in  the  public
    interest justifying the  interference  with  the  family  life  of  the
    appellant and his parents.  The  appellant's  mother  would  be  in  an
    invidious position having to choose whether to remain with her  husband
    in the UK or return to India to live with the appellant.  At  the  time
    of the appellant's  father's  arrival  in  the  UK  in  June  2011  the
    appellant did not have a passport and a  decision  was  taken  that  he
    should remain in India pending obtaining a passport.  During that  time
    the Immigration Rules changed making it difficult for the appellant  to
    succeed in an application as a Tier 4 Student dependant.  The appellant
    was unable to return to India when his visa expired because his  mother
    was pregnant at the time and he could not return alone.


Grounds of Appeal

5.   In grounds of appeal the Secretary of State seeks permission to  appeal
    on the  grounds  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  his
    assessment of the interference with family  life  and  proportionality.
    Reliance was placed on Patel [2013] UKSC 72 in which Lord Carnwath held
    that the opportunity for a promising student to complete his course  in
    the UK is not a right that is protected by Article 8.   The  judge  was
    wrong to conclude that it would be unreasonable and a breach of Article
    8 for the appellant to have to return to India with his mother.

Permission to Appeal

6.   Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J  M
    Holmes on 10 April 2014.  He found arguable grounds as follows:

         "The appellant a child was brought to the UK on a  visitor's  visa.
         His father by then was studying in the UK and his financial affairs
         meant the appellant could not have met the requirements  for  entry
         clearance as his dependent.  The appellant's mother appears to have
         travelled with him although her immigration status in the UK is not
         referred to in the determination.  As the grounds point out, it  is
         well arguable the judge's approach to Article 8 appeal was  flawed.
         The appellant's father had chosen to travel to the UK to study  and
         to leave his family in India  whilst  doing  so.   The  appellant's
         father had no right to insist upon  his  family  being  given  LTR,
         despite their inability to meet the Immigration  Rules,  whilst  he
         completed  those  studies.   If  there  was  some  reason  why  the
         appellant could not return to India with his mother and there await
         his father's return at the completion of those  studies,  then  the
         determination does not disclose it.  It is therefore well  arguable
         that if the judge had properly applied Patel and Nasim, to which he
         makes no reference, he  could  not  rationally  have  come  to  the
         conclusion that he did.  All the grounds are therefore arguable."

Error of Law Hearing

7.   Mr Parkinson relied on the Secretary of State's grounds of  appeal  and
    submitted  that  the  judge   failed   to   correctly   apply   current
    jurisprudence with regard to children and/or Article 8.  The  appellant
    entered as the visitor and presumably intended to return to India.  The
    judge gave no adequate reasons for  finding  it  unreasonable  for  the
    appellant to return to India with his mother or for all the  family  to
    return.  The appellant had  been  parted  from  his  parents  for  some
    eighteen months prior to his arrival in the UK  as  a  visitor  and  it
    would therefore not be unreasonable for him to be looked after again by
    other  family  relatives  in  India.   There  were  no  compelling   or
    compassionate circumstances existing  other  than  the  fact  that  the
    appellant was not able to meet the new Immigration  Rule  requirements.
    He entered as a visitor and now wishes to remain.  He  has  established
    no arguable case as to why leave should be granted outside of the Rules
    and/or considered under Article 8 ECHR.  Reliance was placed on  Patel,
    Nagre, Gulshan and MF (Nigeria).

8.   Mrs Ahammed for the  appellant  submitted  that  the  judge's  decision
    under Article 8 ECHR was correct.  He found at paragraph 7 that it  was
    not reasonable to expect the appellant's mother to return to  India  as
    she has leave as  a  dependant  until  completion  of  studies  by  her
    husband.  At the time the appellant's visa expired  in  June  2013  his
    mother was heavily pregnant and was not able to travel  to  India.   It
    would not be reasonable to  expect  the  appellant  to  live  in  India
    without his parents and young sister.  He travelled to the UK with  his
    grandparents  who  are  living  in  India.   The  compelling   reasons,
    following Gulshan, were the pregnancy of the mother and the appellant's
    relationship with his mother and sister.  His father is in  the  middle
    of his studies which finish in September 2015 and he  is  not  able  to
    return to India without his family.  Reliance was placed  on  a  letter
    from Newham Hospital stating that the appellant's baby sister  required
    treatment for an arachnoid cyst.

9.   Mr Parkinson responded that the document from the hospital  was  nearly
    one year old since it was printed on 9 May 2013 and  did  not  indicate
    that the appellant's sister was not capable of travel  to  India.   The
    appellant had previously been left in the care of his grandparents  who
    brought him to the UK and there is no reason why they could not collect
    him and take him back to India.  The pregnancy was significant  at  the
    date of the visa expiry but not at the date of the determination as  by
    that stage the appellant's mother could return to India  together  with
    the child.  Effectively the appellant was  seeking  to  circumvent  the
    Immigration Rules by relying on Article 8 in circumstances where he had
    been granted limited leave as a visitor and an application for  further
    leave was not permissible under the Rules on that basis.

Discussion and Decision

10.  At the end of the hearing I found that there was a  material  error  of
    law in the judge's determination.  The claimant who is 6 years old came
    to the UK as a visitor.  He did not travel to the UK with  his  parents
    as he had remained living in India with his  grandparents  pending  the
    obtaining of a passport to enable him to travel to join them in the UK.
     When he was able to travel the Immigration Rules had changed  and  the
    appellant was unable to meet the requirements of  the  new  Immigration
    Rules as a Tier 4 dependent.  The appellant applied and was  granted  a
    visit visa.  He then submitted an application to vary his  leave  which
    was refused and he appealed on human rights grounds.

11.  The appeal was determined by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Devittie  who
    found  that  Article  8  ECHR  was  engaged  and   the   decision   was
    proportionate.  I have carefully considered whether  the  determination
    amounts to a material error of law in particular having  in  mind  that
    the appellant is a 6 year old boy.  I am satisfied  that  the  decision
    made followed from  a  flawed  approach  to  Article  8.   The  judge's
    decision failed to apply Patel, Nasim and MK (Nigeria) having regard to
    the fact that the appellant's father was  residing  in  the  UK  for  a
    limited period of time as a student.  The principles establish that for
    persons studying in the UK, this will not amount to a  right  protected
    by Article 8 ECHR.  Further no consideration was given by the Judge  to
    the fact that the appellant entered the UK as a visitor at  which  time
    he intended to return to India and that there are no provisions in  the
    Immigration Rules for extending leave in such circumstances.  The judge
    did not  consider  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  a  fair  and
    consistent immigration process and control by ensuring that  steps  are
    not taken to circumvent the Immigration Rules.  Furthermore, whilst  it
    is accepted that the appellant's mother was unable to travel  to  India
    as at the time of the expiry of the visit visa, she had by the time  of
    the hearing given birth to the appellant's  sister  and  there  was  no
    medical evidence then or now to show that it would not be  possible  or
    reasonable for her or the baby to return to India  whilst  her  husband
    completes his course of study and/or for an application to be  made  by
    the appellant under the Immigration Rules as a dependant  from  out  of
    country. I have considered section 55 Borders Citizenship & Immigration
    Act 2009 as to where the  best  interest  of  the  appellant  may  lie.
    Clearly there is strong argument that his interests  lie  in  remaining
    with both parents as a family unit.  However, he was not able  to  meet
    the requirements of the rules and  effectively  sought  to  go  outside
    those rules by coming to the UK as a visitor.  I have regard to all the
    circumstances  and  taking  into  account  that  he  lived   with   his
    grandparents prior to travelling to the UK, his status as a visitor and
    his establishing a limited private life  in  precarious  circumstances,
    having spent the majority of his life in India, his  parents  temporary
    leave and the reasonableness of his mother returning to India with  the
    appellant, the relatively short time until  his  father  completes  his
    studies. I conclude that the public interest in  maintaining  the  fair
    application of  immigration  rules,  outweighs  the  interests  of  the
    appellant remaining with his family as a unit for  a  temporary  period
    and there are other alternative reasonable possibilities  such  as  the
    appellant returning to India with his mother.

12.  Accordingly the decision made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  is
    flawed as a result of a misdirection of the law.

13.  I find a material error of law in the  judge's  determination.   I  set
    aside the determination.  I allow the appeal by the Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department and I remake the  decision  by  substituting  a
    decision that the appeal is dismissed on immigration grounds.

14.  I  was  able  to  go  on  to  remake  the  decision  having  asked  the
    representatives at the end of the hearing if  submissions  were  to  be
    made in the event of my concluding that there was an error of law.   Ms
    Ahammed confirmed that she had no submissions to make.

Decision

15.  The appeal is allowed.






Signed                                  Date 10.6.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

