
IA 27466 2012
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 July 2013                               |On 19 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                 NASIR AHMED

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             SECRETARY OF STATE

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr F Ahmed (Universal Solicitorrs)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 1 September, 1988. He
      was granted leave to enter the United Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4  student
      until 30 April, 2012. He was admitted to study at Bedfordshire College
      and  it  was  confirmed  that  he  was   enrolled   on   a   full-time
      administrative management program which commenced on 11  March,  2011.
      However the  appellant  did  not  find  the  teaching  quality  to  be
      satisfactory and commenced studies at the London Guildhall College  on
      5 September, 2011 where he successfully  completed  all  the  academic
      requirements leading to the award of a level  5  diploma  in  Business
      Management Studies. The appellant applied for further leave to  remain
      but this application was refused on 15 November, 2012.  The  appellant
      was studying at a  different  college  and  needed  to  make  a  fresh
      application for leave to remain. There was an exception  for  sponsors
      who held a highly trusted status but London Guildhall College did  not
      hold highly trusted status.

   2. Accordingly the respondent was not satisfied that  the  appellant  had
      complied with the conditions  attached  to  his  leave  to  enter  and
      accordingly refused the application under paragraph 322  (3)  HC  395.
      The application was also refused on maintenance grounds. The appellant
      had not supplied his birth certificate showing the name of the  parent
      who was providing his funding.

   3. The appellant appealed and his appeal came before a  First-tier  Judge
      on 27 February, 2013. The judge accepted that the appellant  had  been
      studying at both Bedfordshire College and  London  Guildhall  College.
      She accepted that the appellant had gained  a  diploma  in  management
      studies at London Guildhall College.

   4. It was submitted that the appellant by maintaining his  attendance  at
      two colleges was fulfilling the requirements of policy guidance  which
      permitted extra studies. However the judge considered  that  this  was
      subject to the qualification that the extra course did not get in  the
      way of the course for which the appellant had permission to study. The
      course at  the  London  Guildhall  College  had  interfered  with  the
      appellant studies at Bedfordshire College  leading  him  to  fail  the
      assignments and exam at Bedfordshire College.

   5. In respect of maintenance the judge noted that the only issue was  the
      provision of the original birth certificate and  the  judge  found  no
      merit  in  the  reasons  for  refusal  and  the  issue  of  the  birth
      certificate could and should have been raised by the respondent in the
      light of the evidential flexibility  policy.  The  appellant's  father
      clearly had the requisite sums in  his  account  and  had  supplied  a
      letter  to  the  court  stating  that  they  were  available  for  the
      appellant's education. There has been no appeal from  this  aspect  of
      the judge's decision by the respondent.

   6. The appellant, however, could not succeed under the immigration  rules
      "because he simply has not passed  the  course  which  he  entered  to
      study."

   7. The respondent had also made  a  decision  under  section  47  of  the
      Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 and the judge found  that
      to be not in accordance with the law.

   8. The appellant appealed against the decision on the basis that  it  was
      not a requirement of the rules that  the  appellant  pass  each  exam.
      Furthermore the appellant had not breached the  rules  by  undertaking
      additional  studies.  The   rules   permitted   the   undertaking   of
      supplementary studies and the guidance could not have  done  what  was
      permitted by the rules.

   9. In any event there was a discretion to be  exercised  under  paragraph
      322 (3) and the judge had not considered the exercise of discretion.

  10. The appellant had started his course at  Bedfordshire  College  of  11
      March, 2011 and had not started his course at London Guildhall College
      until 5 September, 2011 after some six months attendance in  his  main
      course. His unchallenged evidence for undertaking a course  at  London
      Guildhall College  was  the  poor  quality  teaching  at  Bedfordshire
      College. He had  not  allowed  the  course  at  Guildhall  College  to
      interfere  with  his  studies,  he  had  sought  to   circumvent   the
      difficulties which he faced in  his  main  course  by  undertaking  an
      additional course. He had continued to study at both institutions.

  11. Mr Deller accepted that it was not a requirement of the rules that  an
      applicant pass the exams at the course for  which  the  CAS  had  been
      provided.

  12. He also accepted that the respondent had not considered  the  exercise
      of discretion under paragraph 322  (3)  -  it  was  not  an  automatic
      refusal, refusal should be the normal course. He further  acknowledged
      that supplementary studies in the rules had not been defined  and  the
      policy guidance was loosely phrased. If the original course  had  been
      abandoned then there would have been a breach but this  had  not  been
      the  position.  The  two  courses  ran  side-by-side  on  the  judge's
      findings. He had not succeeded in the primary course.

  13. The underlying decision was defective in that the respondent  had  not
      exercised discretion, had not followed  the  guidance  in  failing  to
      apply evidential flexibility and there was a problem with the decision
      to issue removal directions under section 47.  The  appeal  should  be
      sent back to the Secretary of State  to  exercise  discretion  and  to
      consider  matters  in  the  light  of  the  current   situation.   The
      application would remain outstanding as the Secretary of State had not
      reached a lawful decision.

  14. Mr Ahmed was concerned that it should be clarified that the  appellant
      had not studied in breach of the rules.  Mr  Deller  referred  to  the
      loose nature of the supplementary policy and he would  undertake  that
      the issue was given sympathetic consideration by the case worker.

  15. It is accepted in this case and that  the  respondent's  decision  was
      flawed. Mr Deller  acknowledged  three  separate  failings.  Two  were
      corrected by the judge. However the significant failure to  deal  with
      the  exercise  of  discretion  clearly  requires  the  matter  to   be
      revisited. The judge also failed to  exercise  discretion.  Where  the
      respondent has not exercised discretion the normal course is  for  the
      case to be returned so that a lawful decision can be reached. Where  a
      discretion has been exercised then the Tribunal may consider the issue
      and reach a decision of its own.

  16. The decision of the First-tier Judge was flawed  in  law  as  was  the
      decision of the Secretary of State. I  remake  the  decision.  In  the
      particular circumstances of this case the  appropriate  course  is  to
      allow the appeal to the extent of remitting it for reconsideration  by
      the Secretary of State as Mr Deller suggests. I have no doubt that the
      matter will be given sympathetic consideration.

  17. Appeal allowed to the extent indicated.

   Signed
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Warr
                               18 July 2013
