
[pic]
IAC-YW-LM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27046/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st September 2015                |On 15th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             KENE CHARLES GEORGE
                 (AnonymitY DIRECTION NOT MADE or requested)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    The Respondent in person


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The Secretary of State, with permission, appeals against  the  decision
    of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Symes)  who,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 18th March 2015, allowed the appeal  of  the  Respondent
    against  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  refuse   his
    application for leave to remain and to  set  removal  directions  under
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. Whilst the Secretary of State is the Appellant, I propose to deal  with
    the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 10th November 1966.

 4. The Appellant's immigration history is set out in the determination  of
    Judge Symes at paragraphs [2] to [3] of the decision.  He first entered
    the country on a student visa from 29th December 2003 valid until  31st
    December 2006.  His leave was then extended until  31st  October  2008.
    An application under the Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) route was refused and
    a subsequent appeal was dismissed on 30th March 2009  with  all  appeal
    rights  being  exhausted  on  7th  April  2009.   He  made  a   further
    application of student leave which was  granted  from  28th  July  2009
    until 18th October 2009, and then as a Tier 1 (General)  Migrant  until
    24th September 2011.  An application outside the Rules was made on 17th
    September 2011 and refused on 12th November 2011, the subsequent appeal
    succeeding on 31st January 2012.

 5. Thus the Appellant was granted discretionary leave to remain from  29th
    March 2012 until 4th May 2014 so that he could finish his training with
    Woodford Wise Solicitors.

 6. The application for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  long  residence
    grounds was made on 20th November 2013 and refused on 26th  March  2014
    without a right of appeal as at that time the Appellant still had leave
    to remain.  Consequently the application that gave rise to this  appeal
    was made on 12th April 2014, by which time its refusal left him without
    leave and with a right of appeal.

 7. The decision of the Respondent was made on 19th June 2014.  It set  out
    the immigration history that I have set out above and when  considering
    discretionary leave noted that the period between 2012 to 2014 had been
    granted so that  he  could  finish  his  training  with  Woodford  Wise
    Solicitors and, as he had finished  that  training,  the  Secretary  of
    State was not satisfied that the grounds under which he was  previously
    granted discretionary leave still persisted, thus the  application  for
    further leave was refused.

 8. As to his application on long residence grounds,  the  decision  letter
    stated that any overstaying of 28 days or less would be disregarded, as
    would any period of overstaying between  periods  of  entry  clearance,
    leave to enter or leave to remain of up to 28 days and  any  period  of
    overstaying pending the determination of  an  application  made  within
    that 28 day period.  However, the Secretary of  State  considered  that
    the period between 7th April 2008 and 16th June 2009 was such  that  he
    did not have valid leave and was therefore a  break  in  residence  and
    discretion could not be applied to the break in residence as the reason
    given was not deemed to be exceptional.  Consequently, as  he  had  not
    spent ten years of continuous lawful leave in  the  United  Kingdom  he
    could not meet the requirements of the Rules.

 9. The decision of the Secretary of State led  to  an  appeal  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Symes)  on  25th  February  2015.   At  that
    hearing, as the judge recorded, the Secretary of State did  not  appear
    nor was represented and the Appellant attended in  person.   The  judge
    set out his evidence at length at paragraphs [8]  to  [13]  and  it  is
    plain from reading the decision of Judge Symes that  not  only  was  no
    challenge made to the truthfulness of the Appellant's  account  in  the
    refusal letter but that in any event it was  "inherently  credible  and
    plausible" and he accepted the Appellant's account as the factual basis
    for considering his assessment of the appeal.

10. At [16] the judge reached the conclusion  that  he  could  not  succeed
    under the Immigration Rules either under the long residence or  private
    life route because there was a  break  in  the  Appellant's  period  of
    lawful residence.  He also found  that  whilst  the  Respondent  had  a
    policy outside the Rules it was  not  exercisable  on  appeal  (Section
    86(4)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration   and   Asylum   Act   2002).
    Furthermore, as to paragraph 276ADE of the  Rules,  he  had  continuing
    social, cultural and family ties in Nigeria and thus could not  satisfy
    the Rules [16].

11. At paragraphs [17] to [25] the judge considered the appeal  outside  of
    the Rules and at [17] placed weight on  the  fact  that  the  Appellant
    could not meet the Immigration Rules.  He made  self-directions  as  to
    the law from paragraph  [17]  to  [19]  of  the  determination  and  in
    relation to the class of cases relating to those who  had  entered  the
    United Kingdom as students and had wished to remain, the judge at  [20]
    directed himself that the mere fact that a person may have entered  the
    country and embarked on a course of studies did  not  necessarily  mean
    that they would have established a private life, particularly once they
    had finished their  course.   The  judge  found  that  the  Appellant's
    circumstances were "readily distinguishable from  the  Nasim  class  of
    case" and gave reasons for that at [20], noting that the Appellant  had
    "a relatively long period of residence" and that he had only failed  to
    qualify for the long residence route under the Rules through a  "chance
    event" in that  the  former  Sponsor  lost  her  ability  to  issue  an
    effective CAS over a period during which he needed to apply for further
    leave to remain.  The judge  cited  the  decision  of  Ferrer  (limited
    appeal grounds; Alvi) Philippines [2012] UKUT 304 (IAC) at  [57],  that
    "issues of fairness can have a material part to play in determining the
    proportionality of giving effect  to  an  immigration  decision,  which
    interferes with a person's private and/or family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom".  Applying that decision, the  judge  reached  the  conclusion
    that the unfairness of the outcome that  resulted  in  this  particular
    Appellant's case was due to difficulties suffered  by  his  Sponsor  in
    circumstances where they "nevertheless retained their licence  so  that
    the  various  policies  that  the  Respondent  has  had  over  time  to
    ameliorate the impact of revocation or suspension of  Sponsor  licences
    were not available to him", he found that  that  was  relevant  in  the
    sense referred to in the decision of Ferrer.

12. At [21] he placed in the balance that the Appellant  had  made  a  very
    significant investment in his studies over an extended period, that  he
    was closely connected to  the  United  Kingdom  having  studied  beyond
    degree level in a very particular professional  context  (that  is  the
    law).  He had worked in the UK and had  volunteered;  he  had  numerous
    close friends  including  members  of  the  legal  profession  who  had
    mentored him in the UK for a lengthy period.  He found him to be  close
    to the  family  of  Mr  Quinn  and  he  concluded  that  that  evidence
    represented a "significant part of his personal identity in  the  sense
    identified in the decision of Niemietz".  Furthermore, he observed that
    his choice to remain here based on his own  private  life  rather  than
    relying on what appeared to be  a  "promising  alternative  application
    under the partner route with a British citizen girlfriend with whom  he
    has been in a lengthy relationship" attested  to  the  extent  that  he
    identified with his life in the UK.  He found that to be contrasted  to
    the situation in Nigeria where he had no close relatives and  to  where
    he did not even feel it necessary to return to attend the  funerals  of
    his parents.

13.  Consequently he did find that private life was  well  established  and
    that there would be an interference with it.  When  considering  issues
    of proportionality at paragraph  [22]  onwards,  the  judge  took  into
    account the statutory factors under Part 5A and Section 117 and applied
    those paragraphs substantively at paragraph [23] of the  decision.   He
    found that the Appellant had been present lawfully for  nearly  all  of
    the time in which his private life had been established; his sole break
    in leave to remain was attributable to events beyond  his  own  control
    and he found that in the early days of the points-based system  it  was
    likely that the complexity of the new  provisions  might  have  led  to
    confusion as to the success of a particular kind of  application  which
    had led to the Appellant making an application which was doomed to fail
    when he sought to extend his Tier 4 leave thereafter, having enjoyed an
    extension of leave to remain because of Section 3C of  the  Immigration
    Act 1971 until April 2009.  He found the application was frustrated  by
    the Sponsor's difficulties with issuing a CAS at the required time.  He
    further concluded that he did not see it as any "answer to his case" to
    say that at that moment he  should  have  gone  elsewhere  to  find  an
    educational Sponsor who could issue him with a  CAS;  he  was  at  that
    moment at a very advanced stage of his studies  with  a  reputable  and
    well-known educational establishment and was more than  three  quarters
    of the way through a course for which he had paid  a  very  significant
    fee.  He found that the Appellant was no burden  on  the  taxpayer  and
    spoke very good English (117B(2)(a)).  Thus  at  [25]  he  reached  the
    decision when applying the balance of proportionality that the  balance
    was in favour of the Appellant and allowed  the  appeal  on  Article  8
    grounds.

14. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  that  decision  and
    permission was granted on 8th May 2015.

15. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Whitwell  on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State relied upon the grounds.  As to Ground 2,  he
    submitted that the judge failed to direct himself  as  to  the  correct
    standard of  proof  and  that  as  he  did  not  refer  to  it  in  his
    determination it constituted a material error of law.

16. As to Ground 1 and the balance of proportionality, he made reference to
    the applicant's history and that the Appellant had made a Tier 1  Post-
    Study application in 2008 as he wished to pursue  a  training  contract
    which he could not do on a Tier 4 visa but when  that  application  was
    refused he sought to extend a Tier 4 visa but could not do  so  because
    the University of Westminster was unable to issue him a CAS.   Thus  it
    was submitted that the judge was incorrect in finding that  there  were
    any issues of unfairness that arose in the current appeal.  He chose to
    make an application in 2008 which was unsuccessful and  that,  as  they
    were choices open to  the  Appellant,  no  issues  of  unfairness  were
    raised.  Thus he submitted the  judge  had  focused  on  the  issue  of
    unfairness but there was no procedural unfairness demonstrated and that
    Article 8 was not a "general  dispensing  power"  for  those  who  were
    unable to meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.   He  relied
    upon the decision of Nasim at paragraphs [39] and  [42]  and  that  the
    Appellant was in the United Kingdom for a temporary  purpose  to  study
    and to qualify as a solicitor and thus the decision  of  the  judge  at
    paragraph [20] of the determination was wrong in that respect and  that
    there was no "chance event" as the judge recorded  nor  was  there  any
    form of unfairness.

17. He also submitted that the proportionality assessment was flawed as the
    judge failed to take into account at [23] Section 117B(5)  that  little
    weight should be given to a private life established by a person  at  a
    time when the person's immigration  status  was  precarious.   In  this
    sense relying upon the decision of the Tribunal in  AM  (Section  117B)
    Malawi [2005] UKUT 260 (IAC).  He accepted that at paragraph  [22]  the
    judge did  quote  and  take  into  account  Section  117B(1)  that  the
    maintenance of immigration control was in the public interest.  Thus he
    submitted the judge's assessment  of  proportionality  was  flawed  and
    should be set aside.

18. Mr George represented himself.  For the purposes of the appeal, he  had
    provided a written response to the application for permission to appeal
    made by the Secretary of State dated 20th May 2015.  In that  document,
    which he adopted as his submissions before this Tribunal, he set out in
    detail the immigration history that had led to the judge's  conclusions
    and in particular highlighted the problems that had arisen relating  to
    the CAS which had caused problems not only for him but for a number  of
    other bona fide students and that the delay that caused  the  break  in
    residence  was  not  attributable  to  any  of  his  own  conduct.   He
    reiterated that there was an issue of unfairness and that  this  was  a
    relevant consideration that the judge was entitled to take into account
    when reaching a decision.  The document went on to set  out  the  legal
    principles relating to private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  he
    submitted that it was open to the judge to find that he  had  lived  in
    the UK for more than eleven years and that the judge applied  and  gave
    appropriate weight to the public  interest  requirement  at  paragraphs
    [19] to [23] of the determination.  He further submitted  at  paragraph
    [11] of the document that the judge applied the  relevant  standard  of
    proof to the findings of fact and also observed that the Respondent had
    not sought to challenge any of those factual assertions either  in  the
    refusal letter or before the First-tier Tribunal.

19. His oral submissions echoed those set out in the document.

20. I reserved my determination.

21. In dealing with Ground 2, the Secretary  of  State  submits  the  judge
    failed to identify the relevant standard of  proof,  which  would  have
    been the balance of probabilities, when making the  findings  of  fact.
    That ground is simply not made out.   It  is  plain  from  reading  the
    determination, and also the documents within the  Respondent's  bundle,
    that no challenge was made to the Appellant's factual account.   Indeed
    the Secretary of State did not attend before the judge to challenge any
    of his factual account and it was fully open  to  the  judge  in  those
    circumstances to reach the conclusion that he had found the Appellant's
    account to be "credible and plausible" and thus accepted wholeheartedly
    and without reservation the factual  account  that  was  given  by  the
    Appellant  in  the  preceding  paragraphs  of  the   determination   at
    paragraphs [1] to [14].  In reaching those findings of fact there is no
    hint of any kind that the judge applied the wrong standard of proof and
    therefore I do not consider that that ground is made out.

22. Dealing with the other issues raised  and  in  particular  the  judge's
    reliance on the issue  of  fairness,  I  have  considered  the  factual
    circumstances.  The Secretary of State submits that the Appellant chose
    to make a Tier 1 application in 2008 to pursue  a  training  contract.
    The history demonstrates that he graduated in June 2007 and enrolled on
    the LPC course in September of that year.  The application  was  lodged
    on 27th October 2008 as a  Post-Study  Migrant  to  pursue  a  training
    contract.  The Appellant in a letter stated that  this  was  a  trainee
    solicitor vacancy that was coming available in August 2009 and  he  was
    required to show that he would be eligible to work full-time  which  is
    why the Tier  1  application  was  lodged.   The  explanation  for  not
    succeeding was that he had graduated in  2007  and  having  lodged  the
    application  in  October  2008  could  not  score  points   under   the
    Immigration Rules because he was  required  to  lodge  the  application
    within one year of graduation.  Whether  or  not  the  application  was
    rejected because he had been given the wrong advice by  an  immigration
    advisor, it is plain that he could not meet the Immigration Rules as  a
    Post-Study Migrant.  He did have an appeal before a judge and that  was
    dismissed.  The decision was not put before the First-tier Tribunal nor
    has it been put before this Tribunal.   Therefore,  the  Respondent  is
    right to assert that it was on the evidence the Appellant's  choice  in
    2008 to pursue a training contract and  when  he  was  unsuccessful  he
    chose to continue his study.  The Appellant then went  on  to  continue
    with his studies after that time.

23.  Consequently  the  factual  circumstances  surrounding  the   Tier   1
    application and the lack of success could not and does  not  raise  any
    issue of unfairness in  my  judgment.   In  this  respect  I  find  the
    Secretary of State is correct.  However, the events that the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge identified that gave rise to the unfairness arose  after
    this stage.  Following the application made as a Tier 1  Migrant  which
    had been dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal on 30th March 2009 he had
    28 days to provide a further application.  It is common ground that  no
    application was made until 16th June 2009.  I  observe  at  this  stage
    that the decision letter  was  wrong  in  its  contents  when  it  made
    reference to the break in residence as the Appellant  properly  pointed
    out in his written evidence, the break in residence was not from  April
    2008 but from April 2009 until 27th July 2009.  The judge accepted  the
    explanation for the delay over that  period  which  was  following  the
    appeal in March 2009 he had approached the  University  of  Westminster
    for  a  sponsorship  letter  (see  the   evidence   at   [f]   in   the
    determination).  The judge considered this at [20] noting that his case
    could be distinguished  from  the  case  of  Nasim  because  he  had  a
    "relatively long period of residence here; indeed he has only failed to
    qualify for the long residence route under the Rules through  a  chance
    event, in that his former  Sponsor  lost  their  ability  to  issue  an
    effective CAS over a period during which he needed to apply for further
    leave to remain".  The judge went on to consider the decision in Ferrer
    (limited appeal grounds; Alvi) Philippines [2012]  UKUT  304  (IAC)  at
    [57], quoting the following:-

         "Issues of fairness can have a material part to play in determining
         the proportionality of giving effect to  an  immigration  decision,
         which interferes with a person's private and/or family life in  the
         United Kingdom."

24. Thus applying that decision he found the issue of unfairness  that  had
    resulted from the particular circumstances  of  this  Appellant's  case
    were difficulties suffered by the Sponsor and thus not at the hands  of
    the Appellant and the Sponsor's circumstances were such that  they  had
    retained  their  licence  but  that  the  various  policies  that   the
    Respondent had over the time to ameliorate the impact of suspension  of
    Sponsor licences (which was the evidence before  him  relating  to  the
    university) was a relevant consideration in the sense referenced in the
    decision of Ferrer.  I do not consider that the submissions made by the
    Secretary of State demonstrate  that  the  judge  wrongly  applied  the
    decision of Ferrer and whilst it is right to submit that Article  8  is
    not a general dispensing power for those who are  unable  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, that misrepresents the  decision
    of the judge and his reasoning as to why he found there was an issue of
    fairness which was an issue of procedural fairness that resulted in  an
    outcome that the Appellant had no control over.

25. He expressly considered at [20] the  policies  that  the  Secretary  of
    State subsequently applied to Appellants who  had  been  in  a  similar
    position to this Appellant where licences had been revoked and this had
    been taken into account so that applicants were able to have  a  period
    in  which  they   could   obtain   CAS   documents   from   alternative
    establishments.  That was not applicable to this Appellant at the  time
    and it was this that the judge  went  on  to  consider  and  take  into
    account in the proportionality balance at  [23]  when  the  judge  made
    reference to the "complexity of the new provisions".

26. Whilst the Secretary of State submits that the Appellant,  having  then
    chosen to pursue a Tier 4 application and the fact that the  University
    of Westminster was unable to issue a CAS did  not  raise  an  issue  of
    unfairness as his Tier 4 application was  ultimately  successful  later
    on, that misses the point.  The judge found on the evidence that he had
    wholly accepted, and to which there has been  no  challenge,  that  the
    applicant had been in a position to  extend  his  leave  as  a  Tier  4
    student but that it was frustrated by  the  Sponsor  difficulties  with
    issuing a CAS at the required time due to no fault of the Appellant for
    the reasons I have already referred to and where the judge  had  stated
    at [23] and that it was no answer  to  say  that  he  could  have  gone
    elsewhere to find an educational Sponsor as he was at an advanced stage
    in his studies with a reputable, well-known educational  establishment.
    Indeed the  documents  provided  show  what  was  outstanding  was  the
    competency assessment which was necessary to provide him  with  a  pass
    for the LPC course (see the documents appended to the application).

27. Furthermore, the fact that his Tier 4 application was  successful  with
    leave  being  granted  between  July  2009  and   18th   October   2009
    demonstrates that if the Sponsor had not had the problems that had been
    outlined, for which the Appellant could  not  be  blamed  for  or  held
    responsible, the likelihood is that he would have  succeeded  and  thus
    there would not have been the break in leave which  ultimately  led  to
    his application for long residence failing.

28. In essence, the judge was not seeking to allow the appeal on Article  8
    grounds based solely on the  issue  of  fairness  or,  as  Mr  Whitwell
    submits, a "general dispensing power" but for the  reasons  given  that
    the Appellant had not been able to satisfy the  Immigration  Rules  and
    the reason for that was a matter that in the judge's assessment weighed
    heavily in the proportionality balance that he undertook alongside  the
    others matters identified by the judge, including the strength  of  his
    private life and the matters referred to .

29. The grounds advanced on behalf of the Secretary of State also refer  to
    the judge's failure to apply the statutory  requirements  contained  in
    Part 5 and Section 117B.  It is accepted by Mr Whitwell that the  judge
    did take into account  at  paragraph  [22]  Section  117B(1)  that  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control was in the public interest
    but he submits that the judge did not take into account Section 117B(5)
    on the basis that his stay in the United Kingdom was  "precarious"  and
    that that was a factor missing from the proportionality balance.

30. Section 117A(3) confirms that the Tribunal is required to carry  out  a
    balancing exercise where a person's circumstances engage  Article  8(1)
    to decide whether the proposed interference is proportionate in all the
    circumstances.    Section   117B   sets   out   the   public   interest
    considerations to apply  and  Section  117C  sets  out  the  additional
    considerations in cases involving foreign criminals, which  clearly  do
    not apply to the particular facts of this appeal.

31. The judge properly had regard to the factors at [22] and [23] and  made
    express reference to Part 5A.  The judge was entitled to rely upon  the
    findings of  fact  that  he  had  made  in  the  earlier  part  of  the
    determination relating to the Appellant's private life.  He  identified
    that private life was properly  engaged  under  Article  8(1)  for  the
    reasons he gave at [21] which are not challenged by  the  Secretary  of
    State and thus turned to the issue of  proportionality  and  took  into
    account the statutory considerations set out under Section  117B.   The
    facts as the judge found them to be at [24] were directly referable  to
    Section 117B and that it was in favour of the applicant and that it was
    in the public interest and the interests of the economic  wellbeing  of
    the United Kingdom, the ability to speak English and this Appellant was
    also financially independent (Section 117B(3)).  The judge  also  found
    that the Appellant had been lawfully in the United Kingdom  for  nearly
    all of the time, applying Section 117B(4)(a) and that the  only  break
    referred to was the short period in the summer of 2009.   It  is  right
    that the judge did not expressly take into account that  the  basis  of
    his stay was precarious.  In this context Mr  Whitwell  relies  on  the
    decision of AM (Section 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC).  The  judge
    did not have the benefit of that decision as  it  was  not  promulgated
    until well after  the  hearing.   The  decision  makes  it  plain  that
    Parliament has drawn a strong distinction between any periods  of  time
    during which a person has been in the UK unlawfully and periods of time
    in which the person's immigration  status  was  "precarious"  if  their
    continued presence in the UK will be dependent upon their  obtaining  a
    further grant of leave.  Consequently, whilst the judge found that  the
    applicant's private life had  accrued  at  a  time  when  he  had  been
    lawfully in the United Kingdom and did not expressly  refer  to  it  as
    "precarious" in the sense identified in the decision of AM, the grounds
    do not demonstrate  that  this  would  have  affected  the  balance  of
    proportionality reached by the judge or, to put it  another  way,  that
    that factor would have outweighed the other factors which  cumulatively
    weighed in the balance in favour of the Appellant.  The  considerations
    whilst expressed in mandatory terms are  not  expressed  as  exhaustive
    (see the phrase "in particular" Section 117A(2) and see the decision of
    Forman (Section  117A-C  considerations)  [2015]  UKUT  0412)  and  the
    Tribunal was entitled to take into account additional considerations if
    relevant if they bear on the public interest  question.   It  is  plain
    that in this context the judge took into  account  that  the  break  in
    leave was attributable to an event for which  this  Appellant  was  not
    responsible [23] and  his  continuing  reference  to  the  points-based
    system as described by the Court of Appeal in Pokhriyal v  SSHD  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 1568 and this was a consideration the judge  was  entitled  to
    take into account in the balancing exercise.

32.  Consequently the Secretary of State has not demonstrated that in light
    of the factors that the judge found to weigh heavily on the side of the
    Appellant that this would have led the judge to have reached any  other
    decision on the issue of proportionality and therefore was not material
    to the outcome.  Therefore I am satisfied that  the  factors  that  the
    judge took into account when considering the issue  of  proportionality
    were relevant considerations and that the weight given by the judge  to
    those  factors  was  a  matter  for  the  judge  when  considering  the
    particular factual circumstances of this appeal that  was  before  him.
    Whilst it might be characterised as a generous decision, the grounds do
    not  demonstrate  that  the  decision  was  not  within  the  range  of
    reasonable decisions open  to  the  judge  on  the  particular  factual
    circumstances that this judge found.  For those reasons, the  Secretary
    of State has not demonstrated that the  decision  of  Judge  Symes  was
    flawed in law and therefore the appeal of the Secretary of State  shall
    be dismissed.  The decision to allow the appeal  made  by  Judge  Symes
    shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  shall  stand;  the  appeal  by  the
Secretary of State shall be dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made and none has been requested.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

