

                                    [pic]


The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                Appeal number:
IA/27691/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester             |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On March 11, 2015               |              On March 13, 2015     |
|                                |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                               MS SOBIA RAFIQ
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
Appellant   Mr Skyner, counsel, instructed by Adamson Law
      Solicitors
Respondent  Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Pakistan  who  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on October 8, 2010 with valid entry clearance as the spouse  of
    a person present and settled in the United  Kingdom.  On  December  10,
    2012 she applied for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of
    domestic violence but his was refused by the respondent and her  appeal
    against that decision was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    White on July 2, 2013. On May 2,  2014  the  appellant  re-applied  for
    settlement as a victim of domestic violence but the respondent  refused
    this application on June 18, 2014 under paragraph 289C  with  reference
    to 289A(iv) HC 395. A decision to remove the  appellant  was  taken  on
    June 18, 2014.

 2. The appellant appealed on July 3, 2014,  under  section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. The matter  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Shimmin
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") on September 15, 2014 and in  a
    decision promulgated on September 25, 2014 he refused her appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on October  1,  2014  submitting
    the FtTJ had erred in his approach to the medical evidence.

 5. On December 1, 2014 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  McWilliam  gave
    permission to appeal finding there were arguable grounds that the  FtTJ
    had erred although indicated that any error may not be material because
    of the content of the report.

 6. The matter came before me on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above. The appellant was not in attendance.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Skyner adopted the grounds of appeal and submitted that the FtTJ had
    erred by discounting the  medical  evidence  not  only  on  grounds  of
    substance but also because it did not, in his opinion, have details  of
    the expert's address and contact  details.  He  also  argued  the  FtTJ
    should have considered the report in light of the other evidence.

 8. Mr McVeety adopted a rule 24  response  dated  December  12,  2014  and
    submitted  the  FtTJ  correctly  followed  the  approach  set  out   in
    Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00702. There had been no other challenge
    to the determination apart from the approach adopted in respect of  the
    medical report. The doctor had not had any of the papers and based  his
    whole report on an interview that lasted for a maximum of one hour. The
    FtTJ did consider the contents of the  report  in  paragraph  [22]  and
    found "... I accept the submission of the respondent that  in  a  short
    attendance of one hour the doctor has accepted  the  statement  of  the
    appellant as to her circumstances and it is upon this basis that he has
    prepared his report." Whilst the doctor considered  her  depression  he
    had no regard to any other evidence and the findings made were open  to
    the FtTJ.

 9. Mr Skyner emphasised that the FtTJ rejected the  medical  evidence  not
    merely for the reason given by Mr McVeety but also because of the  lack
    of an address on the document.


10. Having considered the submissions and having considered the report  and
    the FtTJ's determination, in  particular,  I  refused  the  appeal  and
    indicated to Mr  Skyner  I  would  give  my  written  reasons  in  this
    determination.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

11.  The issue before me centred on the  FtTJ's  approach  to  the  medical
    evidence. Both parties accepted this was  the  only  issue  for  me  to
    determine and in considering the grounds of appeal I reviewed the  file
    of papers but paying particular attention to the  doctor's  report  and
    the FtTJ's determination.

12. The point made by the FtTJ regarding the  lack  of  details  about  the
    doctor was a valid point because the  report  itself  consisting  of  7
    pages did not contain her CV or address of work albeit it did contain a
    mobile telephone number. There  was  contained  within  the  bundle  of
    documents, submitted by the appellant's representatives, a printout  of
    a letter containing information about the doctor. However, parts of the
    page had not been copied. For instance, two questions asking about when
    the doctor was entered on the "specialist register entry date" and  "GP
    register entry date" only contained the answers "this doctor is no o".

13. Most expert reports contain all the necessary information of a person's
    place of work but sadly this report did not.

14. The issue is whether firstly that amounted to a material  error  and/or
    secondly whether the FtTJ considered the content of the report.

15. I am satisfied the report  was  considered.  The  report  is  extremely
    limited in  its  nature  and  is  based  on  one  appointment  with  no
    background information being made available to the doctor.  The  report
    is based wholly in what she was told. The FtTJ rejected this report  on
    content and was also critical of matters raised above.

16. I am satisfied  the  FtTJ  considered  the  report  and  concluded  the
    contents did not alter the position adopted by Judge of the  First-tier
    White. That finding was clearly open to the FtTJ. The finding over  the
    address was not totally without some basis but even if the address  was
    on it that would not alter the contents of what the FtTJ  found  was  a
    weak report.






    DECISION


17. There was no material error. The original decision shall stand.


18. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction pursuant to
    Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and I see
    no reason to alter that order.


Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal I make no fee award.


Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




