
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Numbers:
IA/27273/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 3 March 2017                       |       On 24 May 2017                 |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL

                                   Between

                                md mohi uddin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                  Appellant
                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin, of Counsel, instructed by Hubers Law
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background and Matters in Issue

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge N.M.K. Lawrence promulgated on 26  September  2016,
    in which he dismissed the appeal of the appellant against the  decision
    of the Secretary of State to refuse to issue him with a residence  card
    as confirmation of  his  right  of  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom
    pursuant to the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006.



 2. The Secretary of State had refused to issue a  residence  card  on  the
    basis that the marriage between the  appellant  and  his  wife,  Maria-
    Angelica Mihali, a Romania national, is  one  of  convenience.  It  was
    further not accepted that Mrs Mihali was exercising  treaty  rights  in
    the United Kingdom.

 3. The Secretary of State's case that the marriage is one  of  convenience
    is set out in the refusal letter. It refers  to  findings  following  a
    pastoral visit by Immigration Officers to the claimed matrimonial  home
    where the appellant and Mrs Mihali  were  encountered  and  questioned.
    Following observations made about the state  of  the  room  the  couple
    occupied and their unsatisfactory responses to questioning, Immigration
    Officers concluded that the marriage is one of convenience. As for  Mrs
    Mihali  exercising  treaty  rights,  it  was  noted  that   there   was
    insufficient  evidence  of  her   employment   and   the   respondent's
    verification checks revealed that she was no longer employed.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. At the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal the Secretary of State was
    not represented. The appellant was  however  represented  albeit  by  a
    different firm of representatives. The judge heard oral  evidence  from
    the  appellant  and  Mrs  Mihali  and  received  submissions  from  the
    appellant's then representative. The judge  referred  to  Rosa  v  SSHD
    [2016] EWCA Civ 14 and Papajorgi [2012] UKUT  00038  and  made  various
    observations and conclusions on the evidence at [9] - [12].  The  judge
    was intrigued by the fact that the couple travelled to Scotland for the
    purposes of participating in a marriage ceremony  and  noted  that  Mrs
    Mihali conceived the  appellant's  child  shortly  after  the  pastoral
    visit. She subsequently gave birth on 24 March 2016. The judge  further
    noted there was no explanation for the couple marrying in Scotland  and
    returning the same day; and found that it was not credible  they  could
    not remember the place where they married.

 5. In his omnibus conclusion, the judge stated thus at [13]:

    "In my view, the respondent has demonstrated, to the correct  standard,
    that this is a marriage of convenience. The appellant and  the  sponsor
    rely on the fact of the birth of a child to demonstrate  that  this  is
    not a marriage of convenience. This would have been a  cogent  argument
    had it been demonstrated that the test provider is one approved by  the
    Home Office. Accordingly, I attach no weight to the document."

 6. The judge accordingly found that the Secretary of State  had  made  out
    her case and dismissed the appeal.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had misdirected himself in rejecting the DNA  evidence,  and  that  the
    judge erred in finding the respondent had satisfied the legal burden of
    proving the appellant's marriage to Mrs Mihali is one of convenience to
    the required level; it being argued that there was a failure to examine
    relevant evidence and a failure to give weight to material matters.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin
    on 17 January 2017.

 9. Before me, Mr Kotas submitted that for  the  reasons  set  out  in  the
    letter produced pursuant to Rule 24 and dated  10  February  2017,  the
    appeal was not opposed as it was apparent that the judge erred in law.

10. I indicated that I was satisfied that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did involve the making of an error of law. It is not necessary
    to traverse all the grounds  in  detail  considering  the  respondent's
    concession, so I set out my reasons briefly below.

The Error of Law

11. At the hearing before me Mr Martin submitted that the decision  of  the
    judge contained errors of  law  such  that  it  should  be  set  aside.
    Although there were a number of grounds his primary  challenge  related
    to the approach taken to where the burden of proof lay and the  judge's
    treatment of the evidence.

12. The Court of Appeal has recently considered  the  issue  of  burden  of
    proof in regard to marriages of convenience in both Agho v Secretary of
    State [2015] EWCA Civ 1198 and Rosa (supra). The proper test is clearly
    set out by the Court of Appeal in particular in Rosa at [24]  and  more
    particularly at [29]. It appears however from the decision of the First-
    tier  Tribunal,  in  particular  at  [6]  and  [13],  that  the   judge
    misunderstood how the test is properly to be applied in practice. It is
    acknowledged by Mr Kotas that no notes or contemporaneous records  were
    provided of the Immigration  Officers  visit  other  than  the  details
    provided in the refusal letter. It cannot be said that a refusal letter
    is in itself evidence, and in that sense the  judge  erred  in  law  in
    accepting as  evidence  assertions  of  fact  which  are  not  in  fact
    supported by evidence which was not provided by the Secretary of State.



13. Further, as Mr Martin pointed out, the judge's approach to the evidence
    is erroneous in that the child was  conceived  prior  to  the  pastoral
    visit and the DNA test provider was indeed approved by the Home Office.
    There is no dispute, and I accept, that the judge's conclusions to  the
    contrary were clearly in material error.


14. It follows that the decision must be set aside in its entirety and I do
    so.


15. Accordingly, the decision must be remade.

The Re-Made Decision

16. At the hearing the parties were in  a  position  to  proceed  with  the
    remaking of the decision. I heard oral evidence from the appellant  and
    Mrs  Mihali  in  English.  Both  relied  on  their  respective  witness
    statements and were cross examined by Mr Kotas. It was clear  that  Mrs
    Mihali found the stress of giving evidence  particularly  difficult  as
    she became distressed during the course of her evidence.  Nevertheless,
    I was satisfied that both she and the appellant were able to comprehend
    the  proceedings  throughout.   At   the   close   of   evidence   both
    representatives  made  submissions  following  which  I   reserved   my
    decision. In reaching my conclusions I have considered the evidence and
    submissions before me and applied the civil standard  of  proof  namely
    the balance of probabilities.

17. I remind myself that the legal burden is on  the  respondent  to  prove
    that the  marriage  is  one  of  convenience.  The  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Papajorgji (supra) explains that at the outset of an application, there
    is no burden on a claimant to demonstrate that a  marriage  to  an  EEA
    national is not one of  convenience:  there  is  merely  an  evidential
    burden on the claimant to  address  evidence  justifying  a  reasonable
    suspicion that the  marriage  was  entered  into  for  the  predominant
    purpose of securing residence rights. At [27] Papajorgji sets out  that
    "there is no burden on the claimant in  an  application  for  a  family
    permit to establish that she was not party to a marriage of convenience
    unless the circumstances known to the decision  maker  give  reasonable
    ground for suspecting that this was the case."


18. Mr Kotas properly acknowledged that the respondent had still failed  to
    produce any evidence at all to  support  the  assertions  made  in  the
    refusal letter. In the absence of such  evidence  it  is  difficult  to
    discern how it could be said  that  there  was  evidence  justifying  a
    reasonable suspicion that the marriage is a sham. While Mr Kotas  could
    point to the fact that the appellant did not  dispute  the  visit  took
    place; that is not the point - some of  what  happened  and,  what  was
    said, is challenged by the appellant.


19. I consider that in this case the Secretary of State  has  not  produced
    any evidence which is capable of being relied upon. What is said in the
    refusal letter are simply assertions. They are not in and of themselves
    evidence. There are no notes of what is said to have transpired on  the
    day of the visit or witness statements from  the  Immigration  Officers
    concerned. There was thus no evidential burden  for  the  appellant  to
    discharge.


20. In the instance of the contra position being established, namely,  that
    it could be said  that  there  was  evidence  justifying  a  reasonable
    suspicion that the marriage is  one  of  convenience,  I  am  satisfied
    having heard the evidence of the appellant  and  Mrs  Mihali  that  the
    marriage should be accepted as genuine.

21. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 10  October  2009  as  a
    Tier 4 General Student with entry clearance conferring leave  to  enter
    until 31 December 2012. His leave in that capacity was  extended  until
    24 March 2014. An application to further extend his leave  was  refused
    and the  appellant  duly  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  but
    withdrew his appeal in 2015 in order to pursue an  application  perhaps
    understandably for a residence card.  By  this  stage  the  couple  had
    married in a ceremony conducted in Inverness on 27  November  2014  and
    had been living together since. While I acknowledge that  the  evidence
    presented is not particularly detailed or overwhelming there is nothing
    inherently suspicious in the above background.

22. There is no dispute that Immigration Officers encountered the couple in
    an upstairs bedroom where they resided. Immigration  Officers  observed
    the presence of both male and female clothes  and  photographs  of  the
    appellant and Mrs Mihali on a bedside table. There were  some  blankets
    and sheets laid out on the floor which was  suggestive  of  the  couple
    sleeping separately, but both the appellant and  Mrs  Mihali  confirmed
    that they were sleeping on the  floor  together  because  of  the  warm
    weather. While that may appear odd to some,  I  accept  that  it  is  a
    plausible explanation and one that was not materially challenged before
    me. On the other  hand,  even  if  the  appellant  was  found  sleeping
    separately on the floor, it does not  necessarily  suggest  this  is  a
    marriage of convenience.


23. While further reliance is placed on the appellant and Mrs Mihali  being
    unable to name immediately to the Immigration Officers the  place  they
    married, I note that Mrs Mihali was able to recall that they married in
    Inverness. In evidence the appellant and Mrs Mihali provided cogent and
    consistent explanations as to why they did so, having made  efforts  to
    marry in the United Kingdom only to be told on two occasions  that  the
    appellant could not do so without a passport. Further still, while they
    had planned to stay in Scotland for longer than a  day,  following  the
    marriage they returned to the United Kingdom at  Mrs  Mihali's  request
    who had not prepared herself for the inclement  weather  conditions  in
    Scotland during the winter season.  While  this  evidence  was  rightly
    tested in cross-examination by  Mr  Kotas,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    appellant and Mrs Mihali gave a consistent and innocent explanation for
    their actions.


24. I find that all of this together with the fact that the couple  have  a
    child conceived prior to the  pastoral  visit  is  a  strong  indicator
    corroborative of a genuine relationship.


25. Bearing in mind that the burden in this case is  on  the  Secretary  of
    State to show on the balance of probabilities the marriage  is  one  of
    convenience, I consider that she has not provided  sufficient  evidence
    to do so and that accordingly, reviewing the evidence as a whole, I  am
    satisfied that this is not a marriage of convenience and I so find.


26. There remains an issue as to whether Mrs Mihali  is  exercising  treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom. This issue  was  not  determined  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal. There is evidence supporting Mrs Mihali's economic
    activities up to May 2016 in the form  of  payslips  and  corresponding
    bank statements. This evidence supports her account that at the time of
    refusal she was working, but had simply began working  at  a  different
    branch of the same company. However, since the refusal and the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal Mrs Mihali  took  maternity  leave.  She
    says that she returned to work four weeks' ago, working at a care home;
    her first monthly salary will be paid soon. While I have  been  invited
    to accept that evidence at face value, I agree with Mr Kotas that  this
    is insufficient to discharge the burden  that  falls  squarely  on  the
    appellant to establish that Mrs Mihali is exercising treaty  rights  in
    the United Kingdom. Given the complete lack of any documentary evidence
    supportive of Mrs Mihali's claimed employment, I am  not  satisfied  on
    balance that the appellant has proven to the  requisite  standard  that
    his wife is a qualified person and is exercising treaty  rights  as  at
    the date of hearing as a worker. That is a matter however, should it be
    the case that Mrs Mihali is so employed, that can be  readily  resolved
    by providing such evidence to the respondent.

27. It follows that the appeal must be dismissed as I am not satisfied that
    the requirements of regulation 6 are met.


    Decision


28. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


29. I remake the decision in the appeal as follows: the appeal is dismissed
    with reference to regulation 6 of the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006.

30. I was not asked to make a direction for anonymity and on the  facts,  I
    see no reason to do so.


Signed                                             Date:  20 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal there can be no fee award.



Signed                                             Date:  20 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral






