
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27984/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 13th April 2015                        |On 22nd April 2015                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                               MR SALEH AHMED
                          (ANONYMITY not retained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Hashmi
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 1st February 1990 is  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh.
    The Appellant who was present was  represented  by  Miss  Hashmi.   The
    Respondent was represented by Mr Harrison, a Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application on 16th January 2014  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as  a  partner  under  Appendix  FM.   The
    Respondent had refused that application on 30th June 2014 on the  basis
    that the Appellant failed to meet the suitability requirements namely S-
    LTRP2.2 as the Respondent considered the Appellant had sought leave  to
    remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  by  deception  following  information
    provided by ETS that an anomaly with his speaking  test  indicated  the
    presence of a proxy  test  taker.   The  Appellant  had  appealed  that
    decision and his appeal was heard by Judge Williams,  a  judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal at Manchester on 1st October 2014.  The  judge  had
    found the Appellant met the suitability  requirements  and  accordingly
    allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

 3. The Respondent had sought application to  appeal  the  grounds  stating
    that the judge had failed to  give  proper  consideration  to  evidence
    provided by the Respondent to  prove  that  the  test  certificate  was
    obtained through deception.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Deans  on  9th
    December 2014 who noted that the relevant evidence referred to  by  the
    Respondent was missing and therefore it was  difficult  to  follow  the
    points made by the Respondent in the application but  it  was  arguable
    the judge had misconstrued the sequence of the language  test  and  the
    CAS and therefore all grounds should be regarded as arguable.

 5. The matter came before me in accordance with directions set to  firstly
    decide whether or not an error of law had been made by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 6. Mr Harrison kindly provided me with a copy  of  the  additional  bundle
    that the Respondent had provided to the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in
    order to  demonstrate  that  there  had  been  deception  used  by  the
    Appellant on an earlier occasion to gain entry to the UK, in respect of
    his English language test certificate.  Mr  Harrison  relied  upon  the
    Grounds of Appeal.

 7. Having discussed  the  contents  of  that  additional  bundle  with  Mr
    Harrison and Miss Hashmi it was not  necessary  for  me  to  hear  any
    further submissions on the Appellant's  behalf  from  Miss  Hashmi.   I
    indicated that I found no material error of law made by the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge but would provide my decision with reasons  in  writing.
    I now provide that decision.

Decision and Reasons

 8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge had rightly identified that the issue  in
    this case was the assertion made by the Respondent that  the  Appellant
    fell for refusal under S-LTRP2.2 as he had used deception to provide an
    English  language  test  certificate   as   part   of   his   necessary
    documentation for obtaining a CAS that granted him entry to the  United
    Kingdom as a student on an earlier occasion.

 9. The judge at paragraph 9 had set out the burden and standard  of  proof
    required in immigration and  human  rights  appeals  as  being  on  the
    Appellant and on a balance of probabilities.  In general  and  in  most
    circumstances that is correct.  Whilst the judge had  not  specifically
    referred to the burden  passing  to  the  Respondent  initially,  where
    allegations of deception/dishonesty are made it is clear from paragraph
    11 of the decision that the judge was mindful of the  need  to  examine
    the evidence in  order  to  ascertain  whether  that  demonstrated  the
    Appellant had acted dishonestly.

10. The judge had considered  the  evidence  presented  by  the  Respondent
    within  the  additional  bundle  which  specifically  dealt  with  that
    assertion.  The bundle presented in this case is a familiar bundle that
    I have seen in several other cases.  The judge found at  paragraphs  11
    to 14 that there was an insufficiency  of  evidence  presented  by  the
    Respondent to demonstrate the Appellant had  used  deception  or  acted
    dishonestly.  He was entitled to reach that conclusion.  The  documents
    relied upon by the Respondent are inadequate  in  either  allowing  the
    Respondent to discharge the initial  burden  of  proving  deception  or
    indeed proof of deception at all.

11. By way of background it would appear that in February 2014 a television
    programme revealed a widespread abuse of  language  testing  within  UK
    test centres.  For reasons which  are  unknown  that  appears  to  have
    caused surprise to the Home Office as a result of  which  they  sent  a
    team to America to visit ETS which is an  educational  testing  company
    contracted  to  perform  testing  services  to  a   large   number   of
    organisations which includes the administering of the test  of  English
    as a foreign language.

12. The Respondent's bundle essentially consists  of  two  generic  witness
    statements from two individuals from the Home  Office  who  attended  a
    presentation in America by ETS.  Their statements refer to the  process
    used by ETS to discover where it is said an individual has  dishonestly
    obtained a test result.   Attached to the bundle is then a short  email
    which simply includes the details of this Appellant with the  statement
    that they have an invalid result for that individual.   The  author  of
    the email and to whom it was sent  has  been  deleted.   The  name  and
    details of the Appellant are no doubt extracted from a lengthy list  of
    alleged invalid test takers.  Whilst the witness statements within  the
    bundle present an account of what the authors were told by the team  in
    America as to  their  techniques  for  spotting  irregularities,  those
    statements are generic in nature.  There  is  no  evidence  within  the
    email or any other document to demonstrate why or how it  can  be  said
    that  this  Appellant's   results   were   invalid   or   obtained   by
    deception/dishonesty.  That additional Respondent's bundle presents  an
    inadequacy  of  evidence  to  establish  the  assertions  made  by  the
    Respondent and I am bound to observe that that has  been  the  case  in
    other appeals.  The judge was entitled therefore to  conclude  that  he
    was not satisfied there  was  any  evidence  the  Appellant  had  acted
    dishonestly in taking and passing his examination.

13. Further whilst there may have been a little confusion  in  the  judge's
    understanding of what the Respondent was alleging it is clear that  the
    judge had correctly noted that the CAS was assigned on 12th August 2013
    and the examination was undertaken on 5th June 2013 and accordingly the
    CAS was issued after the examination.  That is correct.  The judge  may
    have mistakenly believed the Respondent was asserting that the test had
    been taken after the CAS had been assigned.  That was not an  assertion
    made by the Respondent and indeed was not the sequence of events.   Had
    the CAS been assigned with test results  attached  prior  to  the  test
    having been taken that would of course have been cause for concern  and
    it may have been in  the  judge's  mind  that  that  was  part  of  the
    Respondent's concern in this case.  However the  judge  had  accurately
    stated and it was clear in his own mind as  to  the  correct  sequence.
    That sequence therefore does not in  itself  demonstrate  a  ground  of
    concern.  The judge also was entitled to refer to  the  fact  that  the
    Respondent had offered the Appellant a further opportunity of taking  a
    fresh test which the Appellant had done and had passed that examination
    with distinction.

14. In summary therefore the judge had carefully and properly looked at the
    evidence available and had reached the conclusion that not only had the
    Respondent failed to discharge an initial burden of  proof  that  there
    was simply no evidence in support of the assertion that  the  Appellant
    had acted dishonestly and therefore no proper basis for the refusal  of
    the Appellant's current application under the suitability requirements.



Notice of Decision

There was no material error of law made by the judge  in  this  case  and  I
uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
