
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27287/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 November 2016                           |On 9 December 2016            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                  MS JHANIQUE JOLEEN CHEVORN ODESSA SAYERS
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Karim of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, a senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                                  Decision

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of St Vincent and the Grenadines whose  date
    of birth is 28 December 1990. She claims to  have  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 22nd July 2001 aged 10 years with  her  mother  on  a  visit
    visa. She remained in the United Kingdom, after the expiry of the visit
    visa, unlawfully. On 2 April 2015 she applied for leave  to  remain  in
    the UK on the basis of her private life. The  respondent  refused  that
    application because (insofar as is relevant to this appeal) she was not
    satisfied that the appellant had provided evidence that  she  had  been
    living continuously in the UK since 2011 and did not therefore meet the
    requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  HC395  (as  amended)   ("the
    Immigration Rules").

 2.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. In a decision promulgated on 8 July 2016 First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge J G MacDonald dismissed the appellant's  appeal.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal found that there would not be very  significant  obstacles  to
    the appellant integrating into St Vincent and the Grenadines  and  that
    it would be proportionate for the appellant to be removed from the UK.

 3. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The grounds of appeal assert that the appellant was aged under  25  and
    had spent half of her life  in  the  UK  and  therefore  met  Paragraph
    276ADE(1)(v). The grounds of appeal also assert  that  the  appellant's
    date of birth is 28/12/1992 and that at the date of the hearing she was
    24. It is  asserted  that  the  appellant  meets  the  requirements  of
    Paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) and that this Paragraph has no  additional  test
    of 'very significant obstacles'.  On  28  October  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hollingworth granted permission to appeal. Thus the  appeal  came
    before me.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 4. At the commencement of the hearing Ms  Karim  indicated  that  she  had
    discussed matters with Mr Wilding and that the she understood that  the
    Secretary of State, having accepted in the Rule 24  response  that  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  decision  disclosed  a  material  error  of  law,
    accepted that the Immigration Rules are satisfied.

 5. Mr Wilding confirmed that it was now accepted that  the  appellant  met
    the requirements of  Paragraph  276ADE(1)(v).  He  submitted  that  the
    confusion at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal may have arisen
    because at the date of the hearing the appellant was aged 25 years. The
    relevant date for ascertaining the appellant's age was at the  date  of
    the application in these circumstances.

Discussion

 6. It was accepted before the First-tier Tribunal that the  appellant  had
    spent more than half her life in the United Kingdom (paragraph 7).  The
    judge then set out:

         "...The test, under the Immigration Rules, was whether or not there
         were "very significant obstacles" to her return to her  country  of
         nationality..."

 7. Paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) provides:

         (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has  spent  at
         least half of his life living continuously in the  UK  (discounting
         any period of imprisonment); or

 8. The grounds of appeal wrongly assert that the  appellant  was  born  in
    1992 and was 24 at the date of the hearing. The appellant was  born  in
    1990 and would have been 25 at the date of  the  hearing.  However  the
    relevant  date  is  the  date  of  application.  At  the  time  of  the
    application the appellant was aged 24. Although she  had  not  provided
    the necessary evidence with her application, in the bundle of documents
    before the First-tier Tribunal there was evidence that she had been  in
    the UK since 2011 and therefore I  consider  it  was  correct  for  the
    presenting officer to have accepted at the hearing that  the  appellant
    had lived in the UK for half of her life. There is no requirement  that
    the  appellant  must  demonstrate  that  there  are  very   significant
    obstacles to her integration in order to satisfy  the  requirements  of
    Paragraph 276ADE(1)(v).

 9. The First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law in considering that the
    appellant must satisfy the "significant obstacles" test.  I  set  aside
    that decision.

10. I re-make the decision. The appellant's appeal against the Secretary of
    State's decision is allowed.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 9 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

