
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27208/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 July 2014                                |On 22 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                Adeeb Younas
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     No Appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant did not attend before me.  He did not attend  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The papers show that notice of hearing  was  sent
    to him at his address for service and to his legal representatives.  My
    clerk checked outside the hearing room when it was convenient to  do  a
    call on the case at a little after 3 o'clock in the afternoon and there
    was no sign of the appellant then.  The case had been listed  for  a  2
    o'clock hearing.  I am satisfied that proper notice has been  given  in
    accordance with the Rules and that the appellant  has  decided  not  to
    attend. In the circumstances  I  continued  with  the  hearing  in  his
    absence.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who is almost 34 years old.   He
    appeals a decision of the respondent of 19 June 2013 to remove him from
    the United Kingdom as an illegal entrant.  He  had  previously  made  a
    claim for asylum which he withdrew in March of 2012.

 3. The appellant applied to remain on the basis of his long  residence  in
    the United Kingdom but even if he were telling the truth when  he  said
    that his residence began in March 1996 he was not able to do  was  show
    the continuous period of fourteen years' residence that would have been
    appropriate under the Rules because there was no reliable  evidence  to
    substantiate his claim.

 4. Certain documents were looked at by the First-tier  Tribunal  but  they
    were regarded  as  unreliable  or  unimpressive,  particularly  because
    alleged wage slips did not show national insurance  contributions  even
    though supporting or  allegedly  supporting  documents  suggested  they
    should have done because national insurance was being paid.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge clearly read the evidence  carefully  and
    found nothing to justify the claim of  long  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom, nothing that would have led to  the  claim  being  allowed  on
    Article 8 grounds in accordance with the Rules and nothing  that  would
    have  made  it  appropriate  to  allow  the  appeal  exceptionally   on
    jurisprudential reasons rather than with  regard  to  the  Rules.   For
    example, this is not a case where the appellant is alleged  to  have  a
    wife, still less a wife that could not go to Pakistan or minor children
    who would benefit from a close relationship with him.

 6. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal really do not identify  any
    properly arguable  error  of  law.   They  complain  about  weight  and
    emphasis but are not impressive.

 7. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier  Tribunal.   It  was
    granted by an Upper Tribunal Judge but it is quite clear that the Upper
    Tribunal Judge did not intend to give permission because he  said  "the
    proposed grounds carry no realistic prospect  of  success  and  do  not
    qualify for debate."  Somehow permission was given. I can  only  assume
    that was a simple slip  of  the  pen  which  should  really  have  been
    corrected under the slip rule.

 8. With the help of Mr Bramble I have gone through the papers and  I  find
    nothing that suggests any material error on the part of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge and I dismiss the appeal that is before me.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 21 October 2014                |




