
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27370/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12th May 2016                          |On 3rd October 2016               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                          miss Manpreet Kaur Butter
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Jafferji (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge P J Holmes, promulgated on 2nd March 2015, following a hearing at
    Stoke-on-Trent on 4th February 2015.  In the determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of Manpreet Kaur Butter, whereupon the Secretary  of
    State subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of India, who was born on 16th May
    1990.  She entered the UK on 9th September 2009 with entry clearance as
    a Tier 4 (General) Student valid until November 2011.  She had  further
    grants of leave in the same category.  Subsequent grants of leave  were
    eventually curtailed on 28th June 2013, but on 2nd September 2013,  the
    Appellant married at Cheltenham, a Czech citizen, by  the  name  of  Mr
    Robert Gabco, and by an application made on 10th  September  2013,  she
    applied for a residence card as a spouse of an EEA national  exercising
    treaty rights in the UK.

 3. By a decision dated 19th June 2014, the Respondent,  the  Secretary  of
    State,  notified  the  Appellant  that,  upon  consideration   of   the
    application under the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006,  and  with
    particular reference to Regulation 2, the application for  a  residence
    card  was  refused  because  there  were  "a  significant   number   of
    discrepancies, inconsistencies, irregularities, and  issues"  when  the
    Appellant and her EEA national husband were  interviewed  on  3rd  June
    2014, thereby leading to the conclusion that the  Appellant's  marriage
    was one of convenience, and not  a  genuine  marriage.   The  Appellant
    issued a Notice of Appeal on 1st July 2014 against that decision.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge considered the appeal under Regulation 26 of  the  said  2006
    Regulations.   He  had  regard  to  Regulation  6(1)  which  defines  a
    qualified person as a person who is  an  EEA  national  and  is  (a)  a
    jobseeker, (b) a worker,  (c)  a  self-employed  person,  (d)  a  self-
    sufficient person, or (e) a student.  He  considered  Regulation  14(1)
    which provides that a qualified person is entitled to reside in the  UK
    for so long as he remains a qualified person.  The judge then  went  on
    to have regard to the definition of a marriage of convenience  and  the
    determination in Papajorgji [2012] UKUT 00038, where the Tribunal  said
    that, "a marriage entered into without  the  intention  of  matrimonial
    cohabitation and for the primary purpose of securing admission  to  the
    country" is a marriage of convenience.

 5. It is a feature of this appeal that the Appellant contended  that  most
    of the contents regarding the interview in "the  reasons  for  refusal"
    letter do not match with  what  the  Appellant  or  the  Sponsor  said.
    Indeed some of the answers written were not what they had replied  (see
    paragraph  11  of  the  determination).   Accordingly,  access  to  the
    transcript of the interview became the critical feature of this appeal,
    especially when none was forthcoming, despite repeated directions given
    by the Tribunal to this effect.  There was first a direction dated  1st
    August 2014 addressed to both parties, and for a hearing  date  of  3rd
    October 2014.  The Respondent did not comply with the directions and no
    interview transcript was produced.

 6. The Appellant's solicitors wrote a letter on 19th September 2014.   Ten
    days later, with the transcript  still  not  having  been  served,  the
    Appellant's solicitors wrote again.  There was then a  direction  given
    by Designated Judge Coates, who adjourned the hearing to  20th  October
    2014 and directed that the Respondent file  and  serve  the  transcript
    within seven days.

 7. Judge Holmes' determination  records  that,  "the  notice  giving  this
    direction was delivered by hand to the Presenting Officers' Unit on 1st
    October 2014" (13).  On 15th October, however, the Tribunal received  a
    further letter from the Appellant's  solicitors  complaining  that  the
    transcript  still  had  not  been  served.   Designated  Judge   Coates
    adjourned the appeal hearing to 4th February 2014 and he  repeated  the
    direction.  He further added  that,  "the  Respondent  is  directed  to
    explain in writing within seven days why my previous direction was  not
    complied with" (paragraph 14).

 8. On 28th January 2015, the Tribunal received yet another letter from the
    Appellant's solicitors complaining that the transcript  still  had  not
    been served.  The file was then referred to  the  Resident  Judge,  who
    refused an adjournment but directed  that,  "unless  the  Secretary  of
    State provides a transcript of the hearing of  the  marriage  interview
    before the hearing, she is precluded from relying on  evidence  of  the
    interview" (paragraph 15).

 9. At the hearing before Judge Holmes on 4th February 2015 the  Presenting
    Officer, Miss Griffiths, "confirmed that she had the transcript on  her
    file,  and  sought  permission   to   rely   upon   it   as   evidence,
    notwithstanding     the      Respondent's      non-compliance      with
    directions"(paragraph 16).  She went on to explain that she had,

         "been informed  that  an  unsuccessful  attempt  was  made  by  the
         Respondent  in  October  2014  to  serve  the  transcript  on   the
         Appellant's solicitors by fax and email, but she was otherwise  not
         able to explain to me why the transcript had not  been  served,  or
         filed with the Tribunal, and the notices giving directions to which
         I have referred ..." (paragraph 16).

    Naturally, Mr Jafferji, who appears again as Counsel  in  this  appeal,
    opposed that application to rely upon the interview transcript now.

10. The judge went on to conclude that,

         "The refusal in this case was based entirely upon the view that the
         Respondent  took  of   the   marriage   interviews.    No   further
         considerations are mentioned in the reasons  for  refusal,  neither
         have any been raised in this appeal" (paragraph 18).

    Since the judge did not allow for the interview transcript  to  now  be
    admitted  in  evidence  by  the  Respondent,   upon   Miss   Griffiths'
    application, there was nothing left upon which  to  base  the  refusal.
    Indeed, the judge held that,

         "The discussion  of  the  marriage  interviews,  contained  in  the
         reasons for refusal letter, does  not  purport  to  be  a  complete
         record of what was asked or what was said in  answer,  and  I  find
         that I cannot treat it as an impartial summary" (paragraph 19).

11. The judge went on to hold that he was  satisfied  "on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that the Appellant and  the  EEA  national  are  lawfully
    married" (paragraph 21).  He ended with the words that, "it is  not  in
    dispute in this appeal, that the EEA national was at the  date  of  the
    Respondent's decision and remains a qualified person" (paragraph 22).

12. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

13. The grounds of application state that, since no concessions  were  made
    whatsoever in the reasons  for  refusal  letter,  it  was  insufficient
    before the judge simply to accept that the  Sponsor  was  a  "qualified
    person", and that the correct course of action was for the Secretary of
    State to allow the appeal only to the extent that it is  remitted  back
    to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  consideration  of  the  outstanding
    requirements.

14. On 14th May 2015, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

15. At the hearing before me on 12th  May  2016,  Mr  Mills,  appearing  as
    Senior Home Office Presenting  Officer  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State, stated that, even if the  judge  had  proceeded  to
    reject Miss Griffiths' application below to have admitted  in  evidence
    the interview transcripts, that did not mean that the appeal  stood  to
    be allowed outright, because the Secretary of State  still  had  to  be
    satisfied about the other remaining issues, the principle one of  which
    here, was whether  the  Sponsor  was  a  qualified  person.   Mr  Mills
    explained that, in  the  nature  of  the  refusals  undertaken  by  the
    Secretary of State, if a refusal can be  made  on  a  particular  point
    (which may be deemed at the time to be the best point), then no further
    consideration is given to any other matters in the application.

16. In this case, the refusal could be made on the basis that  this  was  a
    marriage of convenience, and the Secretary of State did not then go  on
    to consider whether Mr Robert Gabco, the Czech citizen, was a qualified
    person.  That did not mean to say  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    accepted that Mr Robert Gabco was in the UK exercising  treaty  rights.
    That was still a matter that remained outstanding.   It  was  certainly
    not the case that, "it is not in dispute in this appeal, that  the  EEA
    national was at the date of the Respondent's  decision  and  remains  a
    qualified person" (paragraph 22) because Miss  Griffiths  had  made  no
    such concession before Judge Holmes.

17. In this case, although there were some bank statements  going  back  to
    2013, there was nothing to show  that  Mr  Robert  Gabco  was  actually
    employed in the manner  to  satisfy  the  treaty  requirements  at  the
    relevant date.  The burden of  proof  was  on  the  Appellant  in  this
    respect.  He asked that I set aside the decision to the extent that the
    outstanding issues have to be investigated by the Secretary  of  State,
    and if she is so satisfied, then she may allow the application, but  it
    was not open to the Tribunal Judge to allow the appeal outright.

18. For  his  part,  Mr  Jafferji  submitted  that  if  one  looks  at  the
    application form in the Respondent's bundle (at page 16, section 6) the
    details given by the Appellant are that her  sponsoring  husband  works
    for "The Best Connection" at 630 Warwick Road.   The  start  dates  are
    given.  The nature of the job is specified as "ongoing temporary".  The
    date of the expiry of the contract for his job is given.  The judge was
    not oblivious to this.  At paragraph 7 of his determination he makes it
    clear that he is aware of this.  The background is known to  the  judge
    (see paragraphs 12 to 15).  Moreover,  no  issue  was  raised  by  Miss
    Griffiths below that the Appellant was  not  a  qualified  person.   In
    fact, at paragraph 18 of  the  determination,  it  is  clear  that  the
    refusal was based entirely on the issue of a sham marriage.  The  judge
    himself put to himself the question as to whether, at the date  of  the
    hearing, the Appellant's husband was a qualified person (paragraph 22),
    and concluded that he was.  The Grounds of Appeal by the Respondent are
    predicated on the judge not having considered the issues when the judge
    in fact did do so.

19. In reply, Mr Mills submitted that if there is one single fatal flaw  in
    the application, then  that  is  what  the  Secretary  of  State  would
    initially proceed upon, and reject the application on that basis.  That
    did not mean to say that the Secretary  of  State  had  conceded  every
    other issue.  In this case the Secretary of State had  focused  on  the
    fact that this was a sham marriage.  The assessment was based upon  the
    interview.  The transcript of the interview was ready for handing up to
    the Tribunal by Miss Griffiths.

20. In this case, the latest directions given by the  Resident  Judge  (see
    paragraph 15) were that the  Secretary  of  State  was  to  provide  an
    explanation for non-compliance with  the  previous  directions.   There
    was, indeed, an  explanation  here.   This  was  that  when  the  first
    direction was given by  Designated  Judge  Coates,  who  adjourned  the
    hearing to 20th October 2014, and directed that the Respondent file and
    serve the transcript within seven days, this "direction  was  delivered
    by  hand  to  the  Presenting  Officers'  Unit  on  1st  October  2014"
    (paragraph 13).  Thereafter, because of the manner in which it had been
    delivered by hand, it had gone astray.

21. Mr Mills submitted that, he could certainly say that his file  did  not
    contain a copy of the directions.  It had taken a while  to  bring  the
    matter back on track.  This was eventually done before Judge Holmes and
    Miss Griffiths "confirmed that she had the transcript on her and sought
    permission to rely upon it as  evidence"  (paragraph  16).   The  judge
    refused.  Whether or not that was right, it was not open to  the  judge
    to allow the appeal outright thereafter.  He should only  have  allowed
    it to the extent that the "marriage of convenience" point has not  been
    proved by the Secretary of State.  The matter  should  then  have  been
    remitted back to the Secretary of State for consideration  of  all  the
    circumstances before deciding whether to allow the application  of  the
    Appellant.

22. There was, indeed, on the facts of this case, plenty for the  Secretary
    of State to have been  concerned  about.   For  example,  although  the
    application states (at section 6) that the Sponsor,  Mr  Robert  Gabco,
    had employment, this was in September 2013, which was well over a  year
    before the application was made, and this does not demonstrate that the
    Sponsor was exercising treaty rights.

23. To say, therefore, that this was not in  dispute,  goes  too  far.   In
    fact, a letter (see page 41 of  the  Appellant's  bundle)  demonstrates
    that the agency where the Sponsor was employed, had concerns about him,
    six months earlier, because of his failure to answer emails,  and  they
    were stating that they were going to refuse to pay him.   Even  if  the
    Presenting Officer was not raising this as an issue before  the  judge,
    it was there in the documentation for the judge to  consider,  and  the
    appeal should not have been allowed without a proper  consideration  of
    this vital aspect of an application based upon an EEA claim.

24. Mr Jafferji intervened to say  that  the  bundle  that  was  now  being
    referred to was not before the judge.  The employment that the  Sponsor
    was engaged in was continuing.  The reason why Judge Holmes refused  to
    accept the transcript submitted by Miss Griffiths was because she could
    offer no explanation as to non-compliance with earlier directions,  and
    the latest direction by the Resident Judge  was  to  the  effect  that,
    without a proper explanation, the  marriage  interview  is  not  to  be
    tendered in evidence.  All  Mr  Holmes  was  doing  was  upholding  the
    directions given.

Error of Law

25. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

26. First, there were, according to  the  refusal  letter,  "a  significant
    number of discrepancies,  inconsistencies,  irregularities  and  issues
    concerning the credibility of both your accounts" when the refusal  was
    made with respect to  what  unfolded  during  the  marriage  interview.
    Importantly, the refusal letter gives instances of this.  The  Sponsor,
    Mr Robert Gabco, stated  that  he  entered  the  UK  in  2006  but  the
    Appellant, stated that she did not know but thought  it  was  in  2010.
    The Sponsor, Mr Robert Gabco, stated that the Appellant entered the  UK
    on 9th September 2013, but this was difficult to follow given that  the
    Appellant and her husband met and were married before this date.

27. The Appellant said that she got on well with her husband's  mother  and
    visited twice every month and last saw  her  husband's  mother  at  the
    beginning of May 2014.  However, the sponsoring husband stated that she
    had never visited his mother's house.  The Appellant  stated  that  she
    got divorced from her previous husband  in  May  2013,  a  month  after
    meeting her husband, and at this time he had already proposed  to  her.
    Yet, her husband stated that she had been divorced  from  her  previous
    husband before you both met.  This last discrepancy is  indeed  a  most
    significant one.  For a partner to a marriage not to know  whether  his
    or her spouse had already been divorced, when that was not the case, is
    startling indeed.  There is  no  reference  to  these  matters  in  the
    determination whatsoever.  There is no indication that  an  explanation
    was sought from either the Sponsor or the  Appellant  with  respect  to
    these matters, particularly since they alleged that the contents of the
    refusal letter do not match what actually happened.

28. Second, an explanation was available for why  the  directions  had  not
    been complied with.  It may not have been a very good explanation.   It
    may  have  been   indicative   of   administrative   inefficiency   and
    shortcomings.  Nevertheless, it was an explanation, and did  provide  a
    background to why there  had  been  such  delay  before  the  interview
    transcript had been produced.  At the hearing, it  was  available,  and
    Miss Griffiths was in a position to hand it up for  consideration,  and
    the matter could have been adjourned either for an hour  or  so  during
    the course  of  the  day,  or  the  appeal  adjourned  to  another  day
    altogether, but it was in the circumstances, not in accordance with the
    overriding principle to have  refused  consideration  altogether  of  a
    vital piece of evidence that went to the core  issue  in  this  appeal,
    namely, whether or not the marriage of the Appellant  and  the  Sponsor
    was a marriage of convenience.

29. Third, and most importantly, it was not  open  to  the  judge  to  have
    allowed the appeal outright given that what was under consideration was
    compliance with the EEA Regulations between the marriage of  a  non-EEA
    national and an EEA national, where a  refusal  letter  had  thrown  up
    issues that needed further investigation.

Remaking the Decision

30. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal to the extent  that  it  is  remitted
    back to the Secretary of State for a  consideration  of  all  remaining
    outstanding issues, and in particular whether the  Sponsor,  Mr  Robert
    Gabco, was in the UK exercising treaty rights, as  this  was  a  matter
    that was never conceded by the Respondent Secretary of State.

Notice of Decision

31. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    remitted back to the Secretary of State for a reconsideration  for  the
    outstanding issues.

32. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 30th September 2016
