
[pic]
IAC-AH-pc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27907/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th August 2015                  |On 9th September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON
                          upper tribunal judge gray


                                   Between

                             Kamrul Hassan Sumon
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop, Counsel instructed by Malik Law
                    Chambers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of  Bangladesh  born  on  2nd  February
    1985.  The Appellant's immigration history is that he first entered the
    UK on 27th September 2006 with leave  to  enter  as  a  student  until,
    eventually, 30th November 2008.  Subsequently the Appellant was granted
    leave to remain as a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant  until  14th
    October 2010.  The Appellant then applied for further leave  to  remain
    as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant which application  was  refused  on  22nd
    December 2010.  Following judicial review proceedings, the  application
    was reconsidered but again refused on 16th June 2014  for  the  reasons
    give in a Refusal Letter of that date.   The  Appellant  appealed  that
    decision, and his appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    S Walker (the Judge) sitting at Taylor House on 8th January  2015.   He
    decided to dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules and on  human
    rights grounds for the reasons given in his Decision dated 17th January
    2015.  The Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and on  17th
    March 2015 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. We must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The case has a long history.  The application for leave to remain  made
    on 12th October 2010 was originally refused on 22nd December 2010.  The
    Appellant appealed that decision but that appeal was dismissed  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal and leave to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    refused.  The Appellant sought a  Judicial  Review  of  that  decision,
    which application was resolved by consent at a hearing  on  17th  April
    2012 when it was ordered that the original refusal decision be  quashed
    and that the application be reconsidered.  Apparently it  was  part  of
    that order  that  the  Respondent  consider  the  factors  set  out  in
    paragraph 395C of HC 395 and such consideration appears at the foot  of
    page 6 of the refusal decision of  16th  June  2014  although  by  then
    paragraph 395C had been  removed  from  the  Immigration  Rules  to  be
    replaced by paragraph 353B.

 4. The refusal  decision  was  initially  made  under  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 322(2) of HC 395 on the basis that the Appellant had  used  a
    false document as part of  his  application.   The  Judge  upheld  that
    decision and dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules for  that
    reason.  That decision has not been impugned in this appeal.  The Judge
    then considered the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights.  It was conceded
    by the Appellant's representative that the Appellant had no family life
    in the UK,  and  therefore  the  Judge  was  only  concerned  with  the
    Appellant's private life.  The Judge followed the format given  in  the
    decision in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.  He  was  satisfied  that
    the Appellant had a private life in the UK which  would  be  interfered
    with by the Respondent's decision to such a degree  of  gravity  as  to
    engage the Appellant's Article 8 rights.  However, the Judge found such
    interference to be proportionate.

 5. At the hearing, Mr Balroop submitted that the Judge had erred in law in
    coming to that conclusion.  Mr  Balroop  referred  to  the  grounds  of
    application and argued that the Judge had erred in law  by  failing  to
    consider if the Respondent had exercised  her  discretion  properly  in
    accordance with paragraph 395C.  This was a material error.  There  had
    been some consideration of the relevant factors at paragraph 28 of  the
    Decision, but not all of those  factors  had  been  considered  in  the
    round.

 6. In response, Ms Savage referred to the Rule 24 response and argued that
    any such error of law was not material.  The Judge  made  his  decision
    upon findings of fact which had not been  challenged  in  this  appeal.
    Most of the factors mentioned in paragraph 395C were dealt with by  the
    Judge, and if he had considered them all, his decision would have  been
    the same.

 7. We find no material error of law in the decision  of  the  Judge.   The
    Judge carried out the Article 8 ECHR assessment in the proper  way  and
    demonstrated that he had carried out the balancing  exercise  necessary
    for any assessment of proportionality.  The Judge carried out a careful
    and detailed analysis  of  the  relevant  evidence,  particularly  that
    relating to the extent and nature of the Appellant's  private  life  in
    the UK.  The Judge  attached  the  appropriate  weight  to  the  public
    interest, and for the reasons which the Judge explained  at  length  at
    paragraphs 26 to 29 inclusive of the Decision, found that  such  public
    interest outweighed those factors in favour of the Appellant.  This was
    a decision open to the Judge on the evidence before him.

 8. It is not clear whether any decision to remove under Section 10 of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 was made, but it seems to be  the  case
    that the Respondent agreed to carry out a paragraph 395C  consideration
    and this appears in the refusal decision.  That part  of  the  decision
    was not specifically dealt with by the Judge in his  Decision,  but  if
    that was an error of law, then we find it not to be material.   Looking
    at the factors listed in paragraph 395C, they are all referred  to  and
    dealt with by the Judge in his  Decision  with  the  exception  of  any
    criminal record of the Appellant.  As the  Appellant  has  no  criminal
    record, this was not a relevant factor.  In our view it follows that if
    the Judge found the decision of the Respondent to be proportionate,  it
    follows that the Judge did not disagree with the Respondent's  exercise
    of her discretion under paragraph 395C.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on a point of law.

We do not set aside the decision, and the appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction and we  find  no
reason to do so.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
