
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27647/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th January 2015                          |On 28th January 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                       Miss Olubukola Ibukun Ogunluyi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Miss L Kenny (HOPO)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Griffith, promulgated on 29th October 2014, following  a  hearing
    at Taylor House on 20th October 2014.  In the determination, the  judge
    allowed the appeal of Miss Olubukola Ibukun Ogunluyi.   The  Respondent
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Nigeria, who was born  on  11th
    October 1981.  She has one child, a daughter referred to as E, who  was
    born on 24th March 2009.  She appealed  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 19th June 2014 refusing her application to  remain  in
    the UK under Article 8 ECHR.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she has  lived  continuously  in  the  UK
    since arriving here as a child born in the UK who has not lived outside
    the UK.  She claims to have no home to return  to  in  Nigeria  and  no
    finances.  The Appellant, however, has been an overstayer and  this  is
    acknowledged in her application.  Her claim is that she has been in the
    UK since 1998, but the documentary evidence shows  that  she  has  been
    here since November 2000.  The documentary evidence is in the  form  of
    an NHS medical card and her bank statements.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed that the refusal letter of 19th  June  2014  accepts
    that the Appellant can only be taken to have been in the UK since  24th
    March 2009, when her daughter E was born in the UK, but that  otherwise
    there is no means of determining when she arrived in this country.  The
    judge held that the documentary evidence shows the  Appellant  to  have
    been in the UK in November 2000.  The judge heard  that  the  Appellant
    maintained consistently that she arrived in the UK illegally  in  1998,
    and has been living with her sister and brother-in-law since  1999,  as
    part of their household.

 5. The judge, held that the "Appellant has been telling  the  truth  about
    the date she entered the UK and I find that she did so as  claimed,  on
    30th January 1998, aged 16 and has been in the UK for  sixteen  years."
    The Appellant had now reached the age of 33 years.  The judge held that
    she,

         "has therefore lived a little over half her life in the UK.   I  am
         also satisfied that she and her daughter will have formed a  strong
         bond with her family in the UK and that her relationship  with  her
         sister goes beyond the usual emotional ties between adult  siblings
         in light of the level of dependency" (paragraph 37).

 6. The judge had regard  to  the  latest  requirements  of  the  Rules  in
    paragraph 276ADE and that the amended Rules in July now refer to  "very
    significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into  the  country
    to which she would have to  go  if  required  to  leave  the  UK"  (see
    paragraph 38).  The Appellant, according to  the  judge,  was  still  a
    minor when she came to the UK, and her late teenage years and adulthood
    has been spent in the UK.

 7. The judge found that, "she has now spent just over half her life in the
    United Kingdom, which is a significant amount of time, during which she
    will have built up a private life.  I do  not  know  if  the  Appellant
    speaks any of the languages spoken in Nigeria, but her only  connection
    to the country is her mother ..." (paragraph 41).

 8. Thereafter, regard was had by the judge to the case  of  Ogundimu,  and
    the relevant question of integration or the ability of a person who  is
    removed to settle again in his or her  own  country.   The  judge  held
    that,

         "any tie the Appellant has to  Nigeria  through  her  mother  after
         sixteen years of absence therefore significantly diminished  and  I
         am satisfied that the Appellant has no meaningful ties with Nigeria
         to assist her with reintegrating after spending half of her life in
         the  UK,  such  that  she  meets  the  requirements  of   paragraph
         276ADE(vi)" (paragraph 42).

    The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that the judge was wrong to allow  the
    appeal under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE.

10. On 9th December 2014, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 19th January 2015, Miss Kenny, appearing on
    behalf of the Respondent, relied upon the Grounds of Appeal.  She  made
    the following submissions.  First, the evidence that the Appellant  had
    been continuously living in the UK was flawed given that she had sought
    entry clearance in Nigeria in 2006, which was refused, and the Tribunal
    has not made any findings in this respect.

12. Second, even if the Appellant has resided continuously  in  the  UK  as
    claimed, her length of residence is virtually the same in Nigeria as it
    is in the UK, and therefore it cannot be said that she has  spent  over
    half her life here.  Third, the judge erred in  concluding  that  there
    were very significant obstacles to her integration in Nigeria.  She had
    spent her first sixteen years of life there,  and  almost  all  of  her
    youth, and all of her  formative  years,  taking  education,  having  a
    family there, and speaking the language there.

13. Finally, the judge failed to have regard to the fact that the Appellant
    has not had lawful stay in the UK and has overstayed and that  the  law
    requires that little weight should be given to any private life she has
    established in the UK in accordance with the Immigration Act 2014.

14. For her part, Ms Reid, appearing on behalf of the Appellant relied upon
    her Rule 24 response, which was detailed and extensive.  She  submitted
    that this was nothing more than an attempt to re-argue the case in  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The two main points that are being  relied  upon  are,
    firstly, that the length of residence in the  UK  is  the  same  as  in
    Nigeria.

15. Secondly, that the balancing exercise in proportionality has  not  been
    properly performed by the judge.  However, this is incorrect.  First if
    one takes the length of residence in the UK, the  suggestion  that  the
    Appellant  was  out  of  the  country  and  made  an  entry   clearance
    application in 2006 was baseless.  What has happened here is  that  the
    Appellant's name has been confused with somebody else.   The  Appellant
    was specifically cross-examined on this  (see  paragraph  21)  and  she
    replied that "the 2011 application was the first  application  she  had
    made to the Respondent".  Therefore, this  means  that  the  judge  was
    aware of all the  facts.   The  judge  then  made  findings.   She  was
    entitled to do so.   Second,  the  Appellant  could  produce  her  bank
    statements for the last seven years, taking her back to November  2000,
    and there was also an NHS card going to March 2001 (see paragraph 36 of
    the determination).  The Appellant's evidence in this respect had  been
    consistent.  This is why the judge concluded that, "I  am  prepared  to
    accept that the Appellant has been telling the truth about the date she
    entered the UK ..." (paragraph 37).

16. Third, the judge did  give  proper  regard  to  paragraph  276ADE,  and
    expressly said that she would refer to the changed wording of the Rules
    in July.  But the judge found that the Appellant came to  the  UK  aged
    16, was now aged 33, and had spent over half her life  here,  and  that
    she was not on good terms with her mother, not  having  returned  since
    then.  The decision was entirely open to the judge.  There was no error
    of law.  The decision was allowed under paragraph 276ADE(vi) and  there
    is no reference here to the "public interest" in the way that there  is
    in the Immigration Act 2014 at Section 117B.  If the judge allowed  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules, it was unnecessary for the judge to
    go to Section 117B in the 2014 Act.  This  is  despite  the  fact  that
    submissions by both parties were made to the judge on the hearing  date
    on Section 117B.

17. In reply, Miss Kenny submitted that paragraph 276ADE does not say  that
    living in the UK for half your life entitles  you  to  remain  in  this
    country.  Instead, it speaks about  one's  "ties"  to  the  country  of
    origin.  The Appellant had spent the first sixteen years of her life in
    Nigeria, had been there during her formative years, and must still have
    remembered the language there, such as to be  able  to  reintegrate  in
    that county.  The judge's conclusions in this respect were flawed.

No Error of Law

18. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the  judge  does  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007).  My reasons are as follows.

19. First, it was open to the judge to conclude that the Appellant had been
    in the UK since November 2000 (see paragraph 36).  The allegation  that
    the Appellant had made an entry clearance application from  Nigeria  in
    2006 was not properly made out.  The Appellant  was  cross-examined  on
    this issue (see paragraph 21) and she confirmed that the application in
    2011 was the first she had made.  The judge was entitled to accept this
    in the face of the absence of any stronger  evidence.   The  reasonable
    conclusion to draw is that the Appellant's name had been mixed up  with
    somebody else.  The judge accepted that the Appellant had been  in  the
    UK since 2000.

20. Second, the judge is not incorrect in saying  that  the  Appellant  has
    spent half her life in the UK and more.  She concluded that she came to
    the UK aged 16 and was now 33 years of age.

21. Third, under paragraph 276ADE, it was open to the  judge  to  conclude,
    that if the Appellant had not returned back to Nigeria  over  the  last
    sixteen years, then she had lost her ties  to  that  country.   As  she
    reasoned, the Appellant's ties to Nigeria were through her  mother  and
    that  "after  sixteen  years  of  absence"  these  had   "significantly
    diminished and I am satisfied that the Appellant has no meaningful ties
    with Nigeria to assist her with  re-integrating  ..."  (paragraph  42).
    That was a finding that was open to the judge.

22. Finally,  the  judge  was  entitled  to  find  that,  "the  Appellant's
    evidence, which has been consistent is  that  she  arrived  in  the  UK
    illegally in 1998 and that she has been  living  with  her  sister  and
    brother-in-law since 1999 as part of their household" (paragraph 36).

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 28th January 2015




