
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27090/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 September 2013                          |On 30 September 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MANTUS POLIUS

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss K Heath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant (hereafter  the  Secretary  of  State  or  SSHD)  appeals
    against a determination by a First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  panel  (Judge
    Wooley  and  Mr  R  Baines)  allowing  the  appeal  by  the  respondent
    (hereafter the claimant) against a decision to make a deportation order
    against him pursuant to Regulation  21  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations  2006  on  the  ground  that  his  continued
    presence was contrary to public policy.

2.   At the hearing the claimant was not represented.  I  explained  to  him
    that my initial task was confined to deciding whether the FtT panel had
    erred in law, not to decide whether I  would  have  made  the  same  or
    different decision.

3.   By reference to the written grounds, Miss Heath submitted firstly  that
    the FtT panel had made unsustainable findings regarding the  claimant's
    relationship with his girlfriend.  She pointed our that the  uncle  had
    said that the claimant's relationship with his girlfriend had ended and
    she had not attended the hearing.  Ms Heath submitted  secondly that it
    was unreasonable  of the panel to have assessed the claimant as at  low
    risk of reoffending.

4.   I find these grounds unmeritorius. As regards  the  first  ground,  the
    panel heard evidence from the claimant and his uncle, the  latter  whom
    it found to be an impressive witness. It had  regard  to  the  evidence
    about the history of the relationship between  the  claimant  and   his
    girlfriend and the fact that they had had  a  child  born  in  February
    2011.

5.   Contrary to what is suggested in the  grounds,  the  evidence   of  the
    uncle was not that the couple's  relationship  had  ended  permanently,
    only that it was "over for now with the appellant being in prison"  and
    the uncle expressly said he believed the relationship  would  still  be
    there when the claimant was released.  The  panel  also  addressed  the
    matter of the girlfriend not visiting him in prison  or  attending  the
    hearing. It also analysed the correspondence between the couple.  In my
    judgment these were findings of fact which were  eminently  within  the
    compass of the panel as a fact-finding tribunal and are free  of  legal
    error.

6.   As regards the challenge to the panel's assessment  of  the  claimant's
    low risk of reoffending, it is clear that the appeal took into  account
    the severity and speed at which the claimant offended after arrival  in
    the UK and his failure to attend a bail hearing.   Its  assessment  was
    plainly based squarely on the evidence before  it  including  the  pre-
    sentence report, the judge's sentencing remarks and the evidence of the
    uncle and the appellant  himself.

7.   As the panel rightly noted, the claimant could only  be  deported  from
    the UK  if  such   measure  met  the  criteria  set  out  in  the  2006
    Regulations.  He is an  EU  national,  not  a  third-country  national.
    Paras 25-16 contain a well reasoned assessment setting out why it could
    not be said that claimant represented a  present  threat  or  that  the
    deportation decision would be proportionate.



8.   For the above reasons, the determination of the FtT panel was  free  of
    legal error and accordingly it shall stand.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey


