
[pic]
IAC-RH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27281/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 November 2015 and 7 January 2016|On 28 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

                                hanna horzov
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
                    (For the hearing on 5 November 2015)
For the Appellant:     Ms K McCarthy of Counsel instructed by Sterling &
                    Law Associates LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                    (For the hearing on 7 January 2016)
For the Appellant:     Ms S Praidoody of Counsel instructed by Visa Direct
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant, a citizen of  Ukraine,  born  on  6
    February  1947  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Shepherd who, sitting at  Taylor  House  on  5  March  2015  and  in  a
    determination promulgated on 15 April 2015 dismissed her appeal against
    the decision of the Respondent dated 12 June 2014 to refuse to vary her
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom and  to  remove  her  by  way  of
    directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006.

2.   The brief immigration history of the Appellant is that she  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom on 19 October 2013 having travelled on a visit  visa
    valid to 28 February 2014  and  made  her  current  application  on  27
    February 2014.  Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Kelly on 16 June 2015 who considered it arguable that  the  Judge
    fell into legal error by failing  to  consider  whether  the  Appellant
    would meet the requirements of entry clearance as  an  adult  dependent
    relative under Section EC-DR of Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules
    and, if so, whether  it  would  be  appropriate  and  proportionate  to
    require her to return to her country of origin in order to make such an
    application (paragraph 87 of the decision).  In that regard  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kelly referred  to  Chikwamba  [2008]  UKHL  40  and  MA
    (Pakistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 953.  Regrettably, without more,  the  Judge
    considered that whilst the other grounds were  "less  persuasive"  they
    were also arguable.  With respect to the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  I
    consider in that latter regard that it is regrettable that  no  further
    explanation for so doing was provided.

3.   In her Rule 24 response dated 28 June 2015 the Respondent had  this  to
    say:

         "It is clear from paragraph 66 onwards, the Judge was not convinced
         that the Appellant would be alone on  return  to  Ukraine  and  the
         evidence as between the witnesses and between  the  oral  testimony
         and that stated in witness statements  differed  in  that  respect.
         The Judge heard evidence that the Appellant's son used to live very
         near to her in Ukraine as did the aunt/sister.  It led the Judge to
         conclude at paragraph 71 'this was such a  fundamental  discrepancy
         in the evidence of the two that it undermines  to  a  large  extent
         what is said about the Appellant having no one in Ukraine  to  turn
         to'.

         The  Judge  heard  the  evidence  of  all  the  witnesses,  it  was
         contradictory and undermined their  own  case  that  the  Appellant
         would be alone on return.  There  was  no  mistake  of  fact.   The
         account was an exaggerated one and the Judge was entitled  to  find
         that it would not be disproportionate for the Appellant  to  return
         home.

         It has been argued that the  Judge  and  the  SSHD  were  wrong  in
         failing to address the relevant immigration rule  and  then  should
         have addressed the Chikwamba point.  This  ground  is  misconceived
         for two reasons.  Firstly, the application made  by  the  Appellant
         was an 'outside the Rules' application (FLR(O)), there was thus  no
         duty on the SSHD or the Judge to address whether the refusal was in
         accordance with the immigration rules.  Secondly, in so far as  the
         adult dependent relative (ADR) rule  was  relevant,  the  Appellant
         clearly fails to meet it because on the Judge's findings she  would
         not be alone on return, and she would have someone to care for her,
         and furthermore taking the case at the highest the UK Sponsor could
         employ a full-time live in carer in Ukraine, especially  given  the
         financial means at the Sponsor's  disposal  for  the  care  of  her
         mother.  The Appellant  did  not  therefore  meet  the  substantive
         requirements of the ADR rule save for entry clearance, she did  not
         meet the substantive or the procedural provision of the said  rule.
         The Chikwamba principle has no application to this case."

4.   The grounds further contended that consideration of Article  8  outside
    "the letter of Appendix FM" was required in that the  Appellant  had  a
    "meaningful private and family life that engaged Article  8".   It  was
    said that the Appellant enjoyed a particularly close  relationship  due
    to her dependency on her daughter.  The Appellant was an elderly  woman
    and a widow.  She had a health condition and was fearful of dying alone
    as her husband did.  Neither of her children lived in Ukraine.

5.   Notwithstanding the above, it was said  that  the  Tribunal  failed  to
    consider whether (the Appellant had) a private life with her  daughter,
    son-in-law,  grandchildren  and  their  network  of  friends.   It  was
    contended that the Tribunal materially  erred  in  law  by  stating  at
    paragraph 87 that it was open to the Appellant to apply  for  UK  entry
    clearance from outside the UK.  In that regard reference was made to  R
    (on the application  of  Chen)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -   temporary   separation   -
    proportionality) 1JR [2015] UKUT 189 (IAC).

6.   The grounds also argued that the Tribunal failed to adequately  provide
    reasons as to why the Appellant could  not  bring  herself  within  the
    provisions of 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

7.   The hearing on 5 November 2015 was  presided  over  by  myself  and  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Wikeley.  At that hearing Ms McCarthy then for the
    Appellant, informed me that this was an application made under the  old
    Rules that were changed in July 2012 and were now to be found  in  ECDR
    of Appendix  FM.   That  changed  the  test  for  entry  clearance  for
    dependent relatives.  The new test at 2.4  and  2.5  were  requirements
    that the Appellant could clearly meet.  It would be as  well  therefore
    to set out those provisions below:

         "E-ECDR.2.4. The applicant or, if the applicant and  their  partner
         are the Sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner,
         must as a result of age, illness or  disability  require  long-term
         personal care to perform everyday tasks.

         E-ECDR.2.5. The applicant, or if the applicant  and  their  partner
         are the Sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner,
         must be unable, even with the practical and financial help  of  the
         Sponsor, to obtain the required level of care in the country  where
         they are living, because -

         (a)  it is not available and there is no person in that country who
             can reasonably provide it; or

         (b)  it is not affordable."

8.   Ms McCarthy continued that  unfortunately,  the  application  was  made
    under the old Rules and refused because they no longer applied and  the
    new test was not looked at and the refusal letter went straight on to a
    consideration of Article  8  outside  the  Rules  and  the  appeal  had
    proceeded on the same basis, so that there was an acceptance of the old
    Rule that did not apply. The new test was not set out anywhere  in  the
    determination, indeed the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  gone  straight
    into a consideration of Article 8.  Ms McCarthy  contended  that  there
    should have been  a  Chikwamba  consideration  and  an  examination  of
    whether, if the Appellant were required to go to the Ukraine and  apply
    for entry clearance, she would have met the requirements of the Rules.

9.   Ms McCarthy however accepted that these were Rules that  the  Appellant
    could not make in-country and therefore  it  was  always  a  matter  of
    considering Article 8 outside the Rules,  but  she  submitted  that  in
    considering Article 8, Chikwamba was highly  relevant  case  law  given
    that the Appellant  otherwise  met  the  requirements  of  the  current
    Immigration Rules.  The Judge however failed to take this into account.



10.  Mr Tufan considered that the Appellant was raising a  new  matter  that
    the Respondent had not had an opportunity to consider and that in those
    circumstances Ms McCarthy should make an  appropriate  application  for
    leave to amend her grounds.  It was however apparent to  us  that  this
    was not the case in that there was reference to this issue at paragraph
    12 of the existing grounds.

11.  In all the circumstances we agreed with the parties that it was in  the
    interests of justice that  the  matter  be  nonetheless  adjourned  for
    further hearing.

12.  When the matter was restored before me for hearing on  7  January  2016
    it was overlooked that as noted on file, I was also to sit  with  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Wikeley.  However I was able to  obtain  an  appropriate
    transfer order, in that it was not practical for the original  Tribunal
    to give its decision without  undue  further  delay  and  that  it  was
    appropriate for such a transfer order to be made and that I should thus
    continue to hear this case on my own.  This was  a  matter  which  both
    parties before me accepted and the hearing thus proceeded.

13.  My first task was to determine whether the determination of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge contained an error or errors on a point of law such
    as may have materially affected the outcome of the appeal.

14.  I note that the Respondent was  not  satisfied  with  the  reasons  the
    Appellant  had  given  for  applying  to  remain  in  the  UK  and  the
    Appellant's application had thus been refused under paragraph 322(1) of
    the Immigration Rules.

15.  In that regard the Judge observed that  the  Respondent  had  concluded
    that the Appellant could not show that she could bring  herself  within
    the requirements of Appendix FM in that she could neither show that she
    had a partner settled in  the  UK  nor  that  she  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a child under the age of 18 years
    and thus the provisions of Appendix FM could not apply.

16.  It was noted that the Respondent proceeded to consider whether  or  not
    the circumstances of the Appellant brought her within paragraph  276ADE
    (private life/long residence) of the  Immigration  Rules,  but  it  was
    clear in that regard, that the Appellant could not show  that  she  had
    lived continuously in the UK for twenty years or that she had  no  ties
    with the country to which she would go if required to leave the UK  and
    that she could not bring herself within the requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(iii) and (v) of the Immigration Rules.

17.  The Respondent thus considered the Appellant's application outside  the
    Rules taking into account the medical evidence put forward  as  to  the
    nature of the relationship between the Appellant and her  daughter  and
    son-in-law and concluded that the Appellant had not  provided  evidence
    that was "sufficiently  compelling  or  compassionate"  such  as  would
    enable the Respondent to allow the Appellant to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

18.  It was rightly pointed out by the Respondent that  the  Judge  analysed
    and took careful note of the evidence of the witnesses.

19.  At paragraph 67 the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  pointed  out  that  'a
    significant difficulty' had arisen in the evidence as  to  whether  the
    Appellant had any family in Ukraine and if so  their  geographical  and
    emotional closeness to her. The unequivocal evidence of  the  Appellant
    in her witness statement was that she had no one  in  Ukraine  to  look
    after her and it was noted that her daughter in her  witness  statement
    had confirmed this to be the position.

20.  At paragraph 68 the  Judge  explained  how  it  was  that  a  "somewhat
    different picture emerged in oral evidence".

21.  At paragraph 69 the  Judge  noted  that  the  Appellant's  son-in-law's
    evidence not least under cross-examination, and  at  paragraph  70  the
    Judge continued that there was a  "dissonance  therefore,  between  the
    evidence given by the Appellant's daughter and  son-in-law"  such  that
    led him to conclude at paragraph 71 that:

         "... this was such a fundamental discrepancy in the evidence of the
         two that it undermines to a large extent what  he  said  about  the
         Appellant having no one in Ukraine to turn to. It  suggests  to  me
         that there has been an element of fabrication in the factual matrix
         put forward to support the basic premise of this appeal,  which  is
         that the only family she  can  realistically  turn  to  is  the  UK
         family.  Furthermore on the additional premise that because of  her
         heart condition  she  cannot  be  left  alone,  it  undermines  the
         assertion that she would inevitably be on her own if  she  were  to
         return to her home in Ukraine.  The credibility of the  Appellant's
         case put forward is damaged on both the accounts."

22.  The Judge proceeded to consider the medical evidence not least that  of
    Dr Sethi, and in paragraph 82 of the determination, stated inter  alia,
    that at its highest, the doctor had confirmed that  the  Appellant  had
    some symptoms of heart abnormality which gave cause for concern, but he
    did not consider those to be of  an  imminent  or  an  urgent  need  in
    recommending a pacemaker to be fitted.  Further the doctor's report  of
    13 September 2014 appeared to show a lack of urgency.

23.  Ms Praisoody in her submissions, notably conceded  that  in  order  for
    the Appellant to meet the requirements of the relevant Rules she  could
    only do so by making her application for entry clearance  by  returning
    to the Ukraine and applying there but she continued that in the Judge's
    consideration of Article 8 outside the  Rules,  there  was  a  need  to
    balance the interests of the Appellant  against  the  public  interest,
    taking into account all the factors that had  been  identified  in  the
    Appellant's circumstances. She notably however  further  conceded  that
    overall and upon reflection, the appeal could not succeed.

24.  Indeed it was accepted that in terms of  the  Appellant's  health,  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge at paragraph 93, had taken careful account of
    the recent judgment in the Court of Appeal in GS  (India)  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 40 that had now  settled  the  position  of  migrants  who  claimed
    entitlement to remain in a Contracting State in order  to  continue  to
    benefit from medical assistance and services provided by the  expelling
    state.  The Judge continued, "if the medical claim  could  not  succeed
    under Article 3 the claim under Article 8  could  not  prosper  without
    some additional or separate factual element".

25.  In my view the Judge adequately and properly reasoned as to why he  had
    concluded that in this case,  there  were  no  additional  elements  of
    dependency that engaged Article 8  and  that  the  Appellant's  medical
    condition similarly, did not by  itself  "get  her  home".   The  Judge
    continued that if in that regard he was wrong, "then the question to be
    considered would be whether the proposed interference by  removal  with
    such Article 8 rights, as are entrenched in this lady's case  would  be
    disproportionate in her circumstances to those rights" and he  reminded
    himself of the weight to be placed on the public interest.

26.  There was found to be insufficient evidence to show  that  the  removal
    of the Appellant would interfere with her right to  family  or  private
    life in a way that would be disproportionate to the legitimate  aim  of
    the maintenance of effective immigration control.

27.  As the Respondent has rightly submitted, the  Chikwamba  principle  has
    no application in  this  case,  a  matter  that  Ms  Praisoody  clearly
    conceded before me.

28.  Indeed, the grounds in that regard misunderstand what  the  Judge  said
    at paragraph 87 of his determination and thus have placed his reasoning
    out of context.  As rightly pointed out by the  Respondent,  the  Judge
    did not say that the Appellant should now return  to  the  Ukraine  and
    make an entry clearance application from abroad, but that in  terms  of
    the Appellant's present appeal, it was  apparent  that  she  could  not
    bring herself within the provisions of Appendix  FM  (family  life)  or
    paragraph 276ADE (private life).  He continued "The case  she  puts  is
    that she is an adult  dependent  relative  but  she  falls  immediately
    outside that category under Appendix FM because she did not  come  here
    with entry clearance in that capacity but as a  family  visitor".   The
    Judge went on to say that:

         "It would have been open to her to have applied for entry clearance
         in Rome or Kiev to come to the UK  in  the  capacity  of  an  adult
         dependent relative and the ECO  at  either  post  would  have  been
         afforded the opportunity to make the  relevant  enquiries  had  she
         done so.  However she did not do this."

29.  The Judge continued in fairness to  state,  "the  implicit  explanation
    for this is that it was only when she arrived in the UK that her health
    worsened.  It was only at this point that she became 'dependent'."   He
    continued, "However as I have indicated I have concluded this  was  not
    the case and that matters healthwise have remained  much  as  they  had
    been for some considerable time".

30.  Having considered the grounds upon which permission  was  granted,  the
    submissions of the parties and having read  the  Judge's  determination
    and for the above reasons I find myself in  complete  accord  with  the
    reasoning in support of the Respondent's Rule 24 response and for  like
    reason find there to be no error on a  point  of  law  in  the  Judge's
    decision.

31.  The grounds place reliance on R (On the application of  Chen)  v  SSHD.
    Whilst I have found that the Chikwamba principles have no relevance  to
    the present case, I have considered it prudent in light of the  grounds
    of challenge and for the sake of completeness, to remind myself that it
    is apparent that the Appellant in this appeal, is only able to meet the
    requirements of the relevant Rules because she overstayed her visa  and
    that she now seeks to be excluded from what is required  of  those  who
    have not remained in the United Kingdom unlawfully, which  is  to  make
    the application out of country. Indeed ECDR1.1 at (a) states  that  the
    applicant must be out of country, i.e. outside the UK.

32.  It cannot therefore be right, for the Appellant in such  circumstances,
    to claim that she would be deprived of the care that she  needs  whilst
    she goes back to the Ukraine to make an appropriate application.

33.  It may be that there are circumstances in which the consequences of  an
    Appellant being deprived of that care during the period  necessary,  to
    return home to make an appropriate application, would be so  pronounced
    as to demand an outcome in her favour compliant with Article 8  of  the
    ECHR, but it is apparent that on the facts as found by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, such cogent evidence  of  detrimental  effect  did  not
    exist in this particular case.

34.  It is not in any event an appropriate use of Article 8 of the  ECHR  to
    seek thereby to circumvent the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

35.  Contrary to the assertion in the grounds, it is  apparent  to  me  this
    was a detailed determination prepared with evident care  in  which  the
    Judge took careful account of the evidence both  oral  and  documentary
    and relevant case law guidance that he had properly applied against the
    backdrop of the facts as found.  There is no  doubt  that  the  Judge's
    findings were well-reasoned, amply supported by and open to him on  the
    evidence and are sustainable in law.

36.   The  grounds  assert  in  summary  that  the  determination  discloses
    inadequate reasoning and that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed  to
    make findings of fact in every issue arising  and  generally  expressed
    disagreement with the findings made but it is entirely clear  from  the
    determination read as a  whole  why  the  appeal  was  dismissed.   The
    reasoning of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  cannot  be  said  to  be
    irrational nor his conclusions perverse.  The  Judge  was  required  to
    explain why he reached his conclusions but was not required to assemble
    and set out  in  the  determination  everything  that  was  capable  of
    supporting a contrary view

37.  It will be a matter for the Entry Clearance Officer  to  determine  any
    application under the Adult Dependent Relative Rules that the Appellant
    might make upon her return to the Ukraine, but it was argued with  some
    force both in the grounds and over  the  course  of  the  two  hearings
    before me, that other than the fact that the Appellant was required  to
    make such an application out of country,  she  met  all  the  remaining
    requirements in order to successfully  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

38.  I can only express the hope that in view of the circumstances  of  this
    applicant as  indeed  identified  in  the  Judge's  determination  that
    includes her age, her health and the strength of her relationship  with
    her daughter, son-in-law and grandchildren in the United Kingdom,  that
    any such entry clearance application that she may  seek  to  make  from
    Ukraine under the Adult Dependency Rules can in the  circumstances,  be
    considered  with  as  much  expediency  as  possible.    It   was   the
    understanding of Mr Walker that such an application could  possibly  be
    conducted within a matter of weeks but in fairness to Mr Walker, he was
    unable to give that assurance with any certainty.

Notice of Decision

39.  The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law and I therefore order that it shall continue to stand.

40.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 23 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein

