


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
      IA/27632/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 17th January 2017                         |Sent On: 30th January 2017   |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


                                     IA
                          (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:          Mr Smith, Kesar & Co Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Bangladesh born in 2001.   On  the  3rd
    July 2016 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Housego) allowed his appeal on
    human rights grounds. The Secretary of  State  now  has  permission  to
    appeal against that decision, granted by First-tier Tribunal Chohan  on
    the 6th December 2016.




    Anonymity Order

 2. The Respondent is a minor. Having had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  and  the  Presidential  Guidance
    Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders I consider it appropriate  to  make
    an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"






    Error of Law


 3. The case before the First-tier Tribunal was  that  (the  Respondent  to
    this appeal) IA was a child who had lived in the United Kingdom  for  a
    continuous period of ten years. As such he was a 'qualifying child'  as
    defined in s117D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.
    The focus of the appeal was whether it would be "reasonable" to  expect
    him to now leave the United Kingdom.    If it would not, then IA  would
    succeed  on  human  rights  grounds   with   reference   to   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules.

 4. In considering that question the Tribunal had regard to a good deal  of
    jurisprudence concerning the welfare of the child.  It  had  regard  to
    the fact that when IA started at school in London he had never been  to
    school before. He had learned English quickly  and  prospered.  He  has
    done well in academic terms and is sitting his GCSEs  this  year.    He
    has had no real exposure to Bengali culture and speaks only a little of
    the language, which he cannot read or write at all.   He had occasional
    telephone contact with his grandmother in  Bangladesh  but  apart  from
    that no connection with that country.   When IA gave evidence  he  said
    that he was very nervous about the prospect of living there. He did not
    really understand his  grandmother  when  they  spoke.    The  Tribunal
    considered that all of this evidence pointed to an established  private
    life in the United Kingdom. Although reference is made to the Secretary
    of State's submissions, and to sections 117A-D of the 2002 Act,  it  is
    not clear what weight if any these matters were given. The  appeal  was
    allowed on the basis that it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  this
    child to leave the United Kingdom today.

 5. Four days after the determination was promulgated the Court  of  Appeal
    handed down judgement in MA (Pakistan) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home  Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705.  Therein  the  court,  albeit
    reluctantly,  accepted  the  Secretary  of  State's  argument  that  in
    determining what 'reasonable' means, express regard must be had to  the
    public interest, as expressed inter alia at ss117B (1)-(5).

 6. I am satisfied that this is not the approach taken by the  Tribunal  in
    this case. It follows that the determination contains an error  of  law
    and the decision must be set aside.





    The Re-Made Decision


    Legal Framework


 7. The parties were in agreement that the only possible rule  under  which
    the Appellant might succeed was 276ADE(1)(iv):
         276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the
         date of application, the applicant:
         (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-
         LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.5. in Appendix FM;
         and
         (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the
         grounds of private life in the UK; and
         (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years
         (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
         UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of imprisonment)
         and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the
         UK; or
         (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent at
         least half of his life living continuously in the UK (discounting
         any period of imprisonment); or
         (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above, has
         lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting
         any period of imprisonment) but there would be very significant
         obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to which
         he would have to go if required to leave the UK.




 8. Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 inserted a new Part 5A into  the
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. For the purposes  of  this
    appeal the key provision in Part 5A is s.117B:

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases


         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.


         (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-


           (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-


           (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (4) Little weight should be given to-


           (a) a private life, or
           (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.


         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-


           (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
           relationship with a qualifying child, and
           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
           United Kingdom.

 9. It is, for the moment at least, the position that this framework is  to
    be interpreted as follows. Decision-makers must have regard to  all  of
    the factors listed at s 117B (1)-(5) when assessing Article  8  claims,
    but in cases where the adult applicant can  show  both  limbs  of  sub-
    section (6) to be satisfied,  an  appeal  must  succeed  on  Article  8
    grounds: Treebhawon and Ors (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 674 (IAC), MA
    (Pakistan)  [at  14-20].      The  questions  of  'reasonableness'   at
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) and section 117B(6) are the same question.   In
    determining 'reasonableness' regard must be had to the public  interest
    as expressed at s117B(1)-(5).  Regard must also be had to the Secretary
    of State's own policy on what the provisions mean.



10. The genesis of the 'seven year' provision was the concession  known  as
    DP5/96.  That policy, and those which followed, created a general,  but
    rebuttable,  presumption that enforcement action would  "not  normally"
    proceed in cases where a child was born here and had lived continuously
    to the age of 7 or over, or where, having come to the United Kingdom at
    an early age,  7  years  or  more  of  continuous  residence  had  been
    accumulated[1]. Although there have been shifts and amendments to  this
    policy over the years, the government has consistently maintained  that
    a residence of at least 7 years duration is  a  significant  benchmark.
    As the  policy  statement[2]  which  accompanied  the  introduction  of
    paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv) puts it: "a period of 7 continuous years spent
    in the UK as a child will generally establish  a  sufficient  level  of
    integration for family and private life  to  exist  such  that  removal
    would normally  not  be  in  the  best  interests  of  the  child"  [my
    emphasis].  The current guidance reaffirms that this  is  the  starting
    point for consideration of  the  rule.    The  Immigration  Directorate
    Instruction 'Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family Life (as
    a Partner or Parent) and Private Life:  10-Year  Routes'   ("the  IDI")
    gives the following guidance:
         11.2.4. Would it be unreasonable to expect a non-British Citizen
         child to leave the UK?
         The requirement that a non-British Citizen child has lived in the
         UK for a continuous period of at least the 7 years immediately
         preceding the date of application, recognises that over time
         children start to put down roots and integrate into life in the UK,
         to the extent that being required to leave the UK may be
         unreasonable. The longer the child has resided in the UK, the more
         the balance will begin to swing in terms of it being unreasonable
         to expect the child to leave the UK, and strong reasons will be
         required in order to refuse a case with continuous UK residence of
         more than 7 years.
         The decision maker must consider whether, in the specific
         circumstances of the case, it would be reasonable to expect the
         child to live in another country.
         The decision maker must consider the facts relating to each child
         in the UK in the family individually, and also consider all the
         facts relating to the family as a whole. The decision maker should
         also engage with any specific issues explicitly raised by the
         family, by each child or on behalf of each child.
11. This reflects ministerial statements on the matter. The Hansard  record
    of the debate in the House of Lords  on  the  introduction  of  section
    117B(6) (in  the  Immigration  Act  2014)  sets  out  the  government's
    thinking on the significance of the seven year mark,  as  explained  by
    then Home Office Minister Lord Wallace of Tankerness:


         "we have acknowledged that if a child has reached the age of seven,
         he or she will have moved beyond simply having his or her needs met
         by the parents. The child will be part of the education system  and
         may be  developing  social  networks  and  connections  beyond  the
         parents and home. However, a child who has not spent seven years in
         the United Kingdom either will be  relatively  young  and  able  to
         adapt, or if they are older, will be likely  to  have  spent  their
         earlier years in their country of origin or another  country.  When
         considering  the  best  interests  of  the  child,  the   fact   of
         citizenship is important but so is the  fact  that  the  child  has
         spent  a  large  part  of  his  or  her  childhood  in  the  United
         Kingdom"[3].

12. All of this guidance recognises that after a  period  of  seven  years'
    residence a child will have forged strong links  with  the  UK  to  the
    extent that he or she will have an established private life outside  of
    the immediate embrace of his parents and siblings. It is  that  private
    life which is the starting point of consideration under this Rule.  The
    relationships and understanding of life that a  child  develops  as  he
    grows older are matters which in themselves attract  weight.  The  fact
    that the child might be able to adapt to life elsewhere is  a  relevant
    factor but it cannot be determinative, since exclusive  focus  on  that
    question would obscure the fact that for such  a  child,  his  "private
    life" in the UK is everything he knows.   That is the  starting  point,
    and the task of the Tribunal is to then look to other factors to decide
    whether, on the particular  facts  of  this  case,  these  displace  or
    outweigh the presumption that interference with that private life  will
    normally be contrary to the child's best interests.  Those factors  are
    wide-ranging and varied. The IDI gives several examples including,  for
    instance, the child's health,  whether  his  parents  have  leave,  the
    extent of family connections to the country of proposed  return.  As  I
    note above, in MA (Pakistan)  Elias  LJ  accepted  that  it  must  also
    encompass matter pertaining to the family as  a  whole,  including  the
    factors at s117B(1)-(5) as they relate to the parents.  The  assessment
    of what is "reasonable" will call for the  Tribunal  to  weigh  all  of
    these matters into the balance  and  to  see  whether  they  constitute
    "strong reasons" - the language of the current IDI -  to  proceed  with
    removal notwithstanding the established Article 8 rights of  the  child
    in the UK.






    Findings of Fact


13. The Secretary of State has identified the primary countervailing factor
    in this case as being the fact that no member of this family  currently
    has any leave to remain. It is not in issue that IA has lived  in  this
    country since May 2006. When he came here he did so with leave, as  his
    father was then a Points Based System Migrant.  It would seem that  the
    family had lawful leave until  September  2012.   At  that  point  they
    became overstayers.  The application that finally led  to  the  present
    proceedings was made in September 2013.   I am bound, by the  terms  of
    s117B(1), to recognise that it is in the public interest  that  persons
    with no right to remain under the Rules are removed.
14. IA speaks fluent English. It is in the public interest that persons who
    seek leave to remain do so, because this  aids  integration  and  means
    that they are less likely to become a burden on the taxpayer.


15. IA is not financially independent, and this is a matter that I am bound
    to have regard to. I also bear in mind that he is a child, who can have
    had very little say about where the household income comes from.

16. He relies on a private life which was established when his  status  was
    precarious or unlawful and as such I am bound to attach  little  weight
    to it. However I also bear  in  mind  that  this  was  a  private  life
    established when IA was a child with  no  control  over  where  he  was
    living. I expect that he would, in listening to his teachers and making
    friends, be entirely  unaware  that  his  status  was  "precarious"  or
    otherwise. That a child's private life  is  in  these  circumstances  a
    matter attracting considerable weight is recognised  not  just  by  the
    Secretary of State's own policy, but  by  the  jurisprudence:  see  for
    instance Miah (s117B - children NIAA 2002) [2016] UKUT 131.

17. I also bear in mind the apparent concession by IA's parents  that  they
    would not be able to show there to be "very significant  obstacles"  to
    their integration in Bangladesh. Mr Kotas  highlighted  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's finding that both parents speak fluent Bengali, continue  to
    have cultural ties with their country of nationality and have at  least
    some relatives there. IA's father is educated and resourceful and could
    be expected to work.  There are schools available in Bangladesh.

18. I have considered all of those matters in the round. My starting  point
    is the fact that IA has lived here for 10 years. As  such  he  has  put
    down roots here and it would not normally be in his best  interests  to
    disrupt his education, friendships and  stability.    I  weigh  against
    that established private life the fact that his  parents  do  not  have
    leave to remain, and have not done so since 2012. That is a  matter  of
    some significance. It cannot however  be  determinative.  I  have  also
    borne in  mind  that  IA  could,  albeit  it  with  some  hardship  and
    difficulty,  re-establish  his  private  life  outside  of  the  United
    Kingdom. Neither of those factors, taken in isolation or  cumulatively,
    is capable of amounting to "strong reasons" not to grant him  leave  to
    remain. I find that it would be unreasonable to expect IA to leave  the
    United Kingdom today. He qualifies for leave to remain under  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules and his appeal must therefore be allowed  on
    human rights grounds (the decision under that provision being deemed by
    the Secretary of State to be a 'human rights decision').







      Decisions


19. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside.


20. I remake the decision in the appeal as follows:

    "the appeal is allowed on human rights grounds".

21. There is an order for anonymity.








                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                   27th
                                January 2017
                           -----------------------
[1] For a detailed history of the rule and its development see Dyson LH in
Munir v SSHD [2012] UKSC 32 paras 9-13
[2] The Grounds of Compatibility with Article 8 of the ECHR: Statement by
the Home Office (13 June 2012) at 27.
[3] At column 1383, Hansard 5th March 2014

