
[pic]
IAC-UT

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27811/2014

                                                          IA/27812/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17 February 2016                      |On 21 March 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                        (DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ASSY BADIANE
                                    [M D]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms V Easty, counsel.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Majid)  allowing  the  applicants'  appeal
    against the decision dated 24 June 2014 to  remove  them  from  the  UK
    following refusal of their application based on human  rights  grounds.
    In this decision I will refer to the parties as they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, the applicants as the appellants and the Secretary
    of State as the respondent.

Background

2.   The background to this appeal can briefly be described as follows.  The
    first appellant is a citizen of Senegal who claims to have  arrived  in
    the UK in 2003. Her daughter, the second appellant, was born in the  UK
    on 10 December 2007. Her birth certificate names her father and records
    that he is a football agent born  in  Senegal.  On  24  June  2011  the
    appellants applied for indefinite leave to remain on the basis that the
    first appellant was the victim of domestic  violence.  The  application
    was refused on 30 July 2011. On 5 April 2013 a further application  for
    leave to remain was made under article 8 and was refused on 1 May 2013.
    This decision was challenged in judicial review proceedings which  were
    compromised by consent,  the  respondent  agreeing  to  reconsider  the
    application and, if a decision to refuse was  maintained,  to  issue  a
    removal decision. The decision was maintained in the decision letter of
    24 June 2014 and removal decision was duly made. The appellants' appeal
    against this decision was heard by the judge  on  19  August  2015  and
    allowed for the reasons set out in his decision issued on  3  September
    2015.

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

3.   In the grounds it is argued  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  that  the
    judge's decision shows an absence of reasoned findings. The explanation
    for allowing the appeal in [27] was minimal in that it referred to  the
    best interests of the child and to  the  first  appellant's  linguistic
    incompetence in Swahili but there was no indication that  the  relative
    merits of the different strands of the evidence  had  been  considered.
    Secondly, it is argued that there is no evidence of the tribunal taking
    into account relevant legislation and case law such as s.117B(6) of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended or the judgment
    of the Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.  It  is
    further argued that the tribunal failed  to  demonstrate  that  it  was
    aware of the correct legal tests to be applied as well  as  failing  to
    explain how it applied them.

4.   Mr Kotas submitted  that  it  was  impossible  for  the  respondent  to
    understand why the appeal had been allowed. There had been no  adequate
    consideration of the issue of whether the second appellant was entitled
    to Senegalese citizenship or was  stateless.  Although  the  judge  had
    referred to a number of authorities, there was an absence  of  reasoned
    findings.

5.   Ms Easty submitted that the first ground was  in  substance  a  reasons
    challenge. At [16] the judge had recorded the evidence about the  visit
    to the Senegalese Embassy when the first appellant was  told  that  her
    daughter could not have a passport of that country "under  the  rules".
    The  judge  had  been  entitled  to  comment  that  if  that  was   not
    "exceptional" what could be and that he  was  dealing  with  the  "best
    interests" of a child who was stateless [16]. She submitted  that  this
    was a finding open to the judge and explained why the appeal  had  been
    allowed. So far as the second ground was concerned  and  the  assertion
    that the judge had failed to consider the provisions of  s.117B(6),  as
    the judge had found that the second appellant was  not  returnable,  it
    could not arguably be reasonable to return her. She argued that if  the
    judge had made any error of law, it would not be capable  of  affecting
    the outcome of the appeal.

Assessment of Whether there is an Error of Law

6.   I must consider whether the judge erred in law such that  the  decision
    should be set aside. I am satisfied that the respondent's  grounds  are
    made out. The judge has failed to give adequate reasons to explain  why
    he allowed this appeal. Reasons need not be extensive but they must  be
    understandable  and  indicate  that  all  relevant  matters  have  been
    considered.  Ms Easty sought to argue that the judge's finding that the
    second appellant was stateless was properly open to him and  once  that
    finding had been made, it followed inevitably that the appeal should be
    allowed.

7.   The judge's finding on this issue is at [16]:

         "The appellant had gone to the Senegal Embassy in London. She  was
        told that her daughter (the second appellant in this  case)  cannot
        have passport for that country under the  Rules.  If  that  is  not
        "exceptional" what can be - here we  are  dealing  with  the  'best
        interests' of the child who is stateless."

8.   However, the issue  of  statelessness  in  the  present  case  is  more
    complex not least as the letter relied on from the  Senegalese  Embassy
    dated 27th of February 2013 reads:

        "This is to certify that, at present, the  Embassy  of  Senegal  in
        London is unable to satisfy the  request  for  the  issuance  of  a
        passport ... and she has  not  been  registered  at  birth  by  her
        natural father, in accordance with Senegalese law  on  the  matter.
        ...".


    The use of the phrase "at present" in the letter does not indicate that
    the Embassy had taken a final view that the second  appellant  was  not
    entitled to Senegalese citizenship. The letter does not take issue with
    the nationality of either the second appellant's mother or her  natural
    father and I note that the second appellant was described as Senegalese
    in the application form. In the light of these matters I  am  satisfied
    that the judge failed to give any  or  any  adequate  reasons  for  his
    finding that the second appellant was in fact stateless.

9.   The judge set out at length a number of authorities  referring  to  the
    best interests of the child. In [19] he said that the best interests of
    a child are a matter of primary importance and in [20] that where those
    interests favoured a certain course, that  course  should  be  followed
    unless countervailing reasons of  considerable  force  displaced  them.
    However, the judge failed to give adequate consideration about  whether
    there were any such reasons. He failed to give proper consideration  to
    the public interest when  carrying  out  the  proportionality  exercise
    under article 8. He failed to set the  circumstances  relating  to  the
    second appellant in the context of the  evidence  as  a  whole  and  in
    particular the immigration history of the  first  appellant,  the  fact
    that the status of both  the  first  and  second  appellants  has  been
    precarious throughout and  more  generally  the  need  to  take  proper
    account of the public interest  in  maintaining  effective  immigration
    control. In summary,  the  judge  failed  to  assess  the  question  of
    proportionality in the context of the current immigration rules or take
    into  account  the  guidance  given  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  EV
    (Philippines). He also failed  to  give  proper  consideration  to  the
    provisions of s.117B of the 2002 Act.

10.  Both representatives accepted that if there was an error  of  law,  the
    proper course would be for  the  appeal  to  be  remitted  for  a  full
    rehearing before the First-tier Tribunal. I agree in the  circumstances
    of this appeal that this is the right course to take

Decision

11.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that its decision  should  be
    set aside. The appeal is remitted for reconsideration to the First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing before a different judge.


Signed   H J E Latter

H J E Latter                                          Date:  1 March 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

