
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/27376/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 September 2015                  |On 12 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                    S B M
                           [anonymity order made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Adrian Berry, instructed by Fursdon Knapper
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Julie Isherwood, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Malawi citizen who appeals with  permission  against
    the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson who  dismissed  her  appeal
    against the respondent's refusal of further  leave  to  remain  as  the
    spouse of a British citizen.



Background

 2. The appellant was born in Zimbabwe in 1985: although she  is  a  Malawi
    citizen, she has never lived there.  Her  parents  died  when  she  was
    young, and distant relatives brought her up.  She  has  sisters  and  a
    family friend living in the United Kingdom and in October 2004 she came
    to visit them here.  She travelled on her Malawi passport and her  visa
    was granted at the airport on arrival.

 3. After her arrival the appellant went to live with one  of  her  sisters
    and in 2005 she began studying in London for  a  Bachelor's  Degree  in
    Business Administration. She graduated at the beginning of  2009.   She
    then enrolled for an MBA in Financial and Computer Management,  but  in
    early 2009 she became pregnant and was unable to complete that 18-month
    course.  All of her study was with leave. The appellant  has  completed
    an OCR level 2 in Health and Social Care (Adults) and started an Access
    to Nursing course in September 2013, which due to her status she cannot
    pursue.  She would like to qualify as a nurse and she has worked  as  a
    care worker.

 4. In 2006 she became acquainted with the man who is now her husband,  but
    their friendship did not become a relationship until 2009, when she was
    pregnant with her son, whose father had and  has  no  interest  in  the
    pregnancy or the child. The appellant married her  British  husband  in
    July 2009, three months before the child was born.  Her husband is  not
    the child's natural father but he is the  only  father  the  child  has
    known. He also has a 9 year old child who lives with the child's mother
    and whom the appellant's husband sees regularly.

 5. The appellant's son is now 5 years old and like his  mother,  he  is  a
    Malawi citizen.  The appellant says she omitted  him  from  her  FLR(M)
    form in order to save the additional fees.  She does not  dispute  that
    deception, or the deception regarding her bank accounts.

 6. The appellant has three sisters here and one in Australia.  She has  no
    family in Malawi. All  three  of  her  sisters  here  are  now  British
    citizens, married to British citizen  husbands  and  with  children  of
    their own.  The appellant and her son have a lot of  contact  with  her
    extended family.

Procedural history

 7. The appeal history is as follows: the  appellant  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom as a visitor in October 2004  and  obtained  leave  to  remain,
    first as a student, then as a spouse.  Her last leave to remain expired
    on 5 August 2012.

 8. The appellant made an in time application to extend that  leave,  which
    the respondent refused, on the basis, inter alia,  that  the  appellant
    had submitted false bank statements to support  her  application.   The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, which found that she had
    indeed knowingly submitted false documents with  her  application,  and
    also, based on evidence at the First-tier Tribunal  hearing,  that  she
    had  not  disclosed  the  existence  of  her  child  from  a   previous
    relationship, born in October 2009. The child was over 4 years  old  by
    the time his existence was disclosed.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the  appeal  outside  the  Rules  under
    Article 8 ECHR, finding that the appellant had never lived  in  Malawi,
    despite her nationality, and that she had no  meaningful  links  there;
    and that she would face difficulties in maintaining  and  accommodating
    herself and her child in Malawi, which would  'lead  to  hardship  that
    would go beyond the baseline'.

10. Leave to remain as a spouse was granted for the first  time  in  August
    2010 when the child was just 10 months old. The Tribunal found that the
    appellant's husband, with whom she lived, was the only father  her  son
    had known.  The Tribunal also accepted that the appellant's husband was
    in employment. The Tribunal  considered  that  the  husband  could  not
    reasonably be asked to leave the United Kingdom and  that  the  child's
    best interests lay in growing up in the family in which  he  had  lived
    all his life.

11. The respondent successfully challenged that decision, finding that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had not properly approached Article 8  outside  the
    Rules, in  particular  failing  to  reason  sufficiently  the  hardship
    finding on Nagre principles; and that no weight had been given  to  the
    respondent's unparticularised indication in  the  refusal  letter  that
    reintegration assistance might be  available  to  the  appellant.   The
    Upper  Tribunal  set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal   decision   and
    substituted a decision dismissing the appeal on all grounds, relying on
    the reintegration assistance.

12. The appellant appealed to the Court of Appeal, which has  remitted  the
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, with the consent of the parties,  on  the
    basis that the Upper Tribunal erred in relying on the  availability  of
    reintegration assistance in Malawi, since there was insufficient and/or
    no evidence upon which the Upper Tribunal could reach that  conclusion.



13. It follows that the question of error of law  is  not  in  issue.   The
    Upper Tribunal must proceed to consider whether to remake the decision.
    That was the basis on which the appeal came before me.

Upper Tribunal hearing

14. I heard submissions from Mr Berry for the appellant, which followed the
    procedural history.  Mr Berry argued that as  far  as  the  Immigration
    Rules are concerned, there was no possibility of continuing the  family
    unit in Malawi; the husband would have to choose which of his  children
    to lose, since the elder one would remain in the  United  Kingdom  with
    his mother.

15. There was no suggestion that the parties were a burden  on  the  public
    purse;  the  husband  and  the  appellant  had  worked  and   sustained
    themselves financially,  albeit  not  at  the  level  which  the  Rules
    required.   The  marriage  was  subsisting  and  the  appellant's  oral
    evidence and that of her husband stood unchallenged.

16. Mr Berry accepted  that  the  appellant  had  used  deception  but  the
    respondent had a discretion as to whether to  refuse  leave  to  remain
    under para 322(1A).  Although the Rules indicated  that  leave  'should
    normally' be refused, the respondent had the choice not  to  refuse  in
    these circumstances.  Mr Berry asked me to allow the appeal.

17. For the respondent, Ms Isherwood pointed out that the child was  not  a
    qualifying child as defined in part 5A of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 because he had not been in the United Kingdom for 7
    years (he is still only 5 years old) and is not a British citizen.  The
    existence of the child therefore added  no  additional  weight  to  the
    appellant's case.  The suggestion that the child's father had taken  no
    interest in him sat oddly with the birth certificate, which showed  him
    as the informant as to the birth of the child.

18.  Paragraph  117B(3)  and  117B(4)  were  applicable.   The  appellant's
    deception could not be ignored and the appellant was therefore excluded
    from leave to remain by the suitability criteria.

19. As to the reliance on public funds, although the  couple  were  not  in
    receipt of benefits, the child was receiving free education at  school,
    which was a financial  burden  to  the  United  Kingdom.   The  factual
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal had been  retained  and  they  were
    insufficient to demonstrate compelling circumstances outside the Rules.
     Ms Isherwood asked me to   dismiss the appeal.

Discussion

20. The appellant admits that she used deception in her  application.   She
    used false documents, and she also omitted mention  of  her  child,  in
    order to pay a lower fee.  Mr Berry's submission  that  the  respondent
    has a discretion in these circumstances is erroneous: paragraph 322(1A)
    reads as follows:

         "322.    In addition to the grounds for  refusal  of  extension  of
         stay set out in parts 2-8 of these Rules, the following  provisions
         apply in relation to the refusal of an  application  for  leave  to
         remain,  variation  of  leave  to  enter  or   remain   or,   where
         appropriate, the curtailment of leave:

         Grounds on which leave to remain and variation of leave  to  remain
         are to be refused; ...

         (1A)     where  false  representations  have  been  made  or  false
         documents or  information  have  been  submitted  (whether  or  not
         material to the application, and whether or not to the  applicant's
         knowledge), or material facts have not been disclosed, in  relation
         to the application  or  in  order  to  obtain  documents  from  the
         Secretary of State or a third party  required  in  support  of  the
         application; ..."

    The language of the Rule is mandatory and plainly applicable here.  The
    appellant cannot bring herself within the Rules.

21.  The  next  question  is  whether  there  are  exceptional   compelling
    circumstances for which leave to remain ought to be given  outside  the
    Rules. The First-tier  Tribunal  made  findings  of  fact,  which  were
    preserved in the decision of the Upper Tribunal. So  far  as  relevant,
    the findings made were these: the child was born in the United Kingdom;
    he had recently begun nursery education;  he  has  lived  only  in  the
    United Kingdom and his mother the appellant may face uncertainties  due
    to her lack of contact with Malawi and Zimbabwe since 2004; the removal
    of his  mother  would  interrupt  the  child's  relationship  with  his
    mother's husband and his de facto parent; and that it is in the child's
    best interests to remain in the United Kingdom.

22. The Judge accepted that it was unreasonable to expect  the  appellant's
    husband to accompany them to Malawi (or Zimbabwe if they go there)  and
    that the relationship of husband and wife was genuine  and  subsisting.
    The appellant had been in the United Kingdom lawfully for a long period
    and had not relied on public funds.

23. The Judge did give weight  to  the  deceit  of  the  appellant  in  her
    application.  There is no  reasoning  in  relation  to  hardship.   The
    evidence is an assertion by both the appellant and her husband that she
    would cope poorly in Zimbabwe if she returned there, and that  she  has
    no connection with Malawi.  The respondent's decision under section  47
    of the Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act  2006  (as  amended)  was
    that she be removed to Malawi only; Zimbabwe is not in issue.

24. Little weight can be given to the private life the  appellant  and  her
    child have developed in the United Kingdom with  her  extended  family,
    since at all times she has had precarious leave. Weight must  be  given
    to her family life with her child, and with her  husband.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal's finding that the appellant's husband cannot be expected
    to go to Zimbabwe does not really assist because it is to  Malawi  that
    the respondent intends to remove the appellant.

25. Apart from her lack of connection to Malawi due to having been born and
    lived in Zimbabwe, the appellant has advanced no other evidence  as  to
    conditions in Malawi to support her assertion of hardship  there  after
    her return.   Nor  is  there  detailed  evidence  about  her  husband's
    relationship with his older child, or his employment  circumstances.  I
    am not satisfied on the facts  of  this  appeal  that  the  appellant's
    circumstances are exceptional and compelling in the Nagre  sense,  such
    that the respondent should grant her leave to remain outside the  Rules
    despite her failure to meet the Rules on the grounds of deceit.

Conclusions:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law. I set aside the decision and I re-make  the  decision  in
the appeal by dismissing it.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   Subject  to  any
written representations which may be received from the  appellant,  pursuant
to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  that
order will stand discharged at the expiry of 14 days  from  the  sending  to
the appellant of this decision.


|                                      |[pic]                                |
|Date:                                 |Signed:                              |
|                                      |Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson         |

