
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27170/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22nd September 2017                    |On 27th October 2017              |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                              Mr RACHID AMGHAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Popal, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Morocco born  on  4th  March  1987.   The
    Appellant entered the UK  on  2nd  August  2002  with  his  mother  and
    siblings on a visit visa valid until  February  2003.   Two  subsequent
    applications in 2003 were rejected by  the  Secretary  of  State.   The
    Appellant thereafter became an overstayer and on 18th  April  2008  the
    Appellant's submitted an application for leave to remain in the  UK  as
    an overstayer outside the Rules which was rejected on 7th May  2008  as
    no fee was paid.  Nothing thereafter seems to  have  happened  until  a
    subsequent application based on  compassionate  grounds  for  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules was submitted on 27th September 2012 which was
    refused with no right of appeal on 12th October 2013.

 2. The Secretary of State on 22nd July 2015 made a decision to  refuse  an
    application for leave to remain on the grounds that removal  would  not
    place the United Kingdom in breach of its obligations under  the  Human
    Rights Act 1998  and  to  give  directions  under  Section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 for removal from the United Kingdom.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Anstis sitting at Hatton Cross on 31st October 2016.  The
    actual Grounds of Appeal are set out in detail at paragraph  5  of  the
    decision.  The Appellant's appeal was dismissed by notice  of  decision
    and reasons promulgated on 18th November 2016.

 4. On 1st December 2016  Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Permission to appeal was refused by Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Page on 22nd May 2017.  Renewed Grounds of Appeal were  lodged
    on 6th June 2017.  Those grounds reiterated  the  original  Grounds  of
    Appeal and made further observations at paragraphs 4 to 9 inclusive.

 5. On 31st July 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam granted permission  to
    appeal.  Judge McWilliam concluded that it was arguable that the  judge
    did not make adequate findings in respect of the  Appellant's  evidence
    of his mother's dependency upon him and that it was arguable  that  the
    judge did not make it clear what weight, if any, he  attached  to  this
    when assessing proportionality.  She considered that  it  was  arguable
    that the conclusions in Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ 803 were  relevant  in
    this case and that it was arguable that the  judge  had  erred  in  his
    approach to Section 117(B)(4) in the context of the facts of this case.

 6. On 17th August 2017 in a  detailed  response  the  Secretary  of  State
    responded to the Grounds of Appeal under Rule 24.   I  have  given  due
    consideration to that Rule 24 response, in particular paragraphs 3 to 5
    inclusive.  It is on that basis that the  appeal  comes  before  me  to
    determine whether or not there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The  Appellant  appears  by
    his instructed Counsel, Ms Popal.  The Secretary of  State  appears  by
    her Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Nath.

Submissions/Discussion

 7. Ms Popal takes me to her speaking note which she submits is effectively
    a response to the Rule 24 reply and is, to all intents and purposes,  a
    skeleton argument.  She relies upon it as her basic submission in  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in applying a  narrow  approach  to
    the facts relating to the  Appellant's  private  life  claim  and  that
    applying the Court of Appeal judgment in Rhuppiah v  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 803 and that the concept of precariousness is not an inflexible one
    leading to the entire rejection of  a  private  life  claim  where  the
    applicant has no leave or limited leave.  She submits  the  concept  of
    precariousness cannot rationally be applied where the relevant  private
    life claim is that of the Appellant's mother (who is lawfully  resident
    in the UK) and not of the Appellant.  Thereafter, Ms Popal submits that
    the private life claim is based on potential harm  to  the  Appellant's
    mother if she were deprived of the care provided by the Appellant  over
    a substantial period of time and she refers me to the  authorities  set
    out at paragraph 2(iii)-(v) of her speaking note, all of which  I  have
    read and given due consideration to.  She submits that  the  judge  has
    failed to engage with the factual matrix of this case  and  the  effect
    that it would have upon the Appellant's mother and her Article 8 rights
    and that there has been  a  failure  to  consider  the  proportionality
    assessment with only very limited findings being made.

 8. Mr Nath takes me to the very detailed Rule  24  response,  particularly
    paragraph 3  therein,  pointing  out  that  the  judge  has  given  due
    consideration at  paragraph  35  to  Section  117(B)(4)  and  has  made
    reference to this at paragraph 35 pointing out,  using  the  words  "in
    this situation", that full weight should be given.  The judge  was,  he
    submits, correct in noting that whilst the Appellant was a  minor  when
    he came to this country, he remained in the UK unlawfully thereafter in
    breach of immigration restrictions when he was an adult.  He refers  me
    to paragraph 34 of the  Court of Appeal decision in  Rhuppiah  and  the
    consideration of precariousness and weight, namely:

         "The more that an immigrant should be taken to have understood that
         their time in the host country  would  be  comparatively  short  or
         would be liable to termination, the more the host state is able  to
         say that a fair balance between the rights of  the  individual  and
         the general public interest in the firm  and  fair  enforcement  of
         immigration controls should come down in favour of removal when the
         leave expires".

 9. Mr Nath reiterates what is said thereinafter in the Rule 24 that it was
    consequently open to the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to  apply  little
    weight in the Appellant's circumstances.  Further, he asked me to  look
    at the position of the Appellant's mother as  set  out  in  detail,  he
    submits, by consideration of paragraphs 30  to  32  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision and  that  the  judge  made  a  balanced  and
    reasoned finding at paragraph 40.  He consequently submits  that  there
    is no error of law and asked me to dismiss the appeal.

10. Ms Popal responds by saying that part of the time the Appellant was  in
    the UK was as a child and that the precariousness of his  position  was
    not of his own making and submits that the judge has  carried  out  the
    wrong form of assessment having considered paragraphs 36 to 40 and that
    the error of law is to be found in paragraph 37, which is  the  finding
    and conclusion made by the judge.  She submits that it is necessary  to
    give weight to the Appellant's private life  and  that  the  judge  has
    failed to consider the impact upon the Appellant's mother and the  fact
    that the Appellant has been in the UK since he was a minor.

11. In brief response Mr Nath reminds me that  this  is  not  the  mother's
    application commenting that at paragraph 35 the judge does not say that
    he will not consider private life and that he is  at  liberty  to  make
    whatever weight conclusions that he wants providing they  are  reasoned
    which he submits they are.  He asked me  to  find  that  there  are  no
    material errors of law and to dismiss the appeal.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

14. The contention made by Ms Popal in this matter is that  the  judge  has
    erred in concluding that the Respondent's decision was a  proportionate
    means  of  achieving  the  public  interest  in  effective  immigration
    control, both in respect of the Appellant's family and private life and
    when the two are taken in  combination.   I  do  not  agree  with  that
    submission.  This is a judge who has given very  careful  consideration
    to the issues.  I agree with the view effectively  expressed  by  Judge
    Page when he refuses permission, namely that what is being contended is
    that the judge has erred in law essentially by dismissing  the  appeal.
    The principal argument is purely one of disagreement.  This is a  judge
    who reached conclusions on  the  evidence  and  such  conclusions  were
    adequately reasoned.  As Mr Nath has submitted this is not the mother's
    application.  It does not sit  well  for  Ms  Popal  to  predicate  her
    argument on the fact that the Appellant was a minor at the time that he
    initially overstayed.  That concession is accepted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  It is the subsequent overstaying as an adult  that  is
    given scant consideration by the Appellant's representatives and  which
    was properly and appropriately considered with regard to the weight  to
    be given to the Appellant's private life in  the  judge's  analysis  at
    paragraph 35.

15. Thereafter, the judge goes on to consider at paragraph 36 the  question
    of the Appellant's family life and makes findings therein that  he  was
    entitled to.  As Mr Nath submits to me it  is  necessary  to  read  the
    whole of paragraph 36 in its  entirety.   The  judge  has  gone  on  at
    paragraph 37 to consider quite properly public interest and has set out
    all the considerations that were  appropriate  including  the  position
    regarding the Appellant's mother at paragraphs 38 and 39.  His findings
    at paragraph 40 are ones that he was entitled to make  and  whilst  the
    judge makes no specific reference to the Court of  Appeal  in  Rhuppiah
    the general principles set  out  therein  have  been  applied  in  this
    instance.  The decision is well reasoned  and  well  constructed.   The
    judge has made findings which he  was  entitled  to  having  heard  the
    evidence and balanced all the issues.  The submissions made by Ms Popal
    amount to little more than disagreement.   In  such  circumstances  the
    decision contains no material error of law and the  Appellant's  appeal
    is dismissed and the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  is
    maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the appeal is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 26 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 26 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


