
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27503/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Belfast                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 January 2015                            |On 17 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                              mrs judy hy seto


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr e Dorman, Counsel instructed by Tim McQuoid
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a Canadian national born on 9 August 1973.

2.   On 10 January 2013 she applied for a residence card as  the  spouse  of
    an EEA national exercising treaty rights in the  United  Kingdom.   The
    application was refused by the respondent in terms of the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter dated 20 June 2013.   The  appellant  sought  to  appeal
    against that decision, which appeal came before Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Balloch on 20 June 2014.

3.   The appellant is married to Leigh Damian Byrne who is an Irish  citizen
    and also, having been  born  in  County  Armagh,  entitled  to  British
    citizenship.  They married on 27 July 2012.  The appellant entered  the
    United Kingdom on 9  August  2012  as  a  visitor  using  her  Canadian
    passport.  It is contended that at all times  the  appellant's  husband
    had been exercising EEA treaty rights as a student or a worker.

4.   At the time of the application on 10 January  2013  the  appellant  had
    submitted evidence that her husband was then a  student,  currently  in
    education, from Queen's University Belfast.

5.   The point was not taken in the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  that  the
    appellant's husband was not an EEA national.  The issue that was  taken
    was that no evidence had  been  produced  that  he  held  comprehensive
    sickness insurance in the United Kingdom in the  capacity  as  student.
    It was not accepted that the NHS provided that insurance as required.

6.   At the hearing Judge Balloch concluded that the  NHS  did  not  provide
    the comprehensive insurance  that  was  required.   However,  that  was
    perhaps a more academic point at the date of  the  hearing  because  by
    then the appellant's husband  was  working  and  that  that  particular
    requirement did not apply.  However, consideration was  given  both  to
    the case of McCarthy (European citizen) [2011] EUECJ C-434/09  (05  May
    2011) and to the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006,
    in particular to paragraph 1 of schedule 1  to  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    (Amendment) Regulations 2012.  It was the finding of the Judge,  having
    regard to both matters that the  appellant's  husband  was  not  to  be
    regarded as an EEA national,  whether residing in Ireland or in Belfast
    he was a national of both countries.

7.   In those circumstances the appeal in respect  of  the  Regulations  was
    dismissed.

8.   Consideration would seem also to have been given to Article  8  of  the
    ECHR, the appeal in respect thereof dismissed.

9.   Grounds of appeal lodged against those decisions  seek  to  argue  that
    the Judge was in error in finding that the  NHS  did  not  provide  the
    sufficient cover, also  contended  that  the  provisions  of  the  2012
    Amendment Regulations stripping  the  appellant's  spouse  of  his  EEA
    rights in the UK  was  in  breach  of  citizen  rights.   Also  it  was
    contended that the approach to Article 8 was defective.

10.  Mr Dorman, who represents the appellant, relies  upon  the  grounds  of
    appeal.

11.  He submits that the Judge fettered her discretion in failing to make  a
    finding that NHS coverage meets  the  definition  or  consideration  of
    comprehensive health insurance for the purposes of Regulation  4(d)  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

12.  In reply Mr Shilliday invites my  attention  to  the  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in Ahmed [2014] EWCA 988.

13.  At paragraph 19 it cited the reasoning of the Upper Tribunal to why  an
    entitlement to free NHS treatment does not satisfy the  requirement  of
    the Regulations for a student.  The Tribunal found  that  there  was  a
    material distinction between that requirement and the free  entitlement
    to NHS treatment, the fundamental position being of course that the EEA
    national and/or spouse would not be a burden on the host state  so  far
    as that matter is concerned.  That was highlighted in the  judgment  of
    Buxton LJ in W (China) v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1494 cited at  paragraphs
    20 to 23 of the judgment.  In essence, the Court of  Appeal  held  that
    the requirement for comprehensive health insurance went beyond the  NHS
    treatment.

14.  It seems to me that the case of Ahmed clearly supports  the  contention
    that was found by the Immigration Judge at the appeal.  In any event it
    is now somewhat academic, given that the  appellant's  husband  is  now
    working rather than a student.

15.   The  key  issue  in  the  appeal  is,  however,  whether  or  not  the
    appellant's husband is exercising EEA treaty rights whilst  working  in
    the United Kingdom so she can derive the  right  of  residence  as  his
    spouse.

16.  Paragraph 1 of schedule 1 to the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    (Amendment) Regulations 2012 states:-

         "Paragraph 1 of schedule  1  to  these  Regulations  makes  various
         changes to the interpretation provisions of Regulation 2(1) of  the
         2006 Regulations.  These amendments include provisions which:-


             (b)  make it clear that a person will not be  regarded  as  an
                  EEA  national  where  they  are  also  a  United   Kingdom
                  national.  This amendment of  the  definition  of  an  EEA
                  national reflects the ECA's judgment in  the  case  of  C-
                  439/09 Shirley McCarthy v Secretary of State for the  Home
                  Department.   Schedule  3  to   these   Regulations   make
                  transitional provisions to address the position of persons
                  who have acted in reliance n the previous definition'."


     This Regulation came into effect on 16 October 2012.

17.  The appellant's husband  has  worked  or  studied  in  Ireland  and  in
    Belfast, both countries of which he is a national.

18.  It would seem, therefore, in the light of those  Regulations  that  the
    concession  seemingly  made  in  the  reasons  for  refusal  that   the
    appellant's husband was an EEA national exercising treaty rights was in
    error.  Certainly, at paragraph 19, the First-tier Tribunal Judge notes
    that particular fact.

19.  In paragraph 19 the Judge notes the arguments placed before her  by  Mr
    Dorman that the effect of the  Regulations  has  been  to  deprive  the
    appellant's husband of his treaty rights.

20.  Mr Dorman accepts, for the purposes of this appeal, that the Judge  was
    bound by the Amendment Regulations to find that the appellant's husband
    was  not  exercising  treaty  rights  in  Belfast.   Nevertheless,   he
    continues with the argument that such was unlawful within the scheme of
    EU law and said that the Regulations, having  changed,   the  appellant
    was  in a more detrimental position than an EEA national  from  another
    country which was not what the McCarthy decision intended.  I am  asked
    to make a reference to Article 26.  The question as to whether  or  not
    the  provisions  of  the  2012  Amendment  Regulations,  stripping  the
    appellant's  spouse  of  his  EEA  rights,  offend  the  principal   of
    equivalence under European Union laws and/or whether the 2012 Amendment
    Regulations go further than the ECJ intended following  its  ruling  in
    McCarthy.

21.  It is submitted that paragraph 59 in McCarthy is less draconian in  its
    intention than the 2012 Regulations.

22.  For my part I fail to see that  such  a  point  has  merit.   Paragraph
    59(2) provides as follows:-

         "Article 21 TFEU is not applicable to a Union citizen who has never
         exercised his right of free movement, who has always resided  in  a
         Member State of which he is a  national  and  also  a  national  of
         another Member State, providing that the situation of that  citizen
         does not include the application of measures by a Member State that
         would have the effect of depriving him of the genuine enjoyment  of
         the substance of the rights conferred by virtue of his status as  a
         Union citizen or of impeding the exercise  of  his  right  of  free
         movement and residence within the territory of the Member States."


23.  For my part I can find little in that that  is  not  reflected  in  the
    Regulations.  So far as the appellant's husband is concerned,  he  gave
    evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal.   During  1998  and  1999  he
    worked in County Clare, Ireland.  Between 2000 and 2012  he  worked  in
    China as a teacher  and  it  was  there  that  he  met  his  wife,  the
    appellant.  At the end of August 2013 he had a full-time post and  then
    various temporary posts in Belfast.  He was  joined  by  the  appellant
    when living in Northern Ireland.

24.  He has not sought to exercise his right of free  movement.   The  Judge
    found in paragraph 35 of the determination that since October  2012  he
    has been without any EEA treaty rights and the  appellant  cannot  meet
    the requirements of the transitional arrangements.

25.  I do not detect any error of law in the approach taken  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge to the issue of the Regulations themselves.

26.  The Judge went on however to consider Article 8.  As Mr  Shilliday  has
    indicated to me, whether or not it is necessary in an application for a
    residence card, per se, for Judges to consider Article 8  is  a  matter
    that is shortly to be considered by the Upper  Tribunal.   The  reality
    is, however, that in this case it was considered  and  a  decision  was
    made.  It is also submitted that the consideration given was  in  error
    of law in two respects, the first respect being an expectation as to  a
    test of insurmountable obstacles has  been  considered  by  the  Judge.
    Secondly, also that the position in Gulshan has  significantly  changed
    in that there is no longer a requirement for an  intermediate  position
    to show arguably good grounds granting leave  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The decision maker may consider Article  8  unhampered  by  any
    preliminary requirement.

27.  It seems to me that on those matters there are merits to the appeal.

28.  In those  circumstances  the  decision  of  the  Immigration  Judge  in
    relation to  the  EEA  Regulations  shall  stand.   Although  there  is
    justifiable criticism addressed to the decision letter itself it  would
    not seem that there is  any  merit  in  sending  the  matter  back  for
    reconsideration by the Secretary  of  State  given  the  state  of  the
    jurisprudence on this matter.

29.  The decision on Article 8 of the ECHR shall however be set aside to  be
    re-made.

30.  Given the requirement no doubt of evidence as  to  family  and  private
    life, it is appropriate that it is heard by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    having regard  to  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Directions.

31.  I do not set any particular directions, those will be matters  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  That might be particularly so if  there  comes  a
    decision by the Upper Tribunal which is referable to  the  jurisdiction
    of Judges to entertain Article 8 matters in the absence of any specific
    application being made to the Secretary of State for that aspect to  be
    considered.


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
