
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/27800/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25 November 2015                      |On 23 March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                              TARIQUL ISLAM APU
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                  Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms. A. Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Beach promulgated on 6 May 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Bangladesh born  4  April  1984  who
    applied on 12 March 2014 for a residence card as the unmarried  partner
    of an EEA national.

 3. The application was made on the basis  that  the  Appellant  was  in  a
    relationship  with,  Yanka  Mihaleva,  a  Bulgarian  national.  It  was
    contended that the Appellant's partner, to whom I shall  refer  as  the
    Sponsor, was exercising treaty rights in this country.

 4. The application was refused on 24 April 2014. The  Respondent  did  not
    accept that the Sponsor was exercising treaty rights as a student  and,
    therefore, did not accept that she was a qualified person as defined in
    regulation 6 of The Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 (hereafter "the 2006  Regulations").   The  Respondent  took  this
    decision because the evidence failed  to  show  that  the  Sponsor  was
    studying or  was  self-sufficient  and,  that  she  held  comprehensive
    sickness insurance in the UK. Further, the Respondent observed that the
    Appellant had not provided sufficient evidence that he and the  Sponsor
    were in a durable relationship.

 5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (IAC).

 6. Judge Beach decided the appeal following an oral hearing  having  heard
    evidence from the Appellant, Sponsor  and  the  Sponsor's  sister.  The
    Judge was satisfied that the Sponsor was registered on a college course
    but  found  that  she  did  not  attend  as  often   as   she   should.
    Notwithstanding, the Judge recognised that  mere  registration  with  a
    college was not sufficient and that the Sponsor was  also  required  to
    show that she held comprehensive sickness insurance cover  and  provide
    an assurance to the Respondent that she and her family would not  be  a
    burden on the State. The Judge noted that  there  was  no  evidence  of
    comprehensive sickness insurance cover before her, and little  evidence
    of the resources available to the Appellant and Sponsor  to  show  that
    they would not be a burden on the State. The Judge further  noted  that
    there was little evidence of the Appellant's employment from which  she
    could assess whether sufficient resources were available. She  observed
    the evidence that the Appellant and  Sponsor  were  seeking  to  obtain
    Housing Benefit and  confirmation  of  the  Sponsor's  eligibility  for
    Council housing as well as Local Authority support, which indicated the
    couple did not have sufficient resources not to  be  a  burden  on  the
    State. The Judge found therefore that the Sponsor was not  a  qualified
    person and thus not exercising treaty rights in the UK.

 7. As for whether the Appellant and Sponsor were in durable  relationship,
    whilst the Judge accepted the couple had been in a  relationship  -  it
    being observed that the Appellant and Sponsor had  conceived  a  child,
    which the Sponsor later lost  -  the  Judge  was  concerned  about  the
    Appellant's intentions regarding the future of  the  relationship.  She
    noted the Appellant had withheld  information  about  the  relationship
    from  his  family.  The  Judge  noted  the  evasive  character  of  the
    Appellant's evidence and the  contradictions  and  concluded  that  the
    evidence supported the view that  the  Appellant  was  in  a  hurry  to
    commence a relationship with an EEA national. The Judge concluded  that
    there were sufficient doubts to suggest that the  Appellant  had  other
    reasons for being in the relationship  other  than  affection  for  the
    Sponsor. The Judge was thus not satisfied that the  couple  were  in  a
    durable  relationship  and  found  accordingly.  Finally,   the   Judge
    considered Article 8 of the  ECHR  and  found  that  the  decision  was
    proportionate.

 8. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The grounds drafted by the Appellant rehearse the history and  evidence
    and essentially assert that the decision was wrong.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    McDade who found it arguable in view of the fact that the Judge was  in
    "two in two minds as to whether the relationship was a  wholly  genuine
    one", whether there was insufficient reasoning as to why the Judge  was
    not persuaded that the relationship was durable

10. Following the grant of permission, the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, opposing the appeal.

11. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law
    such that the decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

12. The Appellant appeared and was in attendance with the Sponsor.  He  was
    unrepresented and indicated  that  he  was  ready  to  proceed  without
    representation.  I  communicated  with  the   Appellant   through   the
    assistance of a court-appointed interpreter and I was satisfied that he
    fully understood the  proceedings.  I  explained  the  purpose  of  the
    hearing and the procedure. I took the Appellant through the  background
    and history and he was  referred  to  the  grounds  of  application.  I
    invited the Appellant to add to the grounds if  he  so  wished.  In  so
    doing he stated that he had provided evidence that the Sponsor held the
    necessary insurance to his then solicitor, but he could not say if this
    was presented to the Judge at the hearing. He  produced  the  Sponsor's
    European Health Insurance card and a health insurance policy. The  date
    of issue of the former was not discernable and  the  latter  post-dated
    the date of hearing before Judge Beach.

13. Ms Everett submitted that the Judge did not err in law. She stated that
    there  was  no  evidence  before  the  Judge  that  the  Sponsor   held
    comprehensive sickness insurance at the date of hearing.  She  observed
    that the European Health Insurance card did not bear a  date  of  issue
    and was not in English. There was no translation. She noted the current
    insurance policy was taken out after the hearing before the  Judge.  Ms
    Everett submitted that the Judge gave sufficient  reasons  for  finding
    that the couple were not in a durable relationship.

14. In reply the Appellant reiterated that he had provided documentation to
    his then solicitor which was not, in turn, placed before the Judge.

15. I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

16. Whilst the Appellant was represented  before  Judge  Beach  he  appears
    before the Upper Tribunal as a  litigant  in  person  and,  whilst  his
    grounds of application largely disagree with the Judge's findings,  the
    issues that arise therein and from the subsequent grant  of  permission
    are two-fold. Firstly, whether the Judge had before her  evidence  that
    the Sponsor held comprehensive sickness insurance and, second,  whether
    the Judge gave sufficient reasons for finding that the couple were  not
    in a durable relationship. In this latter regard it was the Appellant's
    contention before me that  at  a  previous  hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal it was accepted that the reasoning was so deficient.  This  is
    not made out on a perusal of the appeal  history  which  shows  that  a
    previous hearing was adjourned as the Appellant required the assistance
    of an interpreter. I am thus satisfied that the two  issues  remain  at
    large and require consideration.

17. I conclude, having considered the respective position of  the  parties'
    that, the Judge did not materially err in law.

18. In summary, the Appellant's claim is  that  he  entered  the  UK  as  a
    student in 2010 and subsequently overstayed his  leave  to  remain.  In
    early 2013 he entered into a relationship with the  Sponsor.  They  met
    through  Facebook  in  January  2013  and  the  relationship  developed
    initially through Facebook and Skype contact. They met  for  the  first
    time on 15 April 2013. The Sponsor is disabled and the Appellant is her
    sole carer. The couple are cohabiting. The Appellant is working  whilst
    the Sponsor is a student.

19. The Judge set out in detail  the  Appellant's  case  and  the  evidence
    between [8] and [35],  and  submissions  between  [36]  and  [40].  The
    consideration of the parties' positions is detailed.  The  Judge  heard
    contested evidence  from  the  Appellant,  Sponsor  and  the  Sponsor's
    sister. The Judge was clearly alive to that  evidence  and  the  issues
    before her - [41] to [43] and [46] to [49]. Between [41] and  [54]  the
    Judge sets out what she made of the  evidence  and  the  arguments.  At
    [44], [45], [53] and [54]  the Judge found as follows:

         "44. The Appellant and the sponsor both  stated  that  the  sponsor
         attended College. The sponsor showed her college ID  card  but  had
         not provided any  other  documentation  to  confirm  that  she  was
         registered at college even though the reasons  for  refusal  letter
         clearly raise this as an issue. The sponsor gave  some  details  of
         her studies but was unable to name modules. I gained  the  distinct
         impression that whilst the  sponsor  may  be  registered  with  the
         College her studies did not play a major part in her life. This may
         simply be because she does not attend  the  College  full  time  or
         maybe because she is not attending as often as she  should  attend.
         The Appellant and the sponsor were both able however, to give  some
         details regarding the course and the sponsor did provide an ID card
         for the College. I find that the sponsor is registered on a  course
         with the college although she  may  not  attend  as  often  as  she
         should.

         45. However, mere registration with the College is  not  enough  to
         show that the sponsor is exercising her Treaty right in the UK. The
         sponsor  must  also  show  that  she  has  comprehensive   sickness
         insurance and provide an assurance to the Respondent that  she  and
         her family members will not be a burden on the State. There was  no
         evidence   of   comprehensive   sickness   insurance   before   me.
         Furthermore, there  was  very  little  evidence  of  the  resources
         available to the Appellant and the sponsor to show that  they  will
         not be a burden on the State. Indeed, it is clear  that  they  were
         seeking to obtain Housing benefit because the Appellant's  evidence
         was that he had telephoned the Local Authority to ask them for this
         and had been informed that his partner was not eligible. It appears
         also that he and his sponsor may have been seeking eligibility  for
         Council housing given his comment that they were told she  was  not
         eligible for residency reasons. This does not suggest a couple  who
         have  sufficient  resources  not  to  be  a  burden  on  the  State
         notwithstanding the fact that the Appellant states that he works in
         the UK ..."

         ...

         53. However, there was sufficient consistent evidence before me  to
         suggest that the Appellant and sponsor now  live  together.   There
         were discrepancies in how long they lived at a  particular  address
         when they stated that they first moved in together and it may  well
         be that they were not  living  together  as  such  at  that  stage.
         However, there is documentary evidence before me now which suggests
         that they are living together and their  evidence  was  in  general
         consistent with regard to the  most  recent  events.  I  also  take
         account of the fact that the sponsor was recently pregnant and lost
         the baby. Clearly she is in a relationship of sorts with someone in
         order to become pregnant.   Given  the  way  she  spoke  about  the
         Appellant I find it is more likely than not that the appellant  was
         the  father  of  the  child  which  suggests  that  they   have   a
         relationship.

         54.  What causes me some concern though is the Appellant's view  of
         the future of that relationship. Although  he  states  that  he  is
         engaged he has withheld information  about  the  relationship  from
         members of his family. His evidence was that his mother was unaware
         of the relationship although he had told  his  brother  in  law.  I
         understand that his family would not wish him to live with a  woman
         before marriage but this does not stop him from informing them that
         he is in a relationship and engaged to be  married  without  saying
         that he is living with her. The Appellant was extremely vague about
         this and said that he had only spoken to his brother in  law  about
         the relationship (the sponsor stated that the Appellant had  spoken
         to his brother  and  brother  in  law).  The  lack  of  discussions
         regarding the purported engagement causes me some concern as to the
         Appellant's wishes with regard  to  the  relationship  particularly
         when coupled with his assertion that he was  told  to  contact  the
         sponsor by his friend and that he then considered himself to be  in
         a relationship with the sponsor as soon as that first contact  took
         place. This  suggests  someone  who  is  in  a  hurry  to  start  a
         relationship with an EEA national with all the  perceived  benefits
         attached particularly when  the  Appellant's  overstaying  is  also
         considered. Furthermore, the evidence of an  engagement  from  both
         the Appellant and the sponsor was somewhat vague and contradictory.
          The sponsor's sister did not appear to know that they were engaged
         and simply stated that she hoped they would marry  because  it  was
         against her family's Christian faith for them to live  together.  I
         find  that  the  sponsor  views  herself  as  being  in  a  genuine
         relationship with the Appellant and that there  is  a  relationship
         between  them.   However,  I  further  find  that  the  Appellant's
         intentions with regard to that relationship are not  clear-cut  and
         that there are sufficient doubts  to  suggest  that  he  has  other
         reasons for being in the relationship other than  simple  affection
         for the Appellant. I therefore find that the relationship is not  a
         durable relationship for the purposes of the  EEA  Regulations.  In
         any event, I have also found that the sponsor is not exercising her
         Treaty rights and so the Appellant  would  not  be  entitled  to  a
         residence card on the basis (sic)."

20.   The first issue that I must consider  is  whether  evidence  that  the
    Sponsor held comprehensive sickness insurance was before the Judge. The
    Judge states in emphatic terms that there was no such evidence [45].  I
    am satisfied that the Judge did not err in so stating. There is nothing
    to indicate that such evidence was  placed  before  her.  Even  on  the
    Appellant's admission before me he accepts that that evidence  was  not
    placed  before  the  Judge.  The  insurance  policy  documentation  now
    produced was not in existence at the date of hearing before Judge Beach
    and there is no evidence that the European Health  Insurance  card  was
    issued at the date of hearing and, if it was, whether its existence was
    drawn to the attention of the Judge.  The Judge  cannot  be  criticised
    for not considering evidence that was not before her.  I  am  satisfied
    that there was no error in the Judge's approach.

21.   As for the second issue  as  to  whether  the  Judge's  reasoning  was
    sufficient, I am satisfied that the Judge was not in "two in two minds"
    about the relationship and that she gave clear and  sufficient  reasons
    for finding that the couple were not in a durable relationship.  In  my
    view, it is clear that whilst Judge Beach accepted the existence  of  a
    relationship she was not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant's  intentions
    towards the Sponsor were indeed genuine. She  reached  that  conclusion
    having heard evidence from the Appellant and witnesses. The Judge  gave
    consideration to the evidence and her conclusions at [50] to  [54]  are
    supported  by  the  detailed  recital  of  the  evidence.  The  adverse
    credibility findings are rooted in the evidence and are cogent, to  the
    point that the Judge's conclusions were properly open  to  her  on  the
    evidence. Upon a holistic reading of the decision, I am satisfied  that
    it is clear why Judge Beach reached the decision that she did.  I  find
    that there was no error in the Judge's approach and what is essentially
    being put forward is a disagreement with her conclusions and  findings.
    I find that the decision is not devoid of reasoning which  are  proper,
    intelligible and adequate to sustain the conclusions drawn.

22.   The question of whether a couple are in a durable  relationship  is  a
    question of fact. The Judge reached a decision that was open to her  on
    the evidence at the date of hearing. The factual  landscape  has  since
    changed, in that the Sponsor gave birth to the Appellant's  son  on  10
    November 2015. Whilst this was evidently not the  position  before  the
    Judge for which this appeal concerns, it may well be the subject matter
    for a new application should this be a course the Appellant chooses  to
    undertake.

23.   The decision dismissing the appeal  is  not  vitiated  by  a  material
    error of law and shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of  law
and stands. The appeal is dismissed.



Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no request for anonymity to the Upper Tribunal, and I see no  need  to  make
an anonymity order.


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed. There is no fee award.


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral
