
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27099/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision sent to parties on   |
|On 22 June 2016                               |On 04 July 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                               MD ABDUL LATIF
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Miss A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's
    refusal to grant him further leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant, because he could not show that he met  the  Attributes
    requirements of Appendix A of the Immigration Rules HC395 (as amended).



 2. The applicant had not produced evidence which satisfied the  respondent
    that he was entitled to the 30 points claimed for his CAS, because  she
    did not consider that he had  produced  satisfactory  evidence  of  his
    competence in the English language at a minimum of CEFR Level B2.   The
    appellant relies on a City and Guilds certificate  from  the  Universal
    Professional and Vocational College dated 5 December 2013 which says in
    terms that the pass level is at CEFR B2.  It shows that he  obtained  a
    first-class B2 pass in reading, speaking  and  listening  but  that  he
    narrowly failed the writing test.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Gill  on  the
    basis that it was unclear whether the appellant's  certificate  equated
    to an overall award of CEFR B2 or whether he had only achieved CEFR  B2
    for listening, reading and speaking and failed to achieve CEFR  B2  for
    the writing  component.    The  grant  of  permission  was  limited  to
    paragraph 9 of the grounds, the Judge considering the remaining grounds
    to be unarguable.

 4. The Secretary of State replied  to  the  grant  of  permission  in  the
    following terms:

         "2.    The respondent opposes the appellant's appeal.   In  summary
             the respondent will submit inter alia that the  judge  of  the
             First-tier Tribunal directed [herself] appropriately.

         3.   Appendix A paragraph 118B clearly states  that  the  applicant
             demonstrates knowledge of English in all four components.  The
             applicant  clearly  could   not   demonstrate   he   met   the
             requirements of the Rules as he had  not  passed  the  writing
             component."

 5. The relevant provision in Appendix A  is  at  paragraph  118B(4)  which
    reads as follows:

         "118. No points will be awarded for a  Confirmation  of  Acceptance
         for Studies unless:

         (a)  The applicant supplies as evidence of previous qualifications,
         the specified documents... and

         (b) One of the requirements in (i) to (iii) below is met: ...

             (ii) the course is degree level study ...and:

                  (4)  The Confirmation of Acceptance for  Studies  checking
                  service entry confirms that the applicant has a  knowledge
                  of English equivalent  to  level  B2  of  the  Council  of
                  European's Common European Framework for language learning
                  in all four components  (reading,  writing,  speaking  and
                  listening). ..."

 6.  The  appellant's  CEFR  certificate  is  unequivocal:  the   appellant
    'narrowly failed' the writing component.  He therefore  does  not  meet
    the CEFR B2 standard for all four components, and was not  entitled  to
    the  30  points  claimed  for  his  CAS.  Without  those  points,   his
    application was bound to fail.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was unarguably entitled so to find and  I
    am satisfied that there is no material error of  law  in  his  decision
    dismissing the appeal.

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld  and  I  dismiss  the
    appeal.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.

Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson                    Date: 1 July 2016
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
