
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27888/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House            |Notice sent                          |
|On: 7 August 2015                    |On: 18 August 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                             MUHAMMAD SHER KHAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                      NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL AND REASONS

 1. The appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was allowed by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Kanagaratnam. That decision was later set aside  by
    the Upper Tribunal which remade the decision by dismissing it.   By  an
    order of the Court of Appeal dated 23 March 2015,  the  appeal  against
    the Upper Tribunal was allowed, and Judge Kanagaratnam's  decision  was
    restored.

 2. Given that it is accepted by the respondent that  Judge  Kanagaratnam's
    decision should not have been set aside, I am satisfied  that,  insofar
    as there was any appeal by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  this  matter
    pending, that her appeal has been withdrawn.

 3. Consent of the Upper Tribunal is required for a party to  withdraw  its
    case. Having carefully considered the facts of this appeal as a  whole,
    and observing that the Appellant was the successful  party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, I give such consent for the case to be withdrawn.

 4. Accordingly with my consent, and pursuant to rule 17(5) of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  this  appeal  is  recorded  as
    "Withdrawn with the consent of the Upper Tribunal". This  is  a  Notice
    pursuant to rule 17(5) to inform the parties that the appellant's  case
    is withdrawn.

 5. The effect of the respondent's case  being  withdrawn  from  the  Upper
    Tribunal is that the proceedings before the Upper Tribunal  are  at  an
    end. There is no appeal before the Upper Tribunal  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision shall stand.  This order therefore disposes of  the
    proceedings before the Upper Tribunal.


Signed   Date: 7 August 2015

 [pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
