


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27349/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 23 March 2015                            |On 25 March 2015             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                chee-keong ng
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Collins, instructed by Kilic & Kilic Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing Mr Ng's appeal
    against  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  his  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain.

 2. For the purposes of this decision, I shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
    Secretary of State as the  respondent  and  Mr  Ng  as  the  appellant,
    reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of  Malaysia  born  on  1  August  1979.  He
    entered the United Kingdom on 28 May 2000 as a visitor and was  granted
    subsequent periods of leave to remain as a student until 31 March 2008,
    following which he was granted periods of leave to  remain  as  a  work
    permit holder until 10 March 2012.  During  that  time  he  became,  in
    January 2009, a member of the Territorial  Army.  He  was  subsequently
    accepted for permanent service in HM Forces  and  on  7  December  2011
    became exempt from  immigration  control  under  section  8(4)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971. He served in Afghanistan from 10 May 2012  to  25
    November  2012  until  he  was  demobilised  as  part  of   a   routine
    administrative process.

 4. In May 2012 the appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain on the
    basis of ten years'  lawful  residence.  His  application  was  refused
    initially on 23 January 2013, owing to gaps in  his  period  of  lawful
    residence in October 2002, January 2007 and May  2008.  The  respondent
    declined to exercise discretion in his favour in regard to  those  gaps
    and considered that the decision did not breach  his  Article  8  human
    rights.

 5. The appellant appealed that decision to the First-tier Tribunal and  in
    a determination promulgated on 10 June 2013 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Maxwell allowed the appeal. He did so on the basis  that  the  decision
    was not in accordance with the law since the respondent had failed,  in
    exercising  discretion  against  the   appellant,   to   consider   the
    circumstances under which the gaps in  residence  had  occurred.  Judge
    Maxell found that there had in fact been no gap  in  October  2002  and
    that the other two gaps had occurred due to errors or  oversights  made
    by his college (with respect to the first gap) and his  employer  (with
    respect to the second), the circumstances of which had been made  known
    to the respondent at the relevant times. Judge Maxwell  also  indicated
    that the respondent ought, in re-making the decision, to  consider  the
    appellant's service in HM Armed Forces.

 6. The respondent then reconsidered the appellant's application and made a
    fresh decision on 8 July 2013, maintaining the  refusal.  No  reference
    was made to the previous claimed gap in October 2002 but it was decided
    not to exercise discretion in the appellant's favour  with  respect  to
    the latter two gaps. The application was refused under  paragraph  276D
    of  the  immigration  rules  and  again  it  was  considered  that  the
    appellant's removal would not breach his human rights.

 7. The appellant appealed again and  his  appeal  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kainth on 29 October 2013. It was  conceded  before  the
    judge that he could not meet the requirements of the immigration rules,
    including paragraph 276ADE, and  the  appeal  proceeded  on  Article  8
    grounds outside the rules. The judge noted that, whilst  the  appellant
    had a girlfriend in the United Kingdom, he  was  not  relying  on  that
    relationship as part of his application. The  judge  heard  from  three
    character witnesses, including the Operations Partner of John  Thompson
    & Partners, where the appellant had trained and worked as an  architect
    for several years. Judge Kainth noted the positive credibility findings
    made by Judge Maxwell and maintained those findings. He found that  the
    appellant had  established  a  private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    including  his  service  in  the  Armed  Forces,  and  concluded   that
    interference with that private life was disproportionate and in  breach
    of Article 8. He allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.

 8. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the respondent
    on the grounds that the judge had applied the wrong standard  of  proof
    in relation to Article 8 and that,  in  allowing  the  appeal,  he  had
    failed to explain how the appellant's circumstances were exceptional.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted on 25 November 2013.

10. In a determination promulgated on 9 January 2014, Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Freeman found an error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision  on
    the basis that the judge had wrongly  disclaimed  any  requirement  for
    exceptionality. He went on to re-make the decision  and  dismissed  the
    appeal, placing considerable weight upon  the  appellant's  service  in
    Afghanistan in HM Armed Forces, but concluding that  his  circumstances
    were nevertheless not exceptional and that a grant of leave outside the
    rules was accordingly not justified.

11. Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal was sought, and granted, on
    the  basis  that  UTJ  Freeman   had   erroneously   relied   upon   an
    exceptionality test.  UTJ Freeman's decision was quashed and the matter
    remitted to the Upper Tribunal, where it came before me.

Appeal Hearing

12. At the hearing, and after hearing  submissions  from  both  parties,  I
    indicated that there was an error of law in the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal such that it had to be set aside and re-made,  given  the
    absence of any consideration of  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the
    immigration rules and to the public interest.

13. I heard submissions from both parties with  a  view  to  re-making  the
    decision.

Consideration and Findings

14. In deciding to allow his appeal, two First-tier  Tribunal  judges  made
    very favourable comments about the appellant, in particular  in  regard
    to his exemplary record of service with HM Armed Forces,  as  confirmed
    in the letters of support provided. Page 24 of the appeal bundle  is  a
    letter from Major C L Ellisdon of the Royal Engineers and page 25 is  a
    letter from Captain Glen Franklin also of  the  Royal  Engineers,  both
    attesting to the  indispensible role played  by  the  appellant  as  an
    architect in the Royal Engineers, particularly during  his  service  in
    Afghanistan. Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman also  referred  to  the  fact
    that the appellant's valuable public work was recognised by  the  award
    of a NATO medal and indeed a certificate for that award is included  in
    the appeal bundle. He found that such activities could not  be  written
    off as easily replicated elsewhere for the purposes of consideration of
    private life in accordance with the principles in  MM (Tier 1 PSW;  Art
    8; private life) Zimbabwe [2009] UKAIT 00037.

15. UTJ Freeman's only reason for dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  was
    that his circumstances did  not  meet  the  "exceptionality"  test  for
    succeeding under Article 8 outside the  rules.  However  the  Court  of
    Appeal found that he erred in that respect and I  accordingly  re-visit
    the question of whether circumstances exist that  justify  a  grant  of
    leave on Article 8 grounds outside the rules, which as recent case  law
    has established is in effect the proportionality  exercise  within  the
    five stage test in R (Razgar) v SSHD (2004) UKHL 27.

16. Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 inserted into  the  Nationality,
    Immigration Act 2002 the relevant  public  interest  considerations  in
    Article 8 cases, at sections 117A and 117B of Part 5A. I turn to  those
    considerations in section 117B, from which it is  apparent  that  there
    are no considerations militating against the appellant.

17. With regard to section 117B(2), the appellant speaks  English  and  has
    produced evidence of his integration into society,  not  least  by  his
    studies, work and service in HM Armed Forces. With  regard  to  section
    117B(3) he has produced evidence of his  qualifications,  training  and
    admirable  employment  record  as  an  architect  and  would  thus   be
    independent and far from a burden  on  taxpayers.  As  regards  section
    117B(4) and (5), his private life has  been  established  when  in  the
    United Kingdom lawfully. Although it is established case  law  (Miah  &
    Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA  Civ  261,
    Patel & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  UKSC
    72) that a near miss cannot provide substance to a  human  rights  case
    which  is  otherwise  lacking  in  merit,  the  circumstances  of   the
    appellant's inability to qualify under the ten year residence rules  is
    nevertheless a matter of some weight in his favour when taking  account
    of all the relevant considerations.

18. Other than his inability to meet the requirements  of  the  immigration
    rules there are, accordingly,  no  public  considerations  specifically
    weighing against the appellant. On the contrary there are many  factors
    in his favour, namely his employment record and the  level  of  support
    afforded in the various letters from friends and colleagues. There  are
    also compelling circumstances in the appellant's case, which, it  seems
    to me, taken cumulatively with  the  other  favourable  considerations,
    bring him into the category of those rare cases where a grant of  leave
    outside the rules is justified. I  refer  in  particular  to  his  past
    services in HM Armed Forces which, albeit not lengthy  and  whilst  not
    giving rise to any expectation that a right to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom would follow, nevertheless earned him  a  NATO  medal  and  led
    Major Ellisdon to describe him as having "selflessly volunteered to put
    himself in harm's way to further  the  United  Kingdom's  stabilisation
    goals in Afghanistan."

19. In all of these circumstances, it seems  to  me,  therefore,  that  the
    appellant's removal from the United Kingdom would  be  disproportionate
    and in breach of Article 8. Accordingly  I  conclude  that  his  appeal
    should be allowed.

DECISION

20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an error
    on a point of law. The  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  is  accordingly
    allowed to that extent and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is
    set aside.

21. However, I re-make the decision by allowing Mr Ng's appeal again.






                               Signed   Date: 23 March 2015
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
