
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27347/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11 March 2015                                |On 12 March 2015           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                              Liaqat Ali Qadri
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Chohan, instructed by Immigration Chambers
For the respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the determination of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Eldridge promulgated  13.11.14,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent, dated 18.6.14,  to  refuse  his
    application made on 20.12.13 for further leave to remain as  a  Tier  1
    Entrepreneur.  The Judge heard the appeal on 4.11.14.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin granted permission to appeal on 9.1.15.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 11.3.15 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the determination of Judge Eldridge should be set aside.

 5. The grounds of appeal and grant of permission relate to the refusal  to
    grant an appeal of the First-tier Tribunal hearing on 4.11.14.

 6. The day before the appeal hearing  date  the  appellant  wrote  to  the
    Tribunal to request an adjournment. He explained that the day  previous
    to his letter he had fallen down stairs and hurt his back and head.  He
    had attended A&E and attached the hospital notes. He was treated as  an
    outpatient, given advice to take pain-relieving medication if necessary
    and to see his GP if the matter persisted. He was also advised to rest,
    avoid walking long distances and avoid carrying heavy  things  for  the
    next 3-4 weeks. In  his  letter  the  appellant  said  that  his  legal
    representative's  office  in  London  had  been  closed  and   it   was
    "impossible for me to travel all the way to  the  legal  representative
    Luton office to  prepare  my  bundle  for  tomorrow  hearing  as  I  am
    suffering from severe pain and discomfort."

 7. The application was refused by a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  as  the
    information did not indicate that the appellant was unfit to attend the
    hearing. There was time for him to  obtain  such  evidence  before  the
    appeal hearing, but nothing further was submitted.  The  appellant  did
    not  attend  the  hearing.  At  the  outset   of   the   hearing,   his
    representative Mr Syed-Ali renewed the adjournment application  stating
    that the appellant was indisposed and Mr Syed-Ali was  unable  to  take
    detailed instructions.  The  application  was  opposed.  There  was  no
    further information or change of circumstances to put before the judge.
    The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the application and decided it
    was in the interests of justice to proceed. The appellant had had ample
    time to prepare his case since the refusal decision in June 2014 and he
    had been notified of the hearing as long ago as 6.8.14.

 8. In the circumstances of this case, I  find  no  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal to continue with the appeal hearing
    in the absence of the appellant. There had been ample time  to  provide
    instructions to his representatives, and  he  was  represented  at  the
    hearing. There was no evidence before the judge that  he  was  in  fact
    unfit to attend the appeal hearing and such  information  as  had  been
    submitted was unsatisfactory. If  the  appellant  truly  was  unfit  to
    attend, it would have been possible for him to obtain such evidence.

Conclusions:

 9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed.
Signed: [pic]     Date: 11 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the  Asylum  and
Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award     Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
(rule 23A (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
2005 and section 12(4)(a) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007).

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed and thus there can be no fee award.

Signed: [pic]     Date: 11 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

