
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27276/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 27 May 2014                             |On 29 May 2014             |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                         MR NSIKANABASI UMOH ESSIEN
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Michael Wainwright of counsel instructed by Daniel
Aramide Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr P Deller a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 25 April 1978. He
   has appealed the determination of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Wellesley-
   Cole ("the FTTJ") who dismissed his appeal against the respondent's
   decision of 9 November 2012 to refuse to grant him leave to remain in the
   UK as the family member of an EEA national under the provisions of the
   Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006
   Regulations"). His wife and sponsor is a French citizen.


2. On 3 February 2014 I heard the appeal against the decision of the FTTJ,
   concluded that there was an error of law and set aside the decision to be
   remade in the Upper Tribunal. I also gave directions. My Decision and
   Directions is set out in the Appendix to this determination.


3. Prior to the hearing the appellant's representatives made an  application
   for an adjournment. They said that the appellant's wife could not  attend
   the hearing because she would be sitting an examination. The  application
   was refused. Mr Wainwright renewed the application. I was given copies of
   the wife's student card and a schedule of  LLB  examinations  at  Holborn
   College. I was told that her attendance was necessary because  she  would
   give evidence about whether the marriage would be recognised under French
   law. In reply to my question, Mr Wainwright  accepted  that  she  had  no
   expertise in French law apart from being of French  nationality.  He  was
   unable to tell me whether, in accordance with my directions, any  efforts
   had been made to obtain expert evidence as  to  French  law  relating  to
   foreign marriages and in  particular  a  proxy  marriage  in  Nigeria.  I
   refused the application. There is nothing to connect the  wife  with  the
   examination schedule. The examination which I was told she was  going  to
   sit was at 2 pm on the day of the hearing and there was  no  evidence  to
   indicate that she would not been able to attend the hearing before me  at
   10 am and then go on and sit the examination at 2 pm. Finally, there  was
   no witness statement from her indicating what  evidence  she  would  have
   given and it was admitted that, whilst she would have been called to give
   evidence about recognition of foreign marriages under French law, she had
   no relevant expertise.


4. I have no evidence above and beyond that which was before the  FTTJ.  The
   appellant relied on his 46 page bundle produced for that hearing. At  the
   hearing before the FTTJ the  appellant  and  his  wife  relied  on  their
   witness  statements  and  did  not  give  oral  evidence.  Mr  Wainwright
   indicated that this course would be followed and the appellant would rely
   on the documentation in his bundle and submissions.


5. Mr Deller relied on the refusal letter and Kareem (Proxy marriages  -  EU
   law) [2014]  UKUT  24  (IAC).  He  submitted  that,  in  line  with  this
   authority, I had to judge the validity of the claimed marriage by  French
   law. The burden fell on the appellant to establish that the marriage  was
   valid under French law and he had provided no  evidence  to  do  so.  The
   respondent accepted that his wife was a French citizen and  a  worker  in
   this country. The only question in  the  appeal  was  whether  they  were
   validly married to each other. He adopted the  submissions  made  by  the
   Presenting Officer to the FTTJ and asked me to apply the  same  reasoning
   in relation to her finding that  the  marriage  was  not  one  which  was
   recognised under Nigerian law. He submitted that the appeal  failed,  for
   two reasons; the failure to establish a valid marriage under Nigerian law
   and the failure to establish a valid marriage under French law.


6. Mr Wainwright said that he could not address me on  the  requirements  of
   French law because the appellant had no evidence about this. He submitted
   that the marriage should be recognised as a valid marriage under Nigerian
   law. The respondent had given no proper reasons for any doubts as to  the
   validity of the Nigerian documents. Kareem stated that the production  of
   a marriage certificate issued by a competent authority would  usually  be
   sufficient. On the face of the documents there was  nothing  to  indicate
   that they were not valid. The respondent had not produced any evidence to
   gainsay this, for example in the form of a document verification  report.
   He argued that the documents should be accepted. I was asked to allow the
   appeal.


7. Mr Deller did not wish to reply and I reserved my determination.


8.  The  appellant's  application  for  a  residence  card  under  the  2006
   Regulations stands or falls on the one issue in this appeal;  whether  he
   and his  wife  have  entered  into  a  valid  marriage  which  should  be
   recognised.


9. The appellant and his wife said that they  were  married  in  a  marriage
   ceremony under Native Law  and  Custom  on  25  February  2012  in  Lagos
   Nigeria. The marriage was by proxy as neither of them  attended.  Members
   of the family did attend. The documentary evidence  which  the  appellant
   produced in support was a Native Law and Customary  Marriage  Certificate
   issued on 2  May  2012,  a  sworn  affidavit  of  the  same  date  and  a
   confirmation of traditional  marriage  letter  also  dated  2  May  2012.
   Subsequently there was a reconfirmation letter dated 19 February 2013.


10. At the hearing before the FTTJ the respondent's position  was  not  that
   the marriage documents were forged but that they were not reliable. There
   was conflicting information about the  validity  of  proxy  marriages  in
   Nigeria. The appellant's representative argued that the  question  to  be
   addressed was not whether the marriage was valid under Nigerian civil law
   but whether it was valid under Nigerian native law  and  custom.  I  note
   that  the  original  documents   were   produced   by   the   appellant's
   representative at that hearing, which would have made  it  difficult  for
   the respondent to have them checked before the hearing.


11. Whilst I have set aside the decision of the FTTJ because of the  failure
   to consider the validity of the marriage under French law I indicated  in
   paragraph 7 of my Decision and Reasons that I was not persuaded that  the
   FTTJ erred in law in concluding that the appellant  had  not  established
   that a valid marriage had been  contracted  under  Nigerian  law  whether
   nationally or locally. Having studied  the  evidence  relied  on  by  the
   appellant and taking into account  Mr  Wainwright's  submissions  I  have
   reached the same conclusion as the  FTTJ  for  the  reasons  set  out  in
   paragraphs 8 and 9 of her determination; that  to  the  standard  of  the
   balance of probabilities the appellant has failed to establish  that  his
   marriage is valid either under native law and custom  or  Nigerian  civil
   law.


12. Even if the appellant had established that his marriage was valid  under
   Nigerian law he would also, in line with Kareem, be required to establish
   that the marriage was contracted between him and his  wife  according  to
   the national law of the EEA country of her  nationality  as  a  qualified
   person; that is France. Although given an adjournment and the opportunity
   to do so the appellant has not produced any evidence  to  show  that  the
   marriage was contracted between him and his wife according to French law.
   In the absence of any witness statement from his wife and  the  admission
   that she has no relevant expertise I am not persuaded that an adjournment
   to allow her to give evidence would have produced any  material  evidence
   as to the operation of French law in this area.


13. Whilst I have set aside the decision of the FTTJ dismissing  the  appeal
   I remake the decision and also dismiss the appellant's appeal.






       .............................................
       Signed                                         Date 28 May 2014
       Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden





























                                  APPENDIX

1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 25 April 1978. He
has been given permission to appeal the determination of First-Tier
Tribunal Judge Wellesley-Cole ("the FTTJ") who dismissed his appeal against
the respondent's decision of 9 November 2012 to refuse to grant him leave
to remain in the UK as the family member of an EEA national under the
provisions of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006
("the 2006 Regulations"). His wife and sponsor is a French citizen.

2. The respondent refused the application because she did not accept that
the appellant was validly married to the sponsor. It was not accepted that
the documents submitted established that they were married or that a proxy
customary marriage conducted in their absence in Nigeria was legally
recognised.

3. The appellant appealed and the FTTJ heard his appeal on 3 July 2013.
Both parties were legally represented. There was no oral evidence and the
appeal was determined on the basis of submissions. The FTTJ considered the
country information before her and concluded that the local government in
the area in Nigeria where the claimed marriage took place did not recognise
customary marriages by proxy and that the documents said to establish the
marriage were questionable. The appellant had not established that he and
the sponsor were validly married. She dismissed the appeal under the 2006
Regulations.

4. The appellant applied for and was granted permission to appeal on
grounds which argued that the FTTJ erred in law in her interpretation of
the material before her and that on the basis of the latest country
information she should have reached the conclusion that there was a valid
marriage.

5. At the hearing before me the appellant, who was accompanied by the
sponsor, explained that he had discovered only recently that his former
solicitors had closed down. He had not been able to obtain his papers from
them. He brought with him a bundle of photographs showing groups of those
present at the wedding ceremony. He accepted that neither he nor the
sponsor were amongst them. He also produced four affidavits from those who
attended the wedding. He accepted that neither the affidavits nor the
photographs had been put before the FTTJ.

6. Since the determination in this appeal the Upper Tribunal has
promulgated the reported determination in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law)
[2014] UKUT 24 (IAC). The summary, prepared by the panel, states;

         "a. A person who is the spouse of an EEA national who is a
         qualified person in the United Kingdom can derive rights of free
         movement and residence if proof of the marital relationship is
         provided.


         b. The production of a marriage certificate issued by a competent
         authority (that is, issued according to the registration laws of
         the country where the marriage took place) will usually be
         sufficient. If not in English (or Welsh in relation to proceedings
         in Wales), a certified translation of the marriage certificate will
         be required.


         c. A document which calls itself a marriage certificate will not
         raise a presumption of the marriage it purports to record unless it
         has been issued by an authority with legal power to create or
         confirm the facts it attests.


         d. In appeals where there is no such marriage certificate or where
         there is doubt that a marriage certificate has been issued by a
         competent authority, then the marital relationship may be proved by
         other evidence. This will require the Tribunal to determine whether
         a marriage was contracted.


         e. In such an appeal, the starting point will be to decide whether
         a marriage was contracted between the appellant and the qualified
         person according to the national law of the EEA country of the
         qualified person's nationality.


         f. In all such situations, when resolving issues that arise because
         of conflicts of law, proper respect must be given to the qualified
         person's rights as provided by the European Treaties, including the
         right to marry and the rights of free movement and residence.


         g. It should be assumed that, without independent and reliable
         evidence about the recognition of the marriage under the laws of
         the EEA country and/or the country where the marriage took place,
         the Tribunal is likely to be unable to find that sufficient
         evidence has been provided to discharge the burden of proof. Mere
         production of legal materials from the EEA country or country where
         the marriage took place will be insufficient evidence because they
         will rarely show how such law is understood or applied in those
         countries. Mere assertions as to the effect of such laws will, for
         similar reasons, carry no weight.


         h. These remarks apply solely to the question of whether a person
         is a spouse for the purposes of EU law. It does not relate to other
         relationships that might be regarded as similar to marriage, such
         as civil partnerships or durable relationships."


7. Mr Deller accepted and I find that although the FTTJ could not have been
aware of Kareem this contains a statement of the current law which I must
apply. The FTTJ should have considered whether the marriage was contracted
"according to the national law of the EEA country of the qualified person's
nationality". The sponsor is that person and her nationality is French. The
failure to do so is an error of law. That on its own is sufficient to lead
to the conclusion that the decision should be set aside. However, I am not
persuaded that the FTTJ erred in law in concluding that the appellant had
not established that a valid marriage had been contracted under Nigerian
law whether nationally or locally.

8. Having found that the FTTJ erred in law I set aside her decision which
should be remade in the Upper Tribunal. I adjourned for the hearing to take
place at a later date. It is clear that the appellant had no knowledge of
Kareem or the evidence which he was likely to need to obtain as a result.
Furthermore, his former solicitors have ceased to practice and he needs
time to try and obtain his papers from them or whoever might now have them.

DIRECTIONS

1) To be listed for first available date after three months hence.

2) Time estimate - two hours.

3) The hearing will encompass the issues raised in Kareem.

4) Both parties are permitted to serve further evidence, including expert
evidence as to French law relating to the marriage.

5) No Interpreter required.


