
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27402/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd January 2017                           |On 8th February 2017          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                               mr Imran Sarker
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Khan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lingam, promulgated on 12th July 2016, following a  hearing  at  Taylor
    House on 1st July 2016.  In the determination, the judge dismissed  the
    appeal of Imran Sarker, whereupon  the  latter  applied  for,  and  was
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  He was born on 9th  November
    1990.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent Secretary  of
    State dated 17th July 2015, refusing his application for a variation of
    leave to remain against the decision to remove him on the basis that he
    had made a combined  application  for  leave  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student, which could not  succeed  under  paragraph  245ZX  of  HC  395
    because he did not have a CAS because a CAS had been assigned  on  21st
    May 2014 by London School of Technology, but this institution  was  not
    listed as a Tier 4 Sponsor and  on  8th  May  2015  the  Appellant  was
    informed of this and allowed 60 days to obtain a new  Sponsor  but  was
    unable to do so.

The Judge's Findings

 3. At the hearing before Judge Lingam, the Appellant did not attend.   Nor
    did he arrange  for  any  representation  on  his  behalf.   The  judge
    observed that, "I am satisfied that the Appellant has not explained his
    absence" (paragraph 6).  The Appellant's claim, as  summarised  by  the
    judge was that he was a regular student in the UK since entry here  and
    he had filed a Tier 4 application with a valid CAS  but  the  Sponsor's
    licence was subsequently revoked and that the original grant of 60 days
    was not sufficient and additional time was needed.

 4. The judge heard submissions by the Respondent Secretary of  State  that
    the appeal should be dismissed for  lack  of  substantial  evidence  to
    support the Grounds of Appeal (paragraph 10).  The judge observed  that
    the Appellant filed his appeal grounds on 31st July 2015 but since then
    there had been no  communication.   He  also  observed  that,  "as  the
    Appellant did  not  attend  his  hearing,  there  is  little  point  in
    assessing if the Respondent had properly issued him the 60  day  period
    to obtain a new CAS" (paragraph 14).

 5. In addition, reference was also made to the case of Amjid  Khan  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 137 which was to the effect that when an applicant is  offered
    extra time to submit a new valid CAS, he must also submit new financial
    information to show that he met the requirements for his new course  at
    the material time.  The Appellant did not do so  here  (paragraph  16).
    The judge then went on to consider Article 8 and found that the Sponsor
    adequately dealt with the set of  circumstances  at  the  date  of  the
    decision  (paragraph  19)  and   that   there   were   no   exceptional
    circumstances (paragraph 20) so as to require a  consideration  of  the
    Appellant's position outside the Immigration Rules.

 6. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that evidence  was  filed  before  the
    hearing but did not find its way to the judge so that  his  failure  to
    consider this evidence amounted to an error of law.  On  17th  November
    2016, permission to appeal was granted by the  Tribunal  on  the  basis
    that,

         "Whilst the Appellant was entirely at fault by not faxing it  until
         after 5pm on 30th June 2016, and the judge cannot be faulted if the
         papers did not make their  way  through  to  him  by  the  time  he
         approved it for promulgation on 5th July  2016,  the  fact  remains
         that the papers were filed before the hearing" (see paragraph 3).

 8. On 5th December 2016, a Rule 24 response was entered to the effect that
    the Appellant had been granted 60 days to find another college  and  he
    could not find a place within that timeframe, it was  open  to  him  to
    leave the UK and seek an appropriate entry clearance to return which he
    had failed to do.

The Hearing

 9. At the hearing before me,  on  3rd  January  2017,  the  Appellant  was
    represented by Mr Z Khan of Counsel who began by submitting that he did
    not place complete reliance upon the grounds of application  but  would
    seek to introduce further new matters.  No application was made by  him
    to amend the grounds of application.  However, he continued to make two
    specific submissions.

10. First, the Appellant's case was not that  he  had  failed  to  find  an
    appropriate college within 60 days, as the  judge  had  understood  the
    case to be at the time of the hearing, but that he did find a  college,
    but that the college required him to  verify  his  identity  which  the
    Appellant was unable to  do  because  the  password  was  held  by  the
    Respondent  Home  Office.    Therefore,   on   17th   June   2015   his
    representatives, SEB Solicitors, had written  to  the  Home  Office  in
    Sheffield asking them to provide  certified  copies  of  his  passport.
    This was done before the decision to refuse the application was made on
    17th July 2015.  No reply was forthcoming  with  the  certified  copies
    such that the Appellant could then seek entry into his chosen college.

11. Second, although the Grounds of Appeal referred  to  the  case  of  CDS
    (Brazil) Mr Khan would not wish to rely upon that decision at  all  but
    would seek to say that the judge had failed to approach the  Article  8
    issue in the correct and lawful manner.  He had only dealt with Article
    8 in two brief paragraphs and he had failed to  consider  the  position
    outside the Immigration Rules on the basis of  freestanding  Article  8
    jurisprudence which it was incumbent upon him to do.

12. For his part, Mr Clarke submitted that although the Appellant's witness
    statement does refer to the fact that on 8th May 2015 he had been given
    60 days to find a new college, there  was  nothing  in  the  bundle  of
    documents asking the Home Office to have them send him certified copies
    of his passport at all.  It was incontestable that he was given 60 days
    and he was given his documents within  three  months  to  find  another
    college.

13. Second, although CDS (Brazil) was not now being relied upon, it was  in
    the grounds of  application,  and  this  case  was  entirely  different
    because that was the case where the Appellant had already embarked upon
    a course of study when the status of the college was put into question,
    which is not the case here, because the Appellant has yet  to  begin  a
    course anywhere at all.

14. Third, as far as Article 8 is concerned, the Appellant did not  attend,
    and the  two  paragraphs  are  adequately  reasoned,  with  the  second
    paragraph (paragraph 20) referring  to  the  fact  that  there  are  no
    "compelling" circumstances here such  that  would  necessitate  enquiry
    into freestanding Article 8 jurisprudence.  If the  Appellant  was  not
    relying upon paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  there  was
    nothing  further  to  be  said  as  far  as  freestanding   Article   8
    jurisprudence was concerned.

15. In his reply, Mr Khan now handed up a copy of the letter of  17th  June
    2015 from SEB Solicitors, apparently written  to  the  Home  Office  in
    Sheffield, and to this was attached the Home Office response of 8th May
    2015, which had given the Appellant 60 days to  find  another  college.
    Mr Khan submitted that he only had one copy of this.  I pointed it  out
    to him that the approach on his side had been dogged by a piecemeal and
    unstructured handling of this appeal.  At the  very  least,  copies  of
    this, apparently vital document, should have been provided both for the
    Tribunal, and for Mr Clarke on behalf of the Home Office, prior to this
    hearing.  It is not a matter that  should  have  been  brought  to  the
    attention of the Tribunal in the reply of Mr Khan  to  the  submissions
    made by Mr Clarke.  Nevertheless, two copies of this document were made
    and one was kept on the Tribunal file and the other given to Mr  Clarke
    for his records.  I enquired of Mr Khan whether  this  document,  which
    was not in the Appellant's bundle and  not  even  referred  to  in  the
    grounds of application to the Upper Tribunal, was actually sent to  the
    Home Office requesting them for the Appellant's certified copies of his
    passport, in a timeous manner, so as to enable them to  deal  with  the
    matters raised.  Mr Khan could not give the  Tribunal  that  assurance.
    He submitted that it was open to the Home Office to either deny receipt
    of this letter of 17th  June  2015  asking  for  documentation,  or  to
    concede to the fact that such an application had been made.

No Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.  First, the grounds of application to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    dated 26th July 2016 from SEB Solicitors (see pages 6 to 8 of the  Home
    Office bundle) do not refer to the letter of 17th June 2015  requesting
    the Home Office to provide certified copies of the Appellant's passport
    so as to enable him to get a CAS  from  an  approved  institution.   If
    anything, the  understanding  up  to  this  point  has  been  that  the
    Appellant failed to secure a college on the basis that the 60 days were
    not enough.  Second, insofar as evidence is sent to  the  Tribunal  for
    consideration in the appeal, it is sent after 5pm on  30th  June  2016,
    which is after close of business, and in any event far too late  for  a
    hearing the next day on 1st July 2016.  Third, the  Appellant  did  not
    attend and neither did his legal representatives, so that assuming that
    this late submission of evidence had been produced before the Tribunal,
    Judge Lingam would have wished to know whether the letter of 17th  June
    2015 had been posted to the Home Office on that date  bearing  in  mind
    that the letter sent in June 2015 does not refer to a named institution
    that is approved as an educational Sponsor, but just states  that  "our
    client has been offered by a Tier 4 educational Sponsor who is ready to
    issue a new CAS".  In all the circumstances of the case, therefore, the
    decision reached by Judge Lingam was the only one that was open to  him
    and there is no material error of law in his decision.

Notice of Decision

17. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

18. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 7th February 2017

