
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/27990/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 11 November 2015                  |On 21 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                   MS BNN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr E. Waheed, counsel instructed by Gracelands
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was requested by Mr Waheed and I find that it  is  appropriate  to
make an order because the case involves  consideration  of  the  welfare  of
four  young  children.  Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court   directs
otherwise,  the  appellant  is  granted  anonymity.  No  report   of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her or any member  of  her
family. This direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.


                             DECISION & REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on 5 October 1970. On  10
August 2005, she was issued with a visit visa  and  arrived  in  the  United
Kingdom with her husband and two children. They subsequently overstayed  and
on 13 November 2011, the Appellant applied for leave to remain  outside  the
Immigration Rules with her husband and  children  as  her  dependants.  This
application was refused without the right of appeal  but  following  further
submissions on 3 March 2012, 30 April 2012, 11 March  2013,  29  April  2014
and 16 June 2014, the Respondent issued a further  refusal  decision  on  27
June 2014, with the right of appeal.

2.    The Appellant duly appealed against this decision and her appeal  came
before First Tier Tribunal Judge Housego for hearing on  23  February  2015.
The Judge noted that the appeal was based primarily on  the  health  of  the
eldest child: CBN (DOB  22.7.02)  who  has  been  diagnosed  with  Aspergers
Syndrome, with reference to Articles 3 and 8 and section 55 of the  Borders,
Immigration & Asylum Act 2009. In addition to C,  there  are  three  further
children: ACN (DOB 1.8.04) who was born in Nigeria and  DNN  (DOB  10.12.06)
and GCN (DOB 28.11.12) who were both born in the United Kingdom.

3.    In a decision promulgated on 16 March 2015, the  Judge  dismissed  the
appeal, essentially on the  basis  that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the
requirements of the Immigration Rules and there  were  no  compassionate  or
compelling factors that would make it appropriate to  warrant  the  exercise
of discretion outside the Rules.

4.    An application for permission to appeal was made on 28 May  2015.  The
grounds in support of the application asserted  that  the  Judge  had  erred
materially in law: (i) in failing to adequately take into account  the  best
interests of the Appellant's children  and  failed  to  adequately  consider
evidence that autism is taboo  in  Nigeria;  (ii)  in  failing  to  consider
whether it would be reasonable for the children  to  return  to  Nigeria  in
accordance with paragraph 276ADE(iv) of the Rules;  (iii)  section  117B  of
the NIAA 2002 is inconsistent with paragraph 276ADE of the Rules;  (iv)  the
Judge failed to take into account material factors  under  section  117B  of
the NIAA 2002 viz that there  are  3  qualifying  children  under  paragraph
276ADE(iv) of the Rules and the Appellant and her family speak  English  and
are no burden on tax payers.

5.    Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
Hollingworth on the basis that an  arguable  error  of  law  had  arisen  in
relation to the extent of consideration by the Judge of evidence adduced  in
relation to the approach taken to autism in  Nigeria  and  it  was  arguable
that the Judge has not set out the thrust of the  evidence  adduced  at  the
hearing in this context in relation to findings appertaining to  Article  3,
Article 8 and the application of section 55.

Hearing

6.    At the hearing before me, Mr Waheed submitted a skeleton argument.  He
also requested that an anonymity order be made,  given  that  there  were  4
children and the case essentially turned on  the  condition  of  the  eldest
child and an assessment of the evidence in respect of the eldest  child  and
the Judge's finding at [36] that: "on the balance of probabilities I do  not
find  that  there  is  any  significant  difficulty  for  receiving  medical
treatment for autism in Nigeria. The only evidence of that  is  the  absence
of reference to such treatment  in  country  guidance  issued  by  the  Home
Office and one article from  2006,  subsequently  repeated  in  2010."  This
finding failed to take into account the contents of the  article  that  drew
attention to the stigma and lack of recognition of the condition in  Nigeria
and the problems faced by those suffering from it  and  their  parents.  The
only other evidence referred to is the absence of evidence - when one  reads
the refusal letter no mention is made of treatment of autism  and  Aspergers
and it is not in any of the Home Office  information.  The  Judge  correctly
noted at [7] that the burden of justifying interference with an  established
private and family life  rests  with  the  Respondent  and  thus  where  the
Respondent puts forward no evidence that burden is not met. It was not  open
to the Judge to find in the absence of evidence that that  burden  had  been
met by the Respondent. Mr Waheed asked me to find that the Judge had made  a
material error of law.

7.     Mr  Waheed  further  submitted  that  the  Judge  had  erred  in  his
consideration of  paragraph  276ADE(iv)  at  [38]  where  consideration  was
limited to the Appellant only but he should have considered  her  dependants
as well. In respect of section 117 of  the  NIAA  2002,  he  submitted  that
Article 8 on the facts of  this  case  constitutes  both  private  life  and
family life and the Appellant's private life encompassed  her  as  a  mother
watching her child suffer on return to Nigeria.  At  [58]  the  Judge  dealt
with that by finding that the family would  be  returned  to  together,  but
that is not the only issue here as his siblings and  his  parents  would  be
impacted by having to watch C suffer. He submitted that  GS  (India)  [2015]
EWCA Civ 40 was a standalone case  about  illness  and  the  ECHR  but  this
particular case concerns the welfare of children  and  section  55  and  the
Judge erred in relying on it. He submitted that if I was minded  to  find  a
material error of law there was no need for a further hearing as  there  was
no need for further oral evidence; the Appellant's fears  as  to  her  child
were said to be corroborated by background evidence and it was open  to  the
Upper Tribunal to analyse the background evidence. Mr Waheed submitted  that
the credibility findings did not go to the core of the claim, which was  now
based on the children.

8.    Ms Fijiwala submitted that there were no errors in the  determination;
that the Judge had fully  considered  the  issue  of  autism  and  that  the
decision in GS (India) was relevant and did not stand alone in  relation  to
medical issues as it considers Articles 3 and 8 of  ECHR.  Although  it  was
asserted that certain documentation had not  been  considered,  the  article
that had been provided was noted by the Judge at [8] and [36].  In  relation
to [36] when the Judge considered the lack  of  evidence  this  was  not  in
relation to medical issues in Nigeria but to a lack of reference  to  autism
in the evidence available. It is clear from  the  refusal  letter  that  the
eldest child was considered at [36]-[48] and consideration was given to  the
medical facilities. It was up to  the  Appellant  to  establish  a  lack  of
facilities in Nigeria  and  not  for  the  Respondent  to  prove  that  such
facilities are in place. In respect of the contents of the article  referred
to it is clear that there is some awareness in the medical  community  about
autism but the article refers more to misdiagnosis,  however,  it  is  clear
that the Appellant's eldest son has already been diagnosed  and  the  family
would be returning with this in mind. It is also clear that the parents  are
taking care of the children and there is no reason why  would  not  continue
to do so in Nigeria. According to page 2 of the article, there  are  various
organizations involved and NGOs are aware of autism and  would  be  able  to
assist this family. Ms Fijiwala further submitted  that  the  article  is  5
years old and conditions would have improved. She submitted that at  page  3
of the article implementation would have been  put  in  place  in  terms  of
further awareness  of  autism.  The  Appellant's  case  is  that  autism  is
regarded as taboo but this is considered by the Judge at [46] in an  article
3 context where he finds the threshold is not met, which is consistent  with
N and D and [101] of GS (India).

9.    In respect of Article 8, Ms Fijiwala relied upon [111] of  GS  (India)
[2015] EWCA Civ 40. She submitted that it was clear  that  the  Judge  found
family life existed between the Appellant and her dependants but the  family
would be returning together  as  a  unit  and  family  life  could  continue
together. In respect of section 117B of the NIAA 2002, little weight  should
be given to all their private lives and the  eldest  child  cannot  rely  on
medical treatment as treatment is available in Nigeria. She  submitted  that
it was clear that the Judge has considered section 55  and  best  interests.
The Judge has also taken  into  account  relevant  case  law:  Azimi  Moayed
[2013] UKUT 000397 (IAC); Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and EV (Philippines)  [2014]
EWCA Civ 874 and it was in the best interests of the child  to  remain  with
his parents. In respect of the  reasonableness  of  relocation,  the  eldest
child is bilingual. In respect of paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Rules,  having
found the children could return and given that  treatment  is  available  in
Nigeria it was reasonable to expect children to return and so the fact  that
the children were not  directly  considered  would  have  made  no  material
difference. She submitted that, in relation to grounds 3 & 4 which refer  to
section 117B and 276ADE, there was no inconsistency between  the  Rules  and
the Act and it was the same test in relation to  a  "qualified  child."  The
Judge accepted that 3 of the children qualified but  it  was  reasonable  to
expect them to leave the United Kingdom. In light  of  the  decision  in  AM
(Malawi) [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) this is a question that  only  needs  to  be
answered once. When the Judge was considering whether it was reasonable  for
the children to leave the United Kingdom it was incumbent on  the  Judge  to
consider the public interest factors and whole situation in the  round,  not
just a childcentric evaluation.  In  respect  of  section  117B(3)  and  the
family speaking English, it is clear  from  AM  (Malawi)  [2015]  UKUT  0260
(IAC) that the public interest factors do not on  their  own  give  rise  to
right  to  remain  in  the  UK.  Further,  the  Judge  properly   considered
credibility. The Appellant and her dependants came as visitors and  made  no
application for 6 years and thus  the  maintenance  of  immigration  control
weighed heavily against them. It would be reasonable  and  proportionate  to
return them as a family unit.

Decision

10.   I find that First Tier Tribunal Judge Housego erred materially in  law
for the following reasons:

    10.1.  whilst at [41] the Judge directed himself in respect of the best
    interests of the Appellant's children, I consider that in so  doing  he
    failed to give any specific consideration to the impact on  the  eldest
    child, C, and whether it would be in his best interests to be  returned
    to Nigeria given that he has been diagnosed  with  Aspergers  Syndrome.
    There is no analysis of the evidence in the form of  reports  submitted
    [56-81 of  the  Appellant's  bundle]  which  make  clear  that  he  has
    difficulties in all of the three  areas  that  comprise  the  triad  of
    autism  -  difficulties  with  his  social   interaction   and   social
    communication, which is having a significant impact on his  ability  to
    form reciprocal peer relationships and his socialization  and  that  he
    also has a history of rigidity of thought and behaviour [65].

    10.2.  I further consider that the Judge erred in his finding  at  [36]
    [cited at [6] above] in that Aspergers syndrome is not a condition that
    requires medical treatment as such but rather, because it is  concerned
    with speech and language and  thus  learning  difficulties  and  social
    communication, it is a disability which requires care and support.  The
    first Appellant's evidence before the Judge, which he records  at  [12]
    is that he would suffer in Nigeria because  autism  is  regarded  as  a
    taboo, is heavily stigmatized and there would be inadequate support for
    her son there. The Judge failed to make any findings on this evidence.

    10.3   in failing to consider whether it would be  reasonable  for  the
    children to return to Nigeria in accordance with  paragraph  276ADE(iv)
    of the Rules.  I note that at [26]-[29] of  the  refusal  decision  the
    Respondent expressly considered this aspect of the  case.  The  Judge's
    finding is at [38] and provides:

         "The two elder of the children have lived in  the  UK  at  least  7
         years preceding the application and are in  the  UK,  but  for  the
         reasons set out in the rest of this section of this decision I find
         that it would be reasonable for the children to leave the  UK.  The
         same point deals with  para  ADE276(iv).  Para  276ADE(vi)  applies
         where there would be very significant obstacles to the  applicant's
         integration into the country to which she would  have  to  go.  The
         appellant faces no such difficulty. The assertion is that her elder
         son does. I have found this not to be do."

    I consider that the Judge materially erred in his consideration of  the
    application of paragraph 276ADE(iv) for the following reasons:

         (i) he made a factual error in that the three eldest  children  had
         resided continuously in the United Kingdom for longer than 7  years
         at the date of decision. I consider this error to  be  material  in
         any assessment of reasonableness given that consideration  must  be
         given to this question in respect of  three  children  rather  than
         two;

         (ii) the decision lacks adequate reasoning.  The  only  reason  put
         forward by the Judge for finding that it would  be  reasonable  for
         the family as a whole to return is that he has already  found  that
         there would not be very significant obstacles to the integration of
         the first Appellant's eldest son, but this is not in fact the  case
         as there is no finding to this effect elsewhere in the decision.

         (iii) Even if there were such a finding it would  be  erroneous  in
         that the three children who  prima  facie  fall  for  consideration
         under paragraph 276ADE(iv) are not  required  to  show  that  there
         would be very significant obstacles to their integration  but  only
         that it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  them  to  return  to
         Nigeria. The Judge appears to have merged the  two  separate  tests
         under paragraph  276ADE  (iv)  and  (vi)  and  in  so  doing  erred
         materially in law.

11.   I do not find that the Judge erred for the reasons asserted in  Ground
(iii) or (iv) of the grounds of appeal,  because  AM  (Malawi)  [2015]  UKUT
0260 (IAC) makes  clear  that  the  section  117B  considerations  represent
Parliament's view of the public interest that must  be  taken  into  account
when assessing proportionality and expressly states at [18] that:

         "18.     The mere fact that  the  evidence  in  a  particular  case
         establishes fluency or financial independence to some degree,  does
         not prevent the Respondent  from  relying  upon  these  matters  as
         public  interest  factors  weighing  against  the   claimant.   The
         Respondent would only be prevented from  doing  so  if  a  claimant
         could demonstrate fluency, or financial independence, to the  level
         of the requirements set out in the  Immigration  Rules.  There  was
         therefore no error of law in the Judge's approach to the issues  of
         fluency  and  financial  independence  in  the   context   of   her
         consideration of s117B. The  Appellant  could  obtain  no  positive
         right to a grant of leave to remain from either s117B (2)  or  (3),
         whatever the degree of his fluency in English, or the  strength  of
         his financial resources."

12.   However, for the  reasons  given  in  [10]  above,  I  find  that  the
decision of First Tier Tribunal Housego contains a material error of law  in
respect of the first two grounds of appeal. Given that those  errors  go  to
the heart of the appeal I remit the appeal for a hearing de  novo  before  a
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal other than Judge Housego.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

14 December 2015

