
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/27668/2014
     IA/27670/2014

                                IA/27672/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 20th February 2015                        |      On 24th February 2015   |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And
                                 MRS LB (1)
                                  MR VB (2)
                                  MR PB (3)

                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr C Howells, Counsel instructed by Dent Abrams
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I  will  refer  to
    the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellants are all citizens of Mauritius. The first  appellant  was
    born on 16th July 1971, the second appellant is  her  husband  who  was
    born on 20th July 1967. The third appellant is their son who  was  born
    on 29th September 2000. The appellants also have an older  daughter  HB
    (date of birth 27th July 1995) who has been granted discretionary leave
    to remain in the UK for 30 months on the basis of her private  life  in
    this country on 20th June 2014. The appellants entered the UK  on  11th
    September 2003 as visitors. The  first  appellant  extended  her  leave
    until 29th February 2012 and the second and third appellants until 30th
    September 2009. They applied for further leave on 11th April 2011.  The
    Secretary of State refused this application on two  occasions:  firstly
    on 29th July 2013 and secondly  on  19th  June  2014.   The  appellants
    appealed on 30th June 2014. This appeal was allowed on Article  8  ECHR
    grounds in a determination of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  CJ
    Woolley promulgated on 9th November 2014.

 3. On 5th January 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Parkes found  that
    there was an arguable error of law and  granted  permission  to  appeal
    because in accordance with the Court of Appeal decision in  Haleemudeen
    v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558 Article  8  ECHR  appeal  should  have  been
    determined first in accordance with the Immigration Rules.

 4. The matter came before me to determine whether the First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law.

Submissions

 5. It was the common position of both parties that following the  case  of
    Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ  74  that  the  "new"  Immigration  Rules
    relating to Article 8 ECHR were applicable to this  appellant's  appeal
    as the transitional provisions only applied to  decision  made  between
    9th July and  6th  September  2012.  So  despite  the  fact  that  this
    application was made on 11th April 2011 as the final decision was  made
    on 19th June 2014  the  proper  approach  was  to  first  consider  the
    applications and appeals under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 6. Judge Woolley did not  have  the  benefit  of  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision in Singh which was only promulgated on 12th February 2015  and
    made considerable efforts to resolve the issue with the two  apparently
    contradictory authorities of Edgehill v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  402  and
    Haleemudeen, however ultimately he did not reach entirely  the  correct
    conclusion. It is accepted by  all  that  he  did  err  in  finding  at
    paragraph 27 of his determination that he should  not  apply  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules to the appellants'  case  and  in  only
    considering the private life aspect of the  appellants'  appeals  under
    the general law relating to Article 8 ECHR.

 7. The submissions of the parties were therefore focused on  whether  this
    error was material.

 8. It was agreed the case turned on  whether  the  third  appellant  could
    reasonably be expected to return to Mauritius despite his  having  been
    in the UK for more than seven years as a child at the date of  decision
    and in the context of all the other facts of the case. This is the test
    set out at paragraph 276ADE (iv) of the Immigration Rules.

 9. As reasonableness of a qualifying child (such as  the  third  appellant
    who had spent more than seven years in the UK) leaving the UK  was  now
    part of the test at s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002, which Judge Woolley had considered in  his  determination  of
    the appeal, the issue in dispute was whether Judge Woolley had properly
    and lawfully considered reasonableness.

10. Mr Shilliday argued that Judge  Woolley  had  not  properly  considered
    reasonableness at paragraph 35 of his determination as he had  not  set
    out the real world factors which  would  be  favourable  on  the  third
    appellant's return to the Mauritius. Further he had not, in  accordance
    with EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874, given  proper  weight
    to the appellant's parents having no right to be in the UK and  to  the
    fact the third appellant had no right to education in  the  UK.   Judge
    Woolley had  only  listed  factors  in  favour  of  the  appellant.  Mr
    Shilliday argued strongly against Mr Howells proposition that there was
    a presumption created in favour of the third appellant due to his seven
    years residence, and pointed out that the original guidance cited by Mr
    Howells had accompanied paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules at  a
    time when it made no reference to the appellant having to show that  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave. This guidance was
    no longer relevant as it was not required to show that appellant  could
    not reasonably be expected to leave the UK. Mr  Shilliday  argued  that
    under the Immigration Rules the burden  of  proof  was  always  on  the
    appellant so it could not be argued that as this was an issue going  to
    proportionality the burden of proof was on the respondent.

11. Mr Howells argued that this case differed from EV (Philippines) in that
    the children in that case had only been in the UK  for  four  years  so
    that they did not benefit from the presumption that their removal would
    be unlawful which seven years residence created.  He  relied  upon  the
    Statement of Compatibility which the respondent  had  issued  when  the
    Article 8 ECHR Rules were introduced in July 2012 which itself had said
    seven years residence would generally establish that it was not in  the
    best interest of a child to have to leave the UK. The third appellant's
    case was not solely about him arguing he should be  allowed  to  remain
    for education. Further the respondent had not identified  any  counter-
    vailing factors relating to  Mauritius  which  Judge  Woolley  had  not
    considered. Mr  Howells  argued  that  s.117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  had  reversed  the  situation  in   EV
    (Philippines) so that parents were now dependent  on  what  was  right/
    reasonable for the  children.  He  also  argued  that  in  relation  to
    proportionality the burden of proof was on the respondent.

12. At the end of submissions I told the parties that I  found  that  Judge
    Woolley had erred in law  in  failing  to  consider  the  situation  in
    Mauritius  on  return  for  the  third  appellant  as   part   of   the
    consideration as to whether it was reasonable for him to have to  leave
    the UK. I set out my  written  conclusions  on  this  matter  below.  I
    informed the parties that as  this  aspect  of  the  consideration  was
    missing and might have affecting the outcome of the appeal I would  set
    aside the decision of  Judge  Woolley  allowing  the  appeal  and  hear
    further submission  on  the  issue  of  the  situation  for  the  third
    appellant if he were returned to Mauritius. I would then make  findings
    on this issue which would be combined with the findings at paragraph 35
    of the determination of Judge Woolley to make a new decision.

Conclusions - Error of Law

13. As set out above Judge  Woolley  erred  in  law  in  failing  to  apply
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules to the third appellant.  This
    error became material as he then appears to have placed the  burden  of
    proof on the respondent in the consideration of proportionality, as  it
    would be in the general law relating to Article 8 ECHR rather  than  on
    the appellants as it would be under the Immigration Rules and thus  not
    to have considered  the  issue  of  the  reasonableness  of  the  third
    appellant's leaving the UK as widely as he should have done.

14. In a  consideration  of  the  reasonableness  of  expecting  the  third
    appellant to leave the UK despite having spent more than seven years in
    the UK at paragraph 276ADE (iv) of the Immigration Rules  there  should
    have been consideration as to the  circumstances  the  third  appellant
    would face on return to Mauritius. This is not  considered  at  all  at
    paragraph 35B of the determination of Judge Woolley.

Evidence & Submissions - Remaking

15. At paragraph 12 of the determination of Judge  Woolley  information  is
    set out the evidence given by the first appellant about  Mauritius.  Mr
    Shilliday cross-examined the first appellant further and she said  that
    she speaks English, French, Creole and some Hindi. The third  appellant
    and his sister speak English. The  main  languages  of  instruction  in
    Mauritian schools are Creole  and  French,  although  English  is  also
    taught as a subject.

16. Mr Shilliday submitted that he thought that English was wider spoken in
    Mauritius and he wished to rely upon the operational guidance  note  on
    this matter.  He  did  not  have  this  document  in  the  Tribunal.  I
    questioned him as to whether such a document existed on  Mauritius.  He
    was not entirely certain. I have since ascertained  that  there  is  no
    country of origin information report or operational  guidance  note  on
    Mauritius on the gov.uk website. Mr Shilliday submitted that he  wished
    to rely upon EV (Philippines) and the fact that  the  family  had  some
    accommodation in Mauritius; the third appellant could access  education
    even if he would have to learn French and that the family would not  be
    destitute  on  return  to  Mauritius.  Return  to  Mauritius  would  be
    inconvenient to the third appellant but this was not sufficient for him
    to succeed in his appeal.

17. Mr Howells said that it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  third
    appellant to have  to  leave  the  UK.  He  would  be  faced  with  the
    disruption of his education with issues of a different  curriculum  and
    languages. It would be particularly unreasonable to  expect  the  third
    appellant to leave the UK as his older sibling (who had been in the  UK
    for exactly the same amount of time) had been allowed  to  remain:  she
    had turned 18 years old and had been in the UK for half her life so had
    qualified under paragraph 276ADE (v) of the Immigration Rules.  If  the
    third appellant could not be reasonably expected to  leave  then  there
    would be no public interest in the removal  of  the  first  and  second
    appellants under paragraph 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.



Conclusions - Remaking

18. It is not disputed that the third appellant is  under  the  age  of  18
    years and has been in the UK  for  11  years  and  five  months,  since
    September 2003 when he entered as a two  year  old  child.  To  satisfy
    paragraph 276ADE (iv) of  the  Immigration  Rules  he  must  also  show
    however that it is not reasonable to expect him to leave the UK.

19. As stated above I rely upon what is found by Judge Woolley at paragraph
    35B of his  determination  which  in  summary  states  that  the  third
    appellant has all of his friends and acquaintances in the UK, and is  a
    British child with only very remote memories of Mauritius. He is  close
    to his older sister HB who has permission to remain in the  UK  on  the
    basis of her long residence. As a fourteen year old he is  moving  away
    from the influence of his parents and forming his own social circle and
    planning for his future education. In summary it  was  clearly  in  the
    third appellant's best interests to remain in the UK.

20. I find that there is undoubtedly an education system in Mauritius,  and
    as is said in the refusal letter some of the instruction is in  English
    in that country, which the third appellant could join  if  he  were  to
    return. It would however be a  different  system  which  would  require
    adjustment on his part and set him back.  There is a property  in  that
    country which the appellants own and could in the medium term  use  for
    accommodation (as it is currently rented out).  There  is  no  evidence
    that they would be destitute on return: the first and second appellants
    have previously worked there and there  are  relatives  who  remain  in
    Mauritius. Clearly the third appellant's parents, the first and  second
    appellants, have no right to remain in this country.

21. Although this is a finely balanced decision I find that it would not be
    reasonable to expect the third appellant to  return  to  Mauritius.  In
    accordance with EV (Philippines) and the considerations at paragraph 35
    I find that the third appellant entered the UK at the age of  just  two
    years and has spent his entire memorable life in the UK; he has reached
    a key stage of his secondary education; and is totally  distanced  from
    his country of origin. He lacks linguistic skills in French and  Creole
    which are languages commonly used in Mauritius and  his  removal  would
    interfere with his family life relationship with his eighteen year  old
    sister with whom he has always lived (and plans to continue to  live  -
    see her statement to the Tribunal) and who has permission to remain  in
    the UK lawfully. I find these matters  are  ones  that  go  far  beyond
    inconvenience to the third appellant.

22. In coming to my conclusion I have weighed  these  matters  against  the
    fact that return to Mauritius would not lead to his being destitute  or
    without education at all and thus have weighed factors relating to  the
    situation in the country of potential removal as was done at  paragraph
    44 to 45 of EV (Philippines). However I conclude  that  the  fact  that
    this appellant has very considerably longer residence; the fact that he
    has formed far greater private life ties due to  his  longer  residence
    and being older than the appellants in that case;  and  the  fact  that
    unlike them he has family life ties with his 18 year old sister who  is
    lawfully resident in the UK leads me to a different conclusion to  that
    reached by the Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines).

23. There is clearly a family life relationship between the third appellant
    and his sister HB, and their parents the first  and  second  appellants
    who all continue to cohabit together as a family. I find  that  removal
    would interfere with these family life relationships. This interference
    would be in accordance with the law as the first and second  appellants
    concede that they cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. Any interference with the family life rights of  the  first  and
    second appellants is justified as being in the  economic  interests  of
    the  UK  by  way  of  enforcing  consistent  immigration  control.  The
    appellants are all of good character and  there  is  no  issue  of  the
    protection from crime and disorder.

24. When considering the proportionality of the interference with the first
    and second appellants' right to respect to family life I pay  attention
    to s. 117 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  and
    particularly that s.117B(6) states that the public  interest  does  not
    require the removal of  persons  who  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child, where it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom. I find that
    this test is met by the appellants, and in addition they clearly  speak
    good English and have qualifications  which  will  enable  them  to  be
    financially  self-supporting.  The  first  appellant  has  been  wholly
    lawfully present whilst in the UK, and the second appellant largely so.
    I have not given weight to considerations of the private  life  of  the
    first  and  second  appellants  whilst  in  the  UK   precariously   or
    unlawfully. Whilst having regard to the fact that effective immigration
    control is in the public interest I find  that  the  first  and  second
    appellants are also entitled to succeed in their appeals.

Decision

   1. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.

   2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside.

   3. The appeal is remade and I allow the appeal  of  the  third  appellant
      under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules  and  the  first  and
      second appellants in accordance with the general law of Article 8 ECHR
      with reference to s.117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
      2002.

Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 23rd February 2015

Judge Lindsley
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date 23rd February 2015


Judge Lindsley
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
