

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                   Appeal Number:
IA/27413/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Promulgated on:           |
|On 23 July 2013                             |On 25th July 2014         |
|                                            |                          |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?


                                   Between

                                     S T
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                           Respondent

                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S Canter, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Details of appellant and basis of claim

   1.       This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission on
      5 June 2014 by Judge Deans in respect of the determination  of  First-
      tier Tribunal Fletcher-Hill  who  dismissed  the  appeal  following  a
      hearing at Hatton Cross by way of a determination  promulgated  on  15
      May 2014.
   2.       The applicant is an Iranian national born on 20  February  1987.
      She entered the UK as a student and submitted an application to remain
      as the spouse of an Iranian refugee whom  she  married  here  in  July
      2012. Her claim was refused on 19 June 2013 on eligibility grounds and
      also  because  her  relationship  had  broken  down  due  to  domestic
      violence. The appellant claims that she would be  at  risk  on  return
      because of her marriage to a political refugee.

   3.       In granting permission to appeal, Judge Deans expressed the view
      that the judge did not properly assess any risk of serious harm to the
      appellant returning to Iran  as  the  estranged  wife  of  an  Iranian
      refugee in the UK.

   4.       The appeal came before me on 23 July  2013.  The  appellant  was
      present and I heard submissions  on  whether  or  not  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge made an error on a point of law.

   5.       At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision which  I
      now give.

Findings and Reasons

   6.       Four grounds are put forward by Counsel in his criticism of  the
      determination. I deal with each of these in turn.

   7.       The first complaint is that the judge failed to have regard to a
      material matter when assessing proportionality; i.e.  the  appellant's
      near ability to meet the requirements  of  the  rules  for  indefinite
      leave to remain as the victim of domestic violence, it being the  case
      that had her application been decided sooner or had her  husband  been
      British or settled here, she would have qualified for indefinite leave
      to remain. No disrespect to Mr Canter is intended, but  this  argument
      is so weak that it is not  deserving  of  consideration.  Firstly,  it
      mattered not when the application was decided because even if  it  had
      been decided on the spot, the appellant would not have  qualified  for
      leave as she did not meet the eligibility requirements of  the  rules.
      Secondly, her  husband  was  not  a  settled  resident  or  a  British
      national. He currently has discretionary leave and when that comes  to
      an end, he will need to make an application for further status. It  is
      not  the  case  that  he  was  about  to  qualify  for  settlement  or
      nationality but did not have such  status  when  the  application  was
      made. That may have been described as a near miss, although even  then
      the eligibility requirements were not met. Thirdly, as  there  was  no
      valid "near miss" argument whatsoever, the  judge  made  no  error  in
      failing to address it. Ideally, she should have dismissed it as  being
      wholly unmeritorious, but her failure to do so has no  impact  on  the
      outcome of the appeal. At the  hearing,  Mr  Canter  argued  that  the
      appellant might have applied as a Post Study Worker had  she  not  got
      married but that sounds like a "what if" argument rather than  a  near
      miss. The judge cannot be expected to consider all possibilities. That
      would be wholly speculative.

   8.       The second argument is that the judge failed  to  determine  all
      the grounds of appeal raised. It  is  maintained  that  the  appellant
      alleged that her return to Iran would breach Articles 2, 3 and  8  but
      that the judge only dealt with the Article 8 appeal as is confirmed by
      her dismissal of the appeal on Article 8 grounds without any reference
      to Article 2 and 3. I have  had  careful  regard  to  the  grounds  of
      appeal. They appear in the respondent's  bundle  and  consist  of  two
      pages. Essentially they cite various cases with regard to  Article  8.
      No specifics of the appellant's case are  set  out  and  there  is  no
      reliance anywhere on Articles  2  and  3.  It  is,  therefore,  wholly
      erroneous to maintain that the judge failed to consider points  raised
      in the grounds of appeal.

   9.       The third ground argues that the judge failed to  apply  anxious
      scrutiny to the appellant's case in that she did not show that  "every
      factor which might tell in favour of an applicant  had  been  properly
      taken into account". It  is  maintained  that  she  devoted  only  one
      sentence to the appellant's claim to be at risk. This, it  is  argued,
      makes the reasoning  inadequate  because  it  was  accepted  that  the
      appellant had come to the attention of the authorities  and  that  she
      was married to a political activist who was an Iranian refugee. It  is
      argued that the Operational Guidance Note indicates that an individual
      perceived as being involved in opposition politics who had come to the
      attention of the authorities would be at risk.

  10.       On this point I would firstly refer to the  recent  judgment  of
      the Tribunal in Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014]  UKUT  00341
      (IAC) in which Mr Justice Haddon-Cave observed that it was  "generally
      unnecessary  and  unhelpful  for  First-tier  Tribunal  judgments   to
      rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case".  An  explanation  in
      "brief terms" for their decisions was acceptable.

  11.       The appellant's claim that she would be at risk  of  persecution
      or execution by the authorities was  raised  at  the  hearing  of  her
      appeal. There is no mention of it to the respondent or in her  grounds
      of appeal (as confirmed above) and there  has  been  no  asylum  claim
      because she claimed she "could not  decide  what  to  do".  Mr  Canter
      relied  on  the  cumulative  effect  of  several  factors  which,   he
      submitted, caused the appellant to be at risk. Each of  these  factors
      is summarised by the judge when she sets out the appellant's evidence.



  12.       I appreciate that the cumulative factor was stressed however  in
      order to do so, one still has to consider the merits  of  each  point.
      With regard to  the  claim  that  she  had  "previously  come  to  the
      attention of the authorities", I note  this  refers  to  a  visit  the
      appellant made  to  Iran  in  2011  when  she  claimed  to  have  been
      questioned at the airport  about  her  activities.  Having  presumably
      satisfied them of her bona fides, she was permitted  to  go  unharmed.
      There have been no repercussions of that event and she does not  claim
      to have faced further questioning whether  she  left  Iran  to  return
      here. It should be noted that this visit  was  some  years  after  her
      claim to have attended a  political  protest  in  Iran.  Plainly,  the
      authorities have no record of her having attended a protest  and  have
      no interest in her. The  description  of  her  having  come  to  their
      attention is rather misleading in the circumstances. She has not  been
      involved in any political activities here so  there  is  nothing  that
      could lead to a sur place claim. There was reference to the  appellant
      having participated in an  art  exhibition  sponsored  by  an  Israeli
      organisation which may put her at  risk  but  this  really  is  a  far
      fetched submission. The event was not a protest  or  demonstration  of
      any kind, as accepted in evidence. It entailed artists from  all  over
      the world, including the Middle East  and  Palestine,  drawing/writing
      peace messages on envelopes. It  is  not  credible  that  the  Iranian
      authorities would have monitored such an event just on the off  chance
      that some of their citizens may have attended.

  13.       It is alleged that the appellant's father  was  asked  questions
      about the appellant's activities but that too does not appear to  have
      led to any further incidents and plainly he is able to travel  without
      hindrance as his trip  to  attend  the  appellant's  engagement  party
      shows.

  14.       The appellant maintains that the authorities  would  know  about
      her marriage and that as it was a civil ceremony and not  a  religious
      wedding, she would be executed. The only evidence supporting her claim
      of the risk of execution is an unsigned letter from  the  Iranian  and
      Kurdish Women's Rights Association in  Finsbury  Square  which  states
      that the marriage was not an Islamic one and according to Iranian  law
      "the punishment for  any  relationship  outside  the  Islamic  way  is
      execution". No specific law is cited and there is no reference to  any
      other source of information which would confirm that  civil  marriages
      are unacceptable or that those who enter into  them  face  a  risk  of
      execution. Had this been the case, I would have expected the appellant
      to make put this forward  promptly  however  it  is  absent  from  her
      grounds of appeal and from the skeleton argument and was not mentioned
      until her appeal was heard. There  is  nothing  to  suggest  that  the
      authorities would know of the marriage in any  event  or  that,  given
      that it has ended, it would cause any problems for her. The  appellant
      still uses her maiden name;  I  see  no  documents  in  which  she  is
      referred to by her husband's name and the claim that he  would  inform
      the authorities about her is, as the judge found, wholly  speculative.
      Given that he himself has fled the Iranian authorities, the suggestion
      that he would then contact them voluntarily is frankly not believable.
       Nor is it clear how he would make contact or what he would tell them.

  15.       It is maintained that  the  appellant  would  also  be  at  risk
      because of her relationship to a political activist. This  is  another
      matter that is absent from the skeleton argument and  was  raised  for
      the first time at the hearing. The only evidence that the  appellant's
      former husband has any involvement  in  politics  is  the  appellant's
      evidence and, as can be seen from the determination, she  herself  was
      unsure about his activities and appeared to be making assumptions. The
      claim that he might be involved  in  activities  against  the  Iranian
      authorities is pure speculation on her part. Additionally,  there  was
      no evidence to indicate the basis on which  he  obtained  his  refugee
      status. It may not even have been for political reasons. In any event,
      the judge was not referred to any documentary evidence to suggest that
      family members of refugees are at risk. Certainly the former husband's
      parents appear to be able to travel freely as they also  attended  the
      engagement party and it is not suggested that they have  had  to  flee
      Iran or that they have had problems because of their  son.  It  should
      also be noted that the  appellant  returned  to  Iran  after  she  had
      commenced  her  relationship  with  her  former   husband.   Had   the
      authorities been monitoring her movements via Facebook as  she  feared
      or by other means, this relationship would have been  known  to  them.
      However,  no  questions  about  it  were  put  to  her  when  she  was
      questioned.


  16.       The fourth and last complaint is that there was  a  three  month
      delay in the determination of this appeal which renders it unsafe.  In
      fact the determination witness statement prepared  one  day  short  of
      three months after the hearing so technically the three month rule  of
      thumb had not passed by. Why there was a delay in promulgation is  not
      known but it is not the judge's  fault  and  cannot  impact  upon  the
      determination. It is argued that the judge would have  had  difficulty
      recalling the evidence because she prepared the determination late but
      I find  no  merit  in  this  argument.  There  is  a  full  Record  of
      Proceedings, bundles of documentary evidence both from  the  appellant
      and the respondent and a skeleton argument.  Moreover,  as  Mr  Melvin
      pointed out, there was no suggestion that the judge  had  omitted  any
      part of the evidence when summarising it in her determination. I would
      also note that the Tribunal's country guidance  cases  are  invariably
      promulgated over three months after the hearings  yet  this  does  not
      invalidate the substance and findings of those judgments.

  17.       At the hearing before me, Mr Canter sought to  take  issue  with
      the adequacy  of  the  Article  8  findings  and  the  proportionality
      assessment, raising issues about the appellant's  moral  and  physical
      integrity but other than the first ground, which  I  have  dealt  with
      above, there is no other criticism in the grounds  for  permission  of
      Article 8 and Mr Canter did not seek leave to  amend  his  grounds.  I
      would also note that there were no submissions  made  at  the  hearing
      before the First-tier Tribunal on the basis of the appellant's health,
      whether mental or physical, nor was any oral evidence called  in  that
      respect.

  18.       Having considered the case and the determination  with  care,  I
      conclude that the challenge to the judge's  findings  and  conclusions
      are not made out.  Whilst  the  findings  could  certainly  have  been
      fuller, they are adequate given the  weak  claim  that  has  been  put
      forward. The judge  made  it  plain  that  whilst  the  appellant  had
      established a private life here, her removal would  be  proportionate,
      that she had completed the studies she came  here  for  and  could  be
      expected to return to Iran where she has spent the  vast  majority  of
      her life.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the  appellant's
      expressed fears of harm were wholly speculative and unsupported.  That
      plainly relates to the Article  2  and  3  even  if  not  particularly
      identified as such. The point I am making here  is  that  despite  the
      concise findings, the judge gave clear enough reasons as  to  why  she
      dismissed the appeal and the weak claim did not  merit  more  detailed
      consideration.

  19.       The appellant is clearly a talented and hard working young woman
      who would, as the judge found, prefer to make her life here. She  does
      not however meet the requirements of the rules and  does  not  qualify
      for  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds.  The  judge  dealt
      adequately with the appeal.

Decision

  20.       The First-tier Tribunal did not make  any  errors  of  law.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal on all grounds is upheld.

Anonymity

  21.       The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)
      of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (procedure)  Rules  2005.  I
      continue that order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
      (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



      Signed:






      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal


      24 July 2013







