



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: IA/27997/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12 March 2014                           |On 17 June 2014            |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before
                               JUDGE DRABU CBE

                                   Between
                                MR B A S B +4
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Representation:
For the appellant:     Miss R  Baruah  of  Counsel  instructed  by  G  Singh
Solicitors
For the Res   For  the  Respondent:    Ms  A  Everett,  Senior  Home  Office
Presenting Officer.


 1. The Secretary of State has  brought  these  appeals  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal but in this determination, to avoid confusion, I have referred
    to the parties in the same manner  as  they  were  in  the  proceedings
    before the First -tier Tribunal -  the  Secretary  of  State  continues
    being referred to as respondent.


 2. The appeals were heard by Judge Boyes at Hatton Cross  on  19  November
    2013 and in a determination promulgated on 20 January 2014  he  allowed
    the appeals of  all  five  appellants  under  Article  8  of  ECHR.  He
    concluded  that  the  Respondent's  decision  is   a   disproportionate
    interference with each of the Appellant's rights under Article 8 of the
    ECHR. Whilst dismissing the appeals of the other four appellants  under
    Immigration Rules, the Judge allowed the appeal of the third  appellant
    under the Immigration Rules but said that had  he  dismissed  it  under
    Rules he would have allowed it on human rights grounds.


 3.  The  respondent  has  contended  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  seeking
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal that the determination is in
    material error of law for reasons given in the grounds.

 4. Judge Osborne, a Judge of the  First-tier  in  granting  permission  to
    appeal has said in  his  decision,  "Each  Appellant  has  his/her  own
    appeal. The Judge set out the relevant  law  at  paragraph  13  of  the
    determination. In an otherwise detailed and well-reasoned determination
    in which the Judge patently engaged with the evidence, it is  at  least
    arguable that the Judge failed to give effect to the  specific  wording
    of paragraph 276ADE(iv) which acknowledges the requirement to be met by
    an applicant would be fulfilled if the applicant in under the age of 18
    years and has lived continuously in the UK for at  least  seven  years,
    but then adds "and it would not be reasonable to expect  the  applicant
    to leave the UK. It is at least arguable  that  it  would  be  entirely
    reasonable to expect an 18 year old  child  to  leave  the  UK  in  the
    company of his two parents  and  his  fellow  siblings,  all  of  whose
    appeals were dismissed under the Immigration Rules."

 5. Mr BASB is the father of the three appellants, namely, AAOB,  KAOB  and
    TAO. The principal appellant, BASB is a Nigerian national. He was  born
    in Lagos in 1970. The second appellant named KMAO was born in Lagos  in
    1978 and is the wife of the first appellant and the mother of the other
    three appellants who are all nationals of Nigeria. Their  ages  are  10
    and 5. The fourth and fifth appellants are twins. The  first  appellant
    claims to have entered the UK in 2006  and  has  been  here  unlawfully
    throughout. It is claimed that the second appellant entered the UK with
    the third appellant with the help of an agent in August 2005  and  have
    remained in the UK unlawfully ever since.  The  fourth  and  the  fifth
    appellants are 5 years old and have resided in the UK since birth.

 6. Judge Boyes heard oral evidence from the first  and  second  appellants
    and four further witnesses. He also  took  account  of  the  202  pages
    bundle of documents and  skeleton  argument  filed  on  behalf  of  the
    appellants as well as the respondent's bundle.

 7. Before me Miss Everett representing the respondent said that she  would
    rely on the written grounds of appeal, which she  said  were  "straight
    forward". She said that essentially  the  Judge  had  given  inadequate
    reasons in respect of the third appellant and  that  the  Judge  should
    have followed the principles of law laid down in the  case  of  Zoumbas
    ([2013] UKSC 74 and should have dismissed all the appeals.

 8. In response Ms Baruah argued that the determination was a detailed  and
    well- reasoned decision  and  did  not  have  any  error  of  law.  She
    submitted that the decision made in the Zoumbas case was  made  on  the
    facts of that case as each case has to be decided on its own facts. She
    said that the facts in the case of Zoumbas were  materially  different.
    In this case the Judge had engaged with all the evidence and  had  made
    clear findings of fact and the conclusions drawn from those facts  were
    correct in law.  She  said  that  another  Judge  may  have  reached  a
    different conclusion but that would not in itself be sufficient to find
    error of law in the decision made by Judge Boyes. Miss Everett did  not
    add any more to her arguments and asked that if I find  material  error
    of law, I should remake the decision and dismiss the appeals of all the
    appellants.

 9. I have given the most careful consideration  to  the  determination  of
    Judge Boyes as well as the written and oral arguments  advanced  before
    me, including  the  respondent's  grounds  upon  which  permission  was
    granted and the decision of Judge Osborne  who  granted  permission  to
    appeal.

10. I agree with Judge Osborne that the respondent's grounds are "arguable"
    and I also agree with him that the  determination  of  Judge  Boyes  is
    detailed and well reasoned which demonstrates that  the  Judge  engaged
    with the evidence. However, I note, Judge Osborne has got  the  age  of
    the third appellant wrong describing him as  an  "18  year  old  child"
    whereas he was only 10. This error could have skewed  the  decision  of
    Judge Osborne to grant permission but this is purely speculative on  my
    part.

11. The respondent contends that in looking  at  the  claim  of  the  third
    appellant first under the Immigration Rules, the Judge erred in law. It
    is argued that the Judge should have looked at the claims of the  first
    and the  second  appellant  first.  Upon  careful  examination  of  the
    determination I find little substance in this argument. Paragraph 36 of
    the determination is clear. The Judge therein  states,  "I  must  first
    determine whether any, or all of the appellants are able  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules....... "  The  contents  of  this
    paragraph are a correct statement  of  law  as  is  applicable  to  the
    appellants in these appeals. The Judge has  correctly  found  that  the
    third appellant qualifies to remain in the  UK  under  the  Rules.  The
    contents of paragraphs 47 and 48 of the determination show  that  Judge
    Boyes consideration of the third appellant's claim has  been  full.  He
    cites the principles set out in the decision in E-A (Article 8  -  best
    interests of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 315 (IAC) fair and reasoned.  I
    have not been able to find any material error of law  with  respect  to
    any of the appellants. He weighed all the evidence in balance and  came
    to a conclusion that was open to him. The determination is detailed and
    the findings of fact  are  clear  and  sound.  The  Judge  has  applied
    relevant law correctly.

12.  In the circumstances, I dismiss the  respondent's  appeal.  This  means
    that the decision of Judge Boyes  to  allow  the  appeals  of  all  the
    appellants stands,  there  being  no  material  error  of  law  in  his
    determination.



Judge K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
5 June 2014


Direction regarding anonymity - rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to  the  Respondent.  Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.


Judge K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
5 June 2014














