
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/27836/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 November 2013                            |On 6 December 2013           |
|Determination given orally at hearing         |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                                   Between

                            ozair muhammad afridi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Brown, Counsel instructed by Christian Khan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION


1.   This case has an exceptionally complex and unusual procedural  history.
     It arises from the application made by the appellant, Mr Afridi, for a
    variation of his leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as  a  student.
    That application was refused by the respondent on 16 September 2011 and
    the appellant appealed against it to the First-tier Tribunal.   Without
    at this stage going into any detail, it is plain from the determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Webb  that  he  was  sympathetic  to  the
    predicament in which the appellant found himself.  Judge  Webb  however
    concluded that the appellant could not meet the  relevant  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules and he did not see that  it  was  possible  to
    excuse the appellant from the consequences of that  failure  by  having
    regard to Article 8 of the European Convention for  the  Protection  of
    Human Rights.

2.   The  appellant  appealed  against  the  determination  of  Judge  Webb.
    Permission was granted by a Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    and in March 2012 the matter came before Upper Tribunal Judge King.  On
    12 March Judge King issued directions and preliminary decision  in  the
    following terms:

         "2.  It is my preliminary decision that the immigration decision is
             not in accordance with the law  on  the  basis  of  unfairness
             Patel (revocation of sponsor licence - fairness) India  [2011]
             UKUT  2011  (IAC)  and  Patel  (consideration  of  Sapkota   -
             unfairness) India [2011] UKUT 00484 (IAC).  I would propose to
             allow the appeal and send the matter back to the Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department for  a  lawful  decision  to  be
             made.


         3.   The parties have 21 days from the date of these directions  to
             make written submissions to the contrary,  failing  which  the
             decision as indicated will be made without further hearing."

3.   It is common ground that neither party  submitted  any  representations
    in response to those directions.  Accordingly, on 8  June  2012,  Judge
    King issued a determination in which he allowed the appellant's  appeal
    to the extent that the matter was "remitted back to  the  Secretary  of
    State for a proper and lawful decision to be made".  The  determination
    records that Judge King considered there to be  considerable  merit  in
    the grounds as advanced, particularly in the light of the permission to
    appeal which was given "although of course the UK Border Agency  cannot
    compel a particular college to issue  a  CAS,  nevertheless  the  wider
    ramifications of human rights were something perhaps that  should  have
    been borne in mind by the Immigration Judge.  I also had  in  mind  the
    concerns as to fairness as set out in Patel (consideration of Sapkota -
    unfairness) India [2011] UKUT 00484 (IAC)".

4.   At this stage it is necessary to explain the background to the  matter.
     I do so by reference to the very helpful and lucid submissions that Ms
    Brown  has  made  to  me  this  morning.   Ms  Brown  states  that  the
    organisation known as Kaplan submitted a CAS to the  appellant  and  to
    the respondent but did so in different terms to each.  The  CAS  issued
    to the appellant gave, correctly it  appears,  a  termination  date  of
    April 2012 for his course, but that given to  the  Secretary  of  State
    indicated that the course in fact was said to end in April 2011.  It is
    common ground that these errors occurred.  It is further common  ground
    that the appellant was unaware at all material times of the  fact  that
    Kaplan had issued discrepant information to the Secretary of State.  Ms
    Brown further tells me on instruction, and I have no reason  to  doubt,
    that although the appellant was left in this state  of  ignorance,  the
    Secretary of State was sent both of the CAS documents.  As a result the
    Secretary of State would have been able to see the discrepancy to which
    I have referred.  The  fact  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  been
    informed of an earlier termination  date  for  the  appellant's  course
    resulted in the appellant being given leave only until  20  June  2011.
    The appellant requested a further CAS letter from Kaplan  but  at  this
    point difficulties ensued as a result of changes  in  the  Rules.   The
    appellant did not realise that the leave he had been given was  due  to
    the  error  committed  by  Kaplan.   Nevertheless,  he  applied  for  a
    variation of that leave but owing to the Rule changes to which  I  have
    just made reference his application could not, it is common ground,  be
    successful by reference to the Rules.

5.   Having set out that background, which finds expression to a greater  or
    lesser extent in the reasoning and  findings  of  both  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal I turn to the procedural issues.  Judge
    King's determination of June 2012 was not  appealed  by  either  party.
    However Ms Everett has shown me today a letter dated 21 June 2012  sent
    to the Upper Tribunal, which although apparently not on  my  file  must
    have been received by the Tribunal.  In that letter reference  is  made
    to Judge King's decision of June 2012.  The writer of the letter  notes
    that Judge King relied on the case  of  Patel  [2011]  UKUT  00484  but
    "unfortunately Judge King failed to have regard to the case of Patel  &
    Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 741
    which was handed down on 1 June 2012 making the determination  flawed".
    Judge King plainly  saw  that  letter  because  in  September  2012  he
    purported under rule 43 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 to set aside his determination of June 2012 as a  result  of
    the Court of Appeal judgments to which  I  have  just  made  reference.
    Accordingly, as far as Judge King was concerned, the matter was  to  be
    listed for re-determination of the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

6.   Judge King did not make his rule  43  decision  until  September  2013.
    The reason for this delay is unclear but may have something to do  with
    the fate of the letter of 21 June 2012 to which I have made reference.

7.   Ms Brown's submissions this morning are as follows.  She says that  the
    rule 43 decision of September 2013 is in legal terms  a  nullity.   She
    says that because none of the conditions set out in rule 43(2)  of  the
    Rules are met.  The closest that one might come is rule 43(2)(d)  which
    speaks of "some other procedural irregularity in the proceedings"  but,
    as she points out, the chronology of the case law to which I have  made
    reference is such that there cannot possibly be said to be a procedural
    error in  that  regard.   At  the  time  that  Judge  King  signed  his
    determination on 8 June the judgments in  Patel  had  not  been  handed
    down.

8.   It seems plain to me and I believe to both  representatives  that  what
    Judge King had in mind was in fact rule 45 of the Upper Tribunal Rules.
     Amongst other things, rule 45 permits the Upper Tribunal to  review  a
    decision in accordance with rule 46  if  "since  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    decision a court has made a decision which  is  binding  on  the  Upper
    Tribunal and which  had  it  been  made  before  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    decision could have had a  material  effect  on  that  decision".   The
    problem with that, however, as Ms Brown points out,  is  that  rule  45
    applies only "on receiving an application for  permission  to  appeal".
    Again,  it  is  common  ground  that  the  respondent  made   no   such
    application.

9.   Accordingly I find myself in agreement with Ms Brown that the  rule  43
    decision purported to be made in September 2013  has  no  legal  basis.
    For the respondent Ms Everett did  not  seek  to  persuade  me  to  the
    contrary.  The result of that finding is that the determination  signed
    by Judge King on 8 June 2012 allowing the  appellant's  appeal  to  the
    extent I have just indicated should stand.

10.  Before leaving the matter, however, and in the hope that it may  inform
    the Secretary of State's consideration of the application which remains
    outstanding before her from the appellant, I will  make  the  following
    remarks.  It is entirely evident from the history to which I have  just
    made reference that this appellant, through no fault of  his  own,  has
    been put in an extremely difficult position.   Ms  Everett  points  out
    that the fault largely lies with Kaplan and not with the  Secretary  of
    State herself.  I readily acknowledge that; but as the overall guardian
    of the integrity of the system of Immigration Rules the Upper  Tribunal
    would expect the Secretary of State  to  have  particular  regard  when
    considering the issue of fairness to what had happened in  the  present
    case and in particular that the information of a discrepant nature from
    Kaplan was in the Secretary of State's possession for some time  whilst
    not being available to the appellant.  That issue, as I have indicated,
    has had severe consequences for the appellant  who  has  at  all  times
    plainly striven to remain within the law.  The matter  however  remains
    for the Secretary of State to deal with in due course.






                               Signed                                  Date




                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane



