
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/27845/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 4 September 2013                           |On 9 September 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between


                                  MS Y M B
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr M Harris of counsel instructed by Sunrise solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr S Walker a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The appellant is a citizen of Guyana who was born on 4 December 1978.
   She has been given permission to appeal the determination of First-Tier
   Tribunal Judge M R Oliver ("the FTTJ") who dismissed her appeal against
   the respondent's decision of 16 November 2012 to refuse her further leave
   to remain in the UK as the victim of domestic violence under the
   provisions of paragraph 289A of the Immigration Rules.


2. This appeal came before me on 9 July 2013. Following that hearing I
   issued a Decision and Directions which is set out in the Appendix to this
   determination. Having concluded that the FTTJ erred in law I set aside
   his decision in relation to the grounds under the Immigration Rules and
   human rights which would have to be remade at a later date with none of
   his findings preserved. I upheld his decision to allow the appeal against
   the section 47 decision. I gave directions.


3. This appeal now comes back before me to remake the decision. I have a
   new bundle of documents submitted with the appellant's representative's
   letter of 28 August 2013 and a composite bundle of the documents
   previously before the Tribunal. During the course of the hearing the
   appellant produced better copies of the photographs showing some of her
   injuries and the original of the document showing that she had had a scan
   at a NHS hospital.


4. Mr Walker accepted that there was only one outstanding point to be
   determined in the appeal; whether the appellant's relationship had broken
   down because of domestic violence. He accepted that the appellant met the
   other requirements of the Immigration Rules.

5. I heard oral evidence from the appellant, her sister and a neighbour.
   All of them adopted previous and current witness statements, were
   examined in chief and cross-examined. I asked some questions for the
   purpose of clarification. Their evidence is set out in my record of
   proceedings.


6. Mr Walker made submissions. He accepted that in relation to the evidence
   of the appellant and her sister Devaseelan principles applied and that my
   starting point should be the findings of Immigration Judge Callow who
   heard the appellant's appeal in January 2010, found them to be credible
   witnesses, allowed the appellant's appeal and concluded that the
   appellant had at that time been living with her partner in a relationship
   akin to marriage for a period of two years or more. In relation to the
   evidence given before me he accepted that there was corroborative
   evidence of the appellant's claims to have suffered domestic violence.
   There were photographs showing scars and teeth which had been knocked
   out. Whilst the hospital note showing that she had undergone an
   ultrasound scan was not conclusive as to the cause it did provide some
   corroboration. Crucially, Mr Walker accepted that all the witnesses who
   had given evidence before me were credible. In the circumstances he did
   not wish to make any further submissions. I told Mr Harris that there was
   no need for him to make submissions and I reserved my determination.


7. I find the appellant and her two witnesses to be credible. I would have
   done so even if Mr Walker had not accepted this. I find that the
   appellant arrived in the UK on 24 December 2005 with a marriage visa in
   order to marry a British citizen. Her period of leave expired on 21 June
   2006. On 21 March 2006 she applied for leave to remain under the Armed
   Forces non-exempt category. This application was granted for a period
   expiring on 11 October 2006. On 3 October 2006 she applied for leave to
   remain outside the Immigration Rules. This was refused on 8 October 2006.
   A further application on 19 October 2006 made outside the Immigration
   Rules was refused on 13 November 2006. On 23 November 2006 she applied
   for leave to remain under the Armed Forces non-exempt category. This was
   granted and she was given further leave expiring on 4 March 2008. On 1
   March 2008 she applied for further leave to remain in the same category
   and this was granted for a period expiring on 30 January 2009. On 29
   January 2009 she applied for further leave as an unmarried partner. This
   was refused on 15 October 2009. She appealed and her appeal was allowed
   by Immigration Judge Callow following a hearing on 4 January 2010. She
   was then granted further leave to remain for a period expiring on 15
   October 2012. Before that leave expired she made the application which
   has led to the current appeal.


8. I find that the appellant's partner was and may still be a serving
   soldier in the British Army. Until their final separation in August 2012
   they had been together since high school in Guyana. When she came to the
   UK they planned to marry. They did not do so because she wanted a big
   family wedding which neither of them could afford on his income, because
   she was not allowed to work and because of his postings overseas. They
   did not live together all the time, because of his military service
   commitments. She lived with her sister in the UK and she lived with him
   when they could either at her sister's house or in barracks.


9. There were minor incidents but the appellant suffered no serious
   violence from her partner before 2010. Starting in 2010 she suffered many
   incidents of violence and abuse at the hands of her partner, some of them
   serious. She cannot remember all of them or when they occurred but they
   included being punched, slapped and pushed against a wall. He was
   verbally abusive. Many of the incidents of violence were at her sister's
   home when her sister was not present.


10. The appellant was able to remember the following incidents. In mid-2010
   she was with her partner in his barracks. He was ironing his uniform. He
   abused her and she tried to leave. He grabbed her and pulled her back and
   pushed the hot iron towards her face. She put up her arm to protect her
   face and the iron caused the burn on her lower forearm. The scar in this
   area appears in one of the photographs.

11. In about September or October of 2010 her partner punched the appellant
   in the stomach. This caused severe pain which lasted for several hours.
   She went to a local hospital where she was admitted her for a period of
   between 36 and 48 hours. Subsequently she had the documented ultrasound
   scan. She has now discovered that she has fibroids which may require
   treatment. The appellant does not know and it is not clear whether she
   had fibroids before she was punched by her partner or whether these were
   exacerbated by what he did.


12. In December 2010 at her sister's house the appellant's partner shouted
   at her, abused her, and grabbed her by the hair. This incident was viewed
   by the neighbour who gave evidence.


13. In January 2011 the appellant and her partner were returning from a
   party where they had been arguing and he had abused her. He stopped the
   car and told her to get out which she did. He punched her in the face
   knocking out two upper front teeth and causing bruising and bleeding. The
   appellant was knocked unconscious. When she came round he had placed her
   in the car and was looking for her teeth which he was unable to find. The
   appellant hid from her sister in her room for two days and subsequently
   went to the dentist who has provided her with a two tooth denture. The
   photographs show the appellant with and without the denture. Following
   this incident the appellant's sister said that her partner could no
   longer come to her house.

14. On a date which she cannot now recall with any certainty, although she
   thinks it may have been in 2011, she was returning from a party with her
   partner. He abused her. She asked him to stop so that she could get out.
   After she had got out he slapped her around the face and pushed her
   against a barbed wire fence causing a cut, bleeding and now a scar on her
   upper right arm which appears in one of the photographs. This appears to
   be between 2 and 3 inches in length. The appellant cleaned and bandaged
   this herself. She did not obtain medical treatment.

15. For a long time the appellant put up with the domestic violence because
   she was still in love with her partner, believed that he would change his
   ways and did not report what had happened to the police or the
   authorities because she did not want to harm his career. She was
   embarrassed and did her best to hide what was going on from family and
   friends.


16. It is for the appellant to establish the facts on which she seeks to
   rely and that she meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules. The
   burden of proof is on her and the standard is that of the balance of
   probabilities. To that standard I find that she has established that her
   relationship with her partner was caused to permanently break down as a
   result of his domestic violence. The relationship came to an end in or
   about August 2012 at which time she had the required extension of stay.
   It is conceded that the appellant meets the other requirements of
   paragraph 289A of the Immigration Rules. I find that she meets all the
   requirements of the Rules.


17. Having set aside the decision of the FTIJ I substitute my decision
   allowing the appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules. The decision
   to allow the appeal against the section 47 decision is not flawed and
   stands.


18. Direction regarding anonymity


19. I was asked to make an anonymity direction because of  the  embarrassing
   personal nature of what happened to the  appellant  and  to  protect  her
   partner a serving soldier against possible consequences of my findings in
   circumstances where he has not had an opportunity to state his  position.
   I agreed to make such a direction.

20. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant
   is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings  shall  directly  or
   indirectly identify her or any  member  of  her  family.  This  direction
   applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure  to  comply
   with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                                  APPENDIX

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Guyana who was born on 4 December 1978.
      She has been given permission to appeal the determination of First-
      Tier Tribunal Judge M R Oliver who dismissed her appeal against the
      respondent's decision of 16 November 2012 to refuse her further leave
      to remain in the UK as the victim of domestic violence under the
      provisions of paragraph 289A of the Immigration Rules.

   2. The appellant arrived in the UK on 24 December 2005 with leave as the
      spouse of a British citizen. Her period of leave expired on 21 June
      2006. On 21 March 2006 she applied for leave to remain as the spouse
      of a person serving in the Armed Forces. This application was granted
      for a period expiring on 11 October 2006. On 3 October 2006 she
      applied for leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules. This was
      refused five days later. A further application on 19 October 2006 was
      refused on 13 November 2006. On 23 November 2006 she applied for leave
      to remain as the spouse of a member of the Armed Forces. This was
      granted and she was given further leave expiring on 4 March 2008. On 1
      March 2008 she applied for further leave to remain and this was
      granted for a period expiring on 30 January 2009. On 29 January 2009
      she applied for further leave as an unmarried partner. This was
      refused on 15 October 2009. She appealed, her appeal was allowed and
      she was granted further leave to remain for a period expiring on 15
      October 2012. I have taken this summary from what the judge sets out
      in paragraphs 1 to 3 of the determination but I have doubts as to
      whether some of the grants of leave could have been as a spouse and
      were in fact as a partner.

   3. The appellant claimed that her partner was a serving soldier and that
      over a long period he had subjected her to serious domestic violence
      including a number of violent assaults. She claimed that they had been
      together since high school and for a long time she put up with the
      domestic violence because she was still in love with him, believed
      that he would change his ways and did not report what had happened to
      the police or the authorities because she did not want to harm his
      career. They did not live together all the time, because of his
      military service commitments. She lived with her sister in the UK and
      she lived with her partner when they could either at her sister's
      house or in barracks. The appellant said that the relationship had
      come to an end and they had been living apart since August 2012.

   4. The respondent rejected the appellant's claim concluding that she had
      not provided sufficient evidence to show that the relationship had
      permanently broken down as a result of domestic violence. Her
      application was refused under the provisions of the Immigration Rules
      and on Article 8 human rights grounds.

   5. The appellant appealed and the judge heard the appeal on 26 April
      2013. At that stage the appellant was not represented. The respondent
      was represented. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant, her
      sister and a friend. The judge concluded that the violence that the
      appellant claimed to have experienced at the hands of her partner was
      "very minor". The evidence strongly suggested that it was her partner
      who became disaffected and broke off the relationship rather than it
      breaking down because of domestic violence. The appellant had not
      established that they were unmarried partners. There was little
      documentary evidence to support her claims and the judge appears to
      found the appellant not credible. She had not applied during the
      period of her provisional leave. Her appeal also failed on human
      rights grounds.

   6. The judge allowed the appeal against the decision to remove the
      appellant from the UK by way of directions under s 47 of the
      Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006. He dismissed the appeal
      under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

   7.  One  matter  can  be  disposed  of  immediately.  In  line  with  the
      authorities culminating in Adamally and  Jaferi  (section  47  removal
      decisions: Tribunal Procedures) [2012] UKUT 00414 (IAC) it  is  common
      ground that the judge was correct to conclude that the s  47  decision
      was not in accordance with the law  and  that  the  appeal  should  be
      allowed to that extent.

   8. The appellant prepared her own grounds to  accompany  her  application
      for permission to  appeal  and  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal was granted by a judge in the First-Tier Tribunal. Since  the
      grant of  permission  the  appellant  has  instructed  solicitors  who
      briefed Mr Harris.

   9. The appellant's solicitors have submitted a bundle with a letter dated
      the day before the hearing. Insofar as this  contains  material  which
      was not before the judge this does not fall to  be  considered  unless
      and until the decision is set aside.

  10. I heard oral submissions from both representatives. On behalf  of  the
      respondent Mrs Tanner conceded that the judge made a number of  errors
      of law  and  that  his  decision  should  be  set  aside  and  remade.
      Specifically, he failed to make findings in respect of the evidence of
      all the witnesses. Whilst appreciating that there had been a  previous
      appeal and  that  there  would  have  been  findings  of  fact  by  an
      Immigration Judge he did not consider  whether,  following  Devaseelan
      principles, these findings would have impinged  on  and  provided  the
      starting point for his findings, in particular as to whether there was
      a subsisting partnership. In the light of the evidence  she  found  it
      impossible to defend the  judge's  description  of  the  violence  the
      appellant claimed to have suffered as "very minor".

  11. I find that the judge erred in law in a number of  respects.  Firstly,
      the judge had a witness statement from a Mr W dated 19  February  2013
      which,  if  accepted,  would  have  provided  detailed   corroborative
      evidence of an incident of domestic violence. Whilst he did  not  give
      oral evidence the judge  did  not  address  his  statement.  Secondly,
      whilst the judge appears to have found the appellant not  credible  in
      at least a number of respects there are no clear findings of  fact  in
      respect of the evidence of the appellant's sister or Ms L. Findings in
      respect of their evidence and credibility were essential because  they
      had given not only important background  evidence  but,  if  believed,
      corroborative evidence of specific incidents of domestic violence. The
      lack of clear findings is difficult to understand  because  the  judge
      summarised their evidence in paragraphs  11  to  13  (the  appellant's
      sister) and 14 (Ms L) and, in paragraph 16, said that he preferred the
      evidence of the sister to that  of  the  appellant.  Thirdly,  at  the
      beginning  of  paragraph  16  the  judge  said  "Without  in  any  way
      trivialising the violence which she claims her ex-partner inflicted on
      her". At the end of the paragraph he  found  that  "the  violence  she
      claims to have experienced at the hands of  her  ex-partner  has  been
      very minor". I find that the judge did what he warned himself against.
      He trivialised the violence.  Taking  only  the  incidents  which  the
      appellant could remember  and  particularise  I  find  that  what  she
      claimed to have suffered cannot possibly be described as "very minor".
      Fourthly, in paragraph 13, the judge refers to the appellant's  sister
      as saying that the appellant "lies about a lot of things" without  any
      further explanation or  qualification.  Reference  to  his  record  of
      proceedings indicates that the appellant's sister was referring to the
      appellant lying about what her partner was doing  to  her  by  way  of
      "making excuses  for  him  to  keep  relations  going".  Fifthly,  the
      statement in paragraph 18 that the application for leave on the  basis
      of domestic violence would  not  satisfy  the  requirements  that  the
      application had to be made during the provisional leave is  incorrect.
      As the judge records in paragraphs 1 and 2 of  the  determination  the
      application was made on 10 October 2012 and her period  of  leave  did
      not expire until 15 October 2012. Sixthly, the judge's  conclusion  in
      paragraph 18 that the appellant had not established that she was in an
      unmarried partnership is not clearly explained and flies in  the  face
      of the fact that, on more than one occasion, the respondent must  have
      accepted that such a relationship existed  and  that  the  Immigration
      Judge who heard her appeal in 2010 is likely  to  have  made  findings
      about this. I now have a copy  of  the  determination  of  Immigration
      Judge Callow promulgated on 28 January 2010 in which he accepted  that
      the appellant and her partner were living together in  a  relationship
      akin to marriage which has subsisted for more than two  years.  Whilst
      this was not before the First-Tier Tribunal  Judge  there  were  clear
      indications that the existence of such a partnership is likely to have
      been accepted by both the respondent  and  the  judge  in  a  previous
      appeal. If the judge was going to come to a  different  conclusion  it
      should have been clearly explained.

  12. I heard submissions as to whether the decision should be remade in the
      First-Tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal. Mrs Tanner did not  express
      a view. Mr Harris asked  for  a  continuation  hearing  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal and I accept that this is the  course  to  be  followed.  The
      appellant wishes to give oral evidence and call four other  witnesses.
      There was insufficient time to hear them and submissions on the day of
      the hearing before me.

  13. I find that the errors of law are such that the decision must  be  set
      aside and remade in relation to  the  grounds  under  the  Immigration
      Rules and human rights. None of the judge's  findings  are  preserved.
      The decision to allow the appeal against the section  47  decision  is
      not flawed and stands.




Signed:........................................
    Date: 4 September 2013
Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden


