
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA 27454 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8 April 2014                               |On 23 April 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE C MAILER

                                   Between

                              RAJA YASEEN AYUB
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C H Bexson, Counsel, instructed by Nasim & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen  of  Pakistan  born  in  1989  against  a
    decision of the respondent to refuse him leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Rules and to order his removal from the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant came to the United Kingdom lawfully in  pursuance  of  his
    marriage but the marriage was not happy and he did not remain  with  his
    wife.  It follows that his basis for entering the  United  Kingdom  fell
    away.

 3. It is always possible that  a  person's  removal  might  contravene  his
    rights under Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights,
    either as expressed in  the  Rules  or  as  expressed  by  reference  to
    jurisprudence and the terms of the Convention.  The First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge on this occasion was entirely alert to  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules and made a decision under the Rules that the appellant should  not
    be allowed to remain on human rights grounds.  That part of the decision
    has not been criticised and permission to appeal was not  given  on  the
    basis of what was done.

 4. Concern was expressed in the reason for giving permission to appeal that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge had not asked herself  the  questions  set
    out in the case of Regina v. Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    (Appellant) ex parte Razgar (FC) (Respondent) [2004] UKHL 27.  It is  an
    interesting area of academic argument to decide if the  questions  asked
    in Razgar are necessarily incorporated in an analysis of the case  under
    the Rules.  For my part, I think it  is  still  desirable  to  refer  to
    Razgar as well  as  the  Rules  because  it  will  rarely  require  much
    additional work and it will be plain that the  appropriate  points  have
    been considered.

 5. However this is not a case where any of the strong and  weighty  matters
    that affect an Article 8 balance could be relied  upon.   It  is  not  a
    case, for example, of a man having in a close  relationship  with  minor
    children or having a life partner who could not be  expected  to  travel
    with him.  We discount the suggestion that he had any serious  plans  of
    rekindling his marriage because whatever his intentions  are  there  was
    nothing from his wife to support them to show that they were in any  way
    well-founded.

 6. It is plain from the determination, particularly at paragraph  19  where
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge referred to the absence of "compelling and
    exceptional circumstances", that the judge was alert to the  possibility
    that this might have been an exception on human rights grounds under the
    Rules and found no evidence to support it.

 7. We find no material error on the part of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    and we dismiss the appellant's appeal.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 17 April 2014                  |


