
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V3

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27816/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 March 2016                              |On 27 April 2016              |
|Prepared 21 March 2016                        |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                        Ms Uchenna Chinyere Ihekwaba
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Singh, Representative from Greater Manchester
                    Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of  Nigeria,  date  of  birth  1  June  1978,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated 17 June 2014, to make
    removal directions under Section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    1999, a form IS.151A having been served on 4 March  2011  and  a  human
    rights based claim  having  been  refused.   The  appeal  against  that
    decision came before First-tier Tribunal Judge P J Holmes (the  judge),
    who dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and on  Article  8
    ECHR grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Murray
    and on renewal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman on 20
    April 2015.

3.   Mr Singh argued that the judge had erred in law because when  assessing
    the best interests of the children, that is the  two  eldest  children,
    particularly the eldest, Manuela, who had been in  the  United  Kingdom
    more than seven years at the time of the judge's decision, had not been
    properly considered.

4.   Essentially Mr Singh argued that  the  judge  had  effectively  put  in
    place a hurdle in terms of the length of time the children had been  in
    the United Kingdom by not counting the period  until  4  years  of  age
    rather than looking at the total period of time and the significance of
    the period that they had been in the  United  Kingdom,  when  assessing
    their best interests.  In other words, the judge had erred  in  law  in
    applying the case of Azimi-Moayed and others [2013]  UKUT  00197  (IAC)
    and failed to properly assess their best interests by reference to  the
    totality of the time they had been in the United  Kingdom  rather  than
    discounting a period up to the age of 4.

5.   It is clear that the judge had regard to and considered Section  55  of
    the BCIA 2009 and the judge was alive to the considerations of  age  in
    relation to children and the  potential  significance  of  interference
    with the period of time they  had  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  and,
    insofar as it was material, the time young children had been focused on
    their parents rather than their peers or age group.  At paragraphs  18,
    19 and 20 to 22 of the decision the judge set out the analysis  he  had
    reached on the issue.

6.   I have for my part approached this on the basis of  seeing  whether  or
    not the judge had done  enough  to  meet  that  general  responsibility
    iterated in the case of Abdul (section  55  -  Article  24(3)  Charter)
    [2016] UKUT 00106 (IAC).  It is clear that to a degree  the  nature  of
    the judge's analysis was subject to legitimate trenchant criticism.   I
    was taken to the general obligation as expressed by  the  President  in
    paragraphs 14 and 15  of  Abdul  as  to  how  the  assessment  of  best
    interests should be carried out, by reference to available  indicators,
    and the evidence rather  than  on  a  broad  brush  approach.   As  the
    President said at paragraph 14:-

         "... The best interests of children exercise, where it falls to  be
         performed, is one of unmistakable importance and  gravity.   It  is
         not enough to pay lip service  to  the  evidence  bearing  on  this
         issue.  Rather, an Appellate Tribunal will  invariably  search  for
         indicators  that  the  lower  Tribunal  has  fully  considered  the
         evidence, has understood it and has properly engaged with it."


7.   In the case of Abdul, the President found that there  had  not  been  a
    proper consideration  of  the  relevant  issues.     The  President  in
    paragraph 15 went on to state:

         "Furthermore, the Appellate Tribunal will always search for a clear
         formulation, or identification, of the best interests of the  child
         or children  concerned  in  the  decision  of  the  first  instance
         Tribunal.  This should normally be the subject of a  clear  finding
         or findings, all material evidence first having been examined."


     Again, the President did not find that the judge had  properly  carried
    out that exercise.

8.   In the present case  I  was  satisfied  that  the  judge  did  properly
    consider the evidence before him: It is not suggested that he failed to
    take into account material evidence relevant to the  considerations  of
    best interests: It is  not  said  that  the  judge  took  into  account
    erroneous matters in terms of factual matters relating to the child  or
    children's  best  interests.   Rather  the  criticism  is,  as  I  have
    identified above, that the judge has misdirected himself  in  terms  of
    the application of any threshold  to  the  consideration  of  the  best
    interests of children.

9.   I find that the judge, doing the best he could with  the  evidence  and
    in the light of the way the grounds  of  appeal  are  drafted,  reached
    conclusions  on  the  best  interests  which  reflected  the  arguments
    advanced and the considerations that obviously arose.  I  do  not  find
    that the decision discloses a misapplication of Azimi-Moayed or that in
    effect the judge was applying a threshold to what  was  the  period  of
    time a child has been in  the  United  Kingdom,  for  the  purposes  of
    assessing the children's best interests.  It  seemed  to  me  that  the
    judge, doing the best he could, had reached a conclusion on the  matter
    reliant upon the evidence before him.

9.   The Original Tribunal's decision stands.

ANONYMITY

An anonymity order was not previously made and nor is one requested now.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date 5 April2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

