
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27700/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15 May 2014                                  |11 June 2014               |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                Andriy Kozhak

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Braganza of Counsel instructed by Latitude Law
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the respondent's  refusal
    to grant him leave to remain in the United Kingdom in line with that of
    his mother, who is now a naturalised British citizen.   The  respondent
    applied paragraphs 276ADE  and  Appendix  FM  of  the  Rules  and  also
    considered the question of exceptional circumstances, but she  did  not
    address herself to paragraphs 198-199 of the Rules which deal with  the
    position of children of  persons  being  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.

 2. The original grounds of appeal were amended at the First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing,  to  include   that   question.    The   First-tier   Tribunal
    determination records that amendment and it is clear that the judge was
    seised  of  the  question.    However,  at  some   point   during   the
    determination it seems that those provisions slipped the  mind  of  the
    judge, who failed either to make findings in relation to paragraphs 198-
    199 or to make the relevant findings of fact.

 3. Since the respondent has not addressed the issues under paragraphs 198-
    199, it is of course open to her  to  do  so  now  and  to  serve  that
    decision on the appellant.  If she proposes to do so, in the  light  of
    the overriding objective, I would encourage her to do so promptly.  The
    appellant has made available a substantial amount of material  relating
    to his financial position which appears in  the  bundle  before  me  at
    pages 82 to 208 thereof.

 4. It is plain that the First-tier Tribunal fell  into  error  of  law  in
    failing to deal with the application under paragraphs 198 to 199 of the
    Immigration Rules, that such error is material, and  I  set  aside  the
    determination.

 5. The appeal will be reheard and the decision remade  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 20 October 2014.

    Signed                                  Date:  10 June 2014
             Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

