

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal nos: IA 27502, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7-12

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   29.05.2013|
|on    29.05.2013                              |sent out:                    |
|                                              |03.06.2013                   |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                     Omolara Rasheedat YAHAYA & 5 others
                                                                  appellants
                                     and



                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  John Walsh (counsel instructed by Graceland)
For the respondent: Miss Helen Horsley


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Nicholas Paul), sitting at Taylor House on 1  February,
    to   long  residence  appeals  by  citizens  of  Nigeria,  the   (main)
    appellant, born 23 December 1973, her husband, born 21 June  1966,  and
    three children, all under 18. It is now accepted  by  the  Home  Office
    that they have all (apart from Wadood, born here in 2005) been in  this
    country since 2003, though none at any time with more than visit leave.

 2. The judge treated it as conceded on behalf of the appellants that  they
    could not succeed on the basis of  the  article  8  provisions  in  the
    Immigration Rules (appendix FM and paragraph 276 ADE) as they stood  at
    the date of the decision to refuse them indefinite leave to remain,  on
    22  October  2012;  however  it  is  now  agreed  that   this   was   a
    misapprehension on his part. It follows that the decision will need  to
    be re-made on that basis.

 3. It is also agreed that, before an appeal decision on the merits of this
    family's case as a whole can be properly made,  the  Home  Office  will
    need to reach a decision of their own on the case of the youngest child
    Hameedat, born here 1 April 2010. Since any appeal against  that  would
    go in the first place to the First-tier Tribunal, it is further  agreed
    that that would be the convenient forum for a re-hearing of the present
    appeals, with which such an appeal may be consolidated.

 4. The questions for decision at the re-hearing will be as follows:

        a) Does either of the parents succeed under EX1 of appendix FM?

        b) Does any of the children succeed under paragraph 276 ADE?

        c) In the light of the decisions made on the  family  as  a  whole,
           would removal of any family member who does  not  succeed  under
           the Immigration Rules  be  disproportionate  to  the  legitimate
           purpose of ?

 5. In dealing with questions (a) and (b), it  is  agreed  that  the  judge
    should have regard to the article 8 provisions in the Immigration Rules
    as they stood at the date of the decision under appeal; but in dealing,
    if necessary, with question (c)  with  those  provisions  as  they  now
    stand.

 6. The Home Office should reach a  decision  as  soon  as  possible  about
    Hameedat: if, as expected,  that  is  negative,  then  the  appellants'
    solicitors must include with their notice of appeal

        a) a copy of this decision; and

        b) a request for Hameedat's appeal to be consolidated  for  hearing
           with these at Taylor House.

Appeals : fresh hearing before First-tier Tribunal

                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



