

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Numbers: IA/27339/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                               |Determination           |
|                                                   |Promulgated             |
|On 4th June 2014                                   |On 9th June 2014        |
|                                                   |                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                  Between:

                                SHERAZ AHMAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           In person, no representation
For the Respondent:          Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.    The Appellant is a citizen Pakistan  born  on  22nd  August  1986.  He
      appeals against the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dated
      13th February 2014 dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
      decision of 15th June 2013 refusing a residence card  as  confirmation
      of a right of residence under Regulation 7 and 2  of  the  Immigration
      (EEA) Regulations 2006.


2.    Permission to appeal was granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Allen  on
      24th  April  2014  on  the   ground   that   the   determination   was
      insufficiently  reasoned.  The  detailed  explanation  given  by   the
      Appellant in relation to the discrepancies between him and his wife at
      interview, was scarcely mentioned in the determination and the minimal
      examples given by the Judge of such discrepancies were not such as  to
      enable the reader of the determination  to  be  satisfied  as  to  the
      reasons for the decision.

3.    At the hearing before me, the Appellant was unrepresented.  He  relied
      on written grounds of appeal dated 1st June 2014 and submitted that an
      interpreter was requested for his wife one month before interview; the
      request was made by telephone. No interpreter was available on the day
      and since the Appellant and his wife had travelled from London the day
      before, they decided to go ahead without one. The Appellant's wife did
      not understand the interviewer's Liverpool accent and she was too  shy
      to say that she did not understand. The interviewer was  not  friendly
      and was impolite at times. He was not very clear and  he  hurried  his
      questions.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  interview,  the  Appellant's
      representative stated  that  there  had  been  some  misunderstanding.
      Therefore, a complaint was made immediately after the interview.

4.    The Appellant submitted that he and his  wife  were  questioned  about
      what they did at the weekend. His wife shared a slice  of  pizza  with
      him, but the interviewer misinterpreted the answer; recording that the
      Appellant's wife had eaten at work and the Appellant had  stated  they
      had dinner together. The  interviewer  asked  many  probing  questions
      which were not recorded in the interview record, had he recorded those
      questions, the Judge would have been able to get an accurate sense  of
      the answers. The interviewer followed  the  Appellant's  wife  to  the
      toilet; she was shocked and felt intimidated. On her return, his  wife
      got  confused  when  asked  about  the  wedding   arrangements.   This
      misunderstanding happened because no interpreter was present.

5.     The  Appellant  submitted  that  the  Judge   ignored   the   witness
      statements. He did not ask any questions  and  he  did  not  give  the
      Appellant  the  chance  to  explain  the  discrepancies.   The   Judge
      misunderstood the case  and  based  his  decision  on  two  discrepant
      answers, ignoring the other consistent answers. The Appellant and  his
      wife are unable to visit family in Pakistan or Lithuanian  because  of
      the       Appellant's       unresolved       immigration       status.



6.    Mr Nath submitted that the Judge had dealt with the issues  raised  by
      the Appellant at paragraphs  25  and  26  of  the  determination.  The
      Appellant and his wife had signed the declaration at the conclusion of
      the interview that they had understood the questions and they had been
      given  the   opportunity   to   provide   further   information.   The
      representative's comments at the end of the interview did  not  amount
      to a complaint and no attempt was made  to  stop  the  interview.  The
      Judge made his findings based on this interview; the points he  relied
      on were significant  discrepancies  that  went  to  the  core  of  the
      Appellant's credibility.

7.    The Appellant was represented at the hearing and he should have  dealt
      with the confusion about the wedding arrangements and the wedding day.
      The complaints about  the  interview  were  made  in  the  Appellant's
      statement not at the time. The burden was on the  Appellant  to  prove
      his  case;   the   Judge   was   not   responsible   for   ineffective
      representation. The Judge took into account  the  refusal  letter  and
      there was no error of law in his determination.

8.    In response, the Appellant submitted that the  points  raised  in  the
      refusal letter were baseless. An explanation had been  given  for  all
      the discrepancies raised therein, but  the  presenting  officer  still
      relied on these  discrepancies  at  the  hearing.  The  Appellant  had
      explained all the points raised by the Judge in his determination.


Discussion and conclusions

9.    There were  significant  discrepancies  in  the  Appellant's  and  his
      wife's interview in relation to how they met, their  first  date,  the
      first time the Appellant's  wife  went  to  his  house,  the  marriage
      proposal, the marriage, the wedding night, his wife's  last  visit  to
      Lithuania and the description  of  the  front  door.  The  Appellant's
      explanation that his wife misunderstood the questions in interview did
      not address these issues.

10.   The Judge relied on the discrepancies in the interview  and  concluded
      that they were numerous and significant. This finding was open to  him
      on the evidence. The Judge  considered  the  Appellant's  explanation,
      given  in  his  witness  statement,  that   the   discrepancies   were
      misunderstandings caused  by  the  lack  of  an  interpreter  and  the
      interviewer's failure to record the questions and answers  accurately,
      and his aggressive  and  impolite  manner.  The  Judge  rejected  this
      explanation. This finding was open to the Judge on the evidence.

11.   There was no complaint made at the  time  of  the  interview  or  soon
      thereafter. The Appellant's representative was asked  if  he  had  any
      comments. He stated "Not really, but there was a lack of understanding
      by  the  Appellant's  wife;  she  would  have  been  better  with   an
      interpreter....everything was in place as it  should  have  been,  but
      there was misunderstanding due to her lack of language  skills."  This
      did not amount to a complaint and no explanation for the discrepancies
      was made until the Appellant made his statement for the  hearing.  The
      Appellant and his wife signed  the  declaration  at  the  end  of  the
      interview stating that they understood the questions.

12.   The Appellant's explanation for the discrepancies  about  the  wedding
      arrangements was not mentioned in his witness statement or before  the
      Judge. He accepted that  this  hearing  was  the  first  time  he  had
      explained that his wife thought that questions 141 onwards were  about
      the visit to the registry office to make the wedding arrangements  not
      the actual wedding day. The Judge cannot be criticised for failing  to
      take into account matters which were not before him.

13.   The  Respondent  relied  on  numerous  discrepancies  in  the  refusal
      letter. The Appellant was represented in the First-tier  Tribunal.  It
      was not for the Judge to seek explanations for  discrepancies  in  the
      Appellant's  account.  The  Judge  found  that  the  majority  of  the
      Appellant's answers were inconsistent with his wife. He then  referred
      to two examples. It was not the case that the Judge based his decision
      on two contradictory replies.

14.    The Judge considered the evidence of the Appellant and his  wife  set
      out in their  witness  statements,  and  the  explanations  given,  at
      paragraph 25 and 26 of the determination.  There  was  no  explanation
      offered for the significant discrepancies referred to at  paragraph  9
      above. The explanation for the confusion over the wedding day was  not
      mentioned in the Appellant's witness statement and was not before  the
      Judge. I  find  that  there  was  no  error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
      determination.

15.   The Judge made no error on any point of law which  might  require  the
      determination to be set aside. The appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
      dismissed.  The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  dated  shall
      stand.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
 7th June 2014
