
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27181/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 October 2014                           |On 8 January 2015             |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE DAVIS
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

                       Mr Kenneth Ehizogie Enobakhare
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs B Asigo, R.O.C.K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

                       Oral determination and reasons

1.   This is the appeal by Kenneth Enobakhare with leave of  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Chalkley against a  determination  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Kanagaratnam  promulgated  on  17  February  2014.   In   his
    determination, the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State for the Home Department refusing him
    leave to enter the United Kingdom as an adult dependant of his  mother.
    The Secretary of State concluded that the appellant did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 317 of the Immigration Rules.

2.   In the appeal before  the  Judge,  para  317  was  argued  and,  albeit
    relatively briefly, the issue in relation to  Article  8  rights.   The
    appeal was dismissed on both grounds.

3.   The grounds seeking permission to appeal  assert  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge recorded evidence that the appellant at  some  point  in
    his life had been married.  It was  asserted  in  the  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal that that in fact was not so.  The  appellant  had
    not at any point given such evidence.  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chalkley
    when granting permission granted permission simply on that ground alone
    but said this:

         "If the judge is mistaken and  the  appellant  did  not  give  oral
         evidence to the effect that he had at some stage been married, then
         that error of fact, if there was such an error, may be  capable  of
         amounting to an error of law."

4.   The Upper Tribunal Judge who gave leave plainly had no  idea  from  the
    information before him what the factual position was.  The granting  of
    leave plainly signalled that evidence would have to  be  placed  before
    this Tribunal in order for  this  Tribunal  properly  to  consider  the
    grounds of appeal.

5.   We obtained the Record of Proceedings kept by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge in the course of which the First-tier Tribunal Judge set out  the
    evidence of the appellant, recording, first, that he  had  adopted  his
    witness statement and, second, that he had  given  various  answers  in
    cross-examination.  In particular, it was noted quite early  in  cross-
    examination that the Home Office Presenting Officer asked the appellant
    why in his visa application, where he had said that he  relied  on  his
    brother-in-law and uncle financially, he had not mentioned  his  mother
    (the reliance on mother was in essence the basis for  his  case).   His
    answer as recorded by the First-tier Tribunal Judge was "because I  had
    problems in marriage and they looked after me".  At a  later  point  in
    these notes of the evidence, the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  recorded
    that the appellant said that  another  person  within  his  family  was
    married, that being in the context of somebody whom he could  not  live
    with because  her  house  was  very  full.   That  was  the  Record  of
    Proceedings made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge and that  is  how  it
    appears in the determination.

6.   Had it been thought relevant to this appeal  to  establish  as  a  fact
    that the findings set out in the determination were not  in  accordance
    with the evidence,  the  proper  procedure  would  have  been  to  file
    evidence to that  effect.   No  such  evidence  has  been  filed.   The
    representative of the appellant today has made assertions  as  to  what
    happened in the First-tier Tribunal.  We do not for  one  moment  doubt
    the reliability and integrity  of  that  representative.   We  have  no
    evidence, however.   The  only  evidence  we  have  is  the  Record  of
    Proceedings kept, as he was statutorily obliged to do,  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.

7.   In those circumstances our first conclusion is that the  factual  basis
    upon which the appeal  is  mounted  is  simply  not  made  out  on  the
    evidence.  The Upper Tribunal Judge when granting leave pointed the way
    clearly as to what was needed for the appeal to get off the ground  and
    nothing was done.

8.   But it does not end there.  The  Immigration  Rules  relevant  to  this
    case required the appellant to establish  that  he  was  related  to  a
    person present and settled in the United Kingdom, and he was able to do
    that, namely his mother, and that he was  the  son  of  such  a  person
    living alone  outside  the  United  Kingdom  in  the  most  exceptional
    compassionate  circumstances  and  mainly  dependent   financially   on
    relatives settled in the United Kingdom.  The fact or otherwise that at
    some point he had been married did not in  any  sense  impinge  on  the
    finding of the First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  appellant  failed  very
    considerably to get within that part of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    Judge found that the circumstances simply did not evoke  compassion  of
    the most exceptional nature, applying the test, as he was  required  to
    do, in Senanayake [2005] EWCA Civ 1530.  Therefore any error he made in
    terms of the previous marriage of the appellant was  wholly  immaterial
    to his finding in respect of the Immigration Rules.

9.   In relation to the Article 8 claim, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  said
    this (at[10]):

         "...In further considering the appellant's Article 8  rights  on  a
         standalone basis I find that he is an  adult  son  who  has  had  a
         limited family life with his mother given that he was  married  and
         lived in Nigeria.  I have  taken  into  consideration  the  medical
         infirmities of  his  mother  but  find  that  they  are  not  life-
         threatening or debilitating and for these  reasons  find  that  any
         infringement on the relationship between this  adult  son  and  his
         mother by his removal would be legitimate and proportionate."


    The words "given that he  was  married"  could  be  removed  from  that
    passage and this would not have any material effect on the  outcome  of
    the appellant's Article 8 claim.  For a man in  his  position  who  had
    entered the United Kingdom as recently as he had done, the notion  that
    there was family life which (irrespective of  any  marriage)  would  be
    infringed by his removal from the United Kingdom was in our view wholly
    unsustainable.

10.  Criticism is made today, and we emphasise today,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did not engage in the step-by-step approach required  of
    him in the case of R (on the application of Razgar) v SSHD (2004)  UKHL
    27.  That is not an issue  that  is  raised  anywhere  in  the  grounds
    seeking permission to appeal.  Even if the Judge had been  required  to
    engage in that exercise and had done so,  we  are  perfectly  satisfied
    that the decision would have been entirely the same.

11.  There  was  no  material  error  in  this  judge's  determination.   He
    dismissed the appeal of the appellant against the Secretary of  State's
    decision.  We dismiss his appeal against the determination of the First-
    tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  any
error on a  point of law.  The Appellant's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
therefore dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date
Mr Justice Davis


