
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27069/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 June 2014                               |On 16 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

                             DANE PATRICK TEMPLE
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Usher, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.   The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 29 November 1979,  who
      has appealed with the permission of the First-tier Tribunal against  a
      decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal M R Oliver, who dismissed
      his appeal against a decision of the respondent to refuse to  issue  a
      derivative residence card under  Regulation  18A  of  the  Immigration
      (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006,  as  amended,  because  his
      application did not  meet  the  requirements  of  Regulation  15A.  In
      particular,  his  application  did  not  meet  the   requirements   of
      Regulations 15A(4A) or 15A(7).


   2.   The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and  his  wife,  Ms
      Gemma Lorraine French. He noted the couple have two  children,  Milan,
      born on 17 July 2010, and Caisan, born on 6 August 2012. Both boys are
      British citizens by birth. The judge concluded as follows:


         "19. The application made by the appellant is inappropriate because
         his children have British citizenship and  are  therefore  not  EEA
         citizens. For this reason the appeal must fail. This decision  does
         not lead to his immediate removal which must now be  considered  by
         the respondent. It appears to me from  the  refusal  that  although
         section 55 has been mentioned it has not been  considered  properly
         or in any depth and in any consideration whether to remove him  the
         children's claim on his presence in this respect are likely to have
         a substantial impact."


   3.   Permission to appeal was granted to the appellant on three grounds:


         (1)      The  judge's  apparent  exclusion  of  the  children  from
         consideration under the Zambrano point on the basis that  they  are
         British citizens was erroneous.
         (2)      The judge failed to make any assessment under article 8 of
         the Human Rights Convention.
         (3)      The judge failed  to  make  any  assessment  of  the  best
         interests of the children.


   4.  The respondent has filed a Rule 24 response opposing the appeal.  The
      determination read as a whole showed the judge decided the  appeal  by
      reference  to  Regulations  15A  and  18A.  Furthermore,  it  was  not
      incumbent on the judge to consider article 8 because the decision  did
      not render the appellant liable to leave the UK. He had never  made  a
      claim to the respondent to consider article 8.


   5. I heard submissions on the question of whether  the  judge's  decision
      contains a material error of law.  Mr  Usher  accepted  the  appellant
      could not bring himself within the EEA Regulations, although he argued
      there were practical reasons the appellant's British partner could not
      stay alone in the UK with the children. He focused his submissions  on
      the failure of the respondent and the judge to consider article 8  and
      the best interests of the children. Mr Bramble  argued  there  was  no
      consequence for the  appellant  as  a  result  of  the  refusal  of  a
      residence card which could  engage  article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
      Convention. He should submit a charged application under Appendix  FM,
      as the refusal letter had invited him to do.


   6. Mr Usher said no section 120 notice had been served. I  asked  whether
      the case of Lamichchane v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
      [2012] EWCA Civ 260 applied so as to prevent the Tribunal  considering
      new grounds not raised in response to a section 120 notice. I gave  Mr
      Usher further time to consider  this  and  made  available  copies  of
      Lamichchane and Jaff (s.120 notice; statement of "additional grounds")
      [2012] UKUT 00396 (IAC) available to him.  Both  representatives  made
      further submissions, which I have recorded.


   7.   The  judge  plainly  erred  in  law  in  finding   the   application
      "inappropriate" for the reason he gave in paragraph 10  of  his  brief
      determination. The EEA Regulations read in relevant part as follows:

         "15A. Derivative right of residence
         (1) A person ("P") who is not an exempt person  and  who  satisfies
         the criteria in paragraph (2), (3), (4)  ,  (4A)  or  (5)  of  this
         regulation is entitled to a  derivative  right  to  reside  in  the
         United Kingdom for as long as P satisfies the relevant criteria.
         ...
         (4A) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-
         (a) P is the primary carer of  a  British  citizen  ("the  relevant
         British citizen");
         (b) the relevant British citizen is residing in the United Kingdom;
         and
         (c) the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside  in  the
         UK or in another EEA State if P were required to leave."


   8.   Contrary to what Judge Oliver thought, the Regulations are concerned
      precisely with the situation of British children,  in  line  with  the
      Zambrano judgment. However, his error was  not  material  because  the
      appellant could not in any  event  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
      Regulation as set out above. His partner, with  whom  he  shares  care
      responsibility for the children is British and would not  be  required
      to leave the UK as a result of the appellant having to.  The  children
      would be able to remain with her.


   9.   As for the question  of  whether  the  judge  erred  by  failing  to
      consider article 8 and the best interests of the children, it is clear
      that the decision under appeal could not have caused any  interference
      with the current living arrangements of the appellant and his  family.
      He is not being removed. A residence card is no more than  a  document
      recognising an existing state of affairs and it  does  not  of  itself
      grant any rights. Furthermore, there having been no section 120 notice
      in this case, the Tribunal could not determine an article 8 ground for
      the reasons set out in paragraphs 35 to  41  of  Lamichchane.  I  find
      therefore that Judge Oliver did not materially err in law  in  failing
      to determine the article 8 ground put forward by the appellant. He had
      no jurisdiction to do so.

DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material error  on
    a point of law and his determination dismissing the appellant's  appeal
    shall stand.


    No anonymity direction has been made.


    No fee award.

                      Signed                 Date 13 June 2014


         Neil Froom, sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
