
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/27167/2015
                                                               IA/27175/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision Promulgated            |
|On 27 January 2017              |  30 January 2017               |




                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                    H O M
                                    A D M
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Kouma of Migrant Legal Action
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against a judgment of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Mitchell promulgated on the 23 August 2016 in which the appeals  of
         these two related appellants were dismissed under the  Immigration
         (European Economic Area) Regulation 2006.
      2. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
         Tribunal on the basis it was said to be  arguable  that  the  Judge
         erred as the appellants had appealed  on  Article  8  human  rights
         grounds but the decision merely  stated  that  as  there  were  no
         removal directions Article 8 was not engaged. The  grant  continues
         "However, given that the Appellants face difficulties in continuing
         with their education and in seeking employment in the UK and  given
         the Sala decision, it is arguable that the Tribunal may have  erred
         in not considering Article 8 grounds more fully".


Error of law

      3. The  Judge  finds  in  the  decision  that  there  are  no  removal
         directions in this case  and  that  no  notice  under  section  120
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 has been  served.  The
         Judge was looking at this issue as these were the two criteria said
         to be relevant to assessing whether a  right  of  appeal on  human
         rights grounds exists and the First-tier Tribunal has  jurisdiction
         to consider the same, Amirteymour [2015]  UKUT  466  refers.  That
         principle was upheld, albeit for different reasons, by the Court of
         Appeal in TY  (Sri  Lanka)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1233.
      4.  The  appellants  assert  this  approach  is  legally  flawed  when
         considering section 82 of the 2002 Act as the appeal was brought on
         the basis of part 5 of the 2002 Act following implementation of the
         amendments contained in the Immigration Act 2014.
      5. The first problem for the appellants with this  submission is  the
         specific wording of section 82 which provides:

             82 Right of appeal to the Tribunal


             (1) A person ("P") may appeal to the Tribunal where-


                 (a)   the Secretary of State has decided to refuse a
                 protection claim made by P,


                 (b)   the Secretary of State has decided to refuse a human
                 rights claim made by P, or


                 (c)   the Secretary of State has decided to revoke P's
                 protection status.

      6. The Act envisages a two stage process which is (a)  that  a  person
         makes an application for leave on human rights grounds and (b) that
         the respondent has decided to refuse the claim.  Provided  a  valid
         appeal is lodged the Tribunal will have jurisdiction  to  determine
         the appeal.
      7. It is not disputed that in paragraph 1 of the original  grounds  of
         appeal the  appellants  claimed  that  the  decision  was  not  'in
         accordance with the law' as it was contrary to their human rights.
         As no human rights  claim  has  been  made  or  refused  this  must
         constitute a new matter.
      8. Section 85 of the 2002 Act provides:

             (4) On an appeal under section 82(1) ... against a decision
             the Tribunal may consider.. Any matter which it thinks
             relevant to the substance of the decision, including a matter
             arising after the date of the decision.


             (5) But the Tribunal must not consider a new matter unless the
             Secretary of State has given the Tribunal consent to do so.


             (6) A matter is a "new matter" if-


                 (a)   it constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind listed in
                 section 84, and


                 (b)   the Secretary of State has not previously considered
                 the matter in the context of-


                    (i)      the decision mentioned in section 82(1), or


                    (ii)     a statement made by the appellant under section
                    120."

      9. It was accepted that the Article 8 claim in the grounds  of  appeal
         constitutes a new matter by Ms Kouma. It has not been made out that
         anyone sought the permission of the respondent for the Tribunal to
         consider this matter. As such the Tribunal had no  jurisdiction  to
         do so.
     10. The Judge does appear to refer to section 117 A and B at  paragraph
         33 of the decision but the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to consider
         this issue. No material error arises as the Judge made no  findings
         on the merits of the Article 8 claim.
     11. Despite the view of the judge who granted permission,  no  arguable
         legal error arises in relation to the Judge's approach  to  Article
         8, which was to find there was no jurisdiction  to  consider this
         matter on the facts.
     12. If the appellants want their Article 8 rights to be  considered  it
         is open to them to make a proper application on this basis.
     13. In relation to the Sala point, it is not disputed that in  relation
         to ADM the application for a Residence Card was in recognition of a
         right to reside as an extended family member of  an  EEA  national.
         The Tribunal had no jurisdiction to consider an appeal against  the
         refusal and so no arguable  material  legal  error  arises  as  the
         appeal on this grounds was dismissed.
     14. In relation to HOM,  this  appellant  is an  Irish  national.  The
         application was for a Residence Card in relation to a claim to be a
         qualified person in her own right and so Sala has no application.
     15. The Judge considered the appeal of HOM and at [21] found:

             "The first appellant is an EEA national.  Her application  has
             been refused on the basis of the lack of financial evidence to
             show that she has sufficient resources not to become a  burden
             on social assistance of the United Kingdom.   The  documentary
             and oral evidence that was produced is  entirely  insufficient
             to demonstrate that she would not become a  burden  on  social
             assistance.  No  financial  documents   have   been   produced
             whatsoever.  The uncle was remarkably  vague  as  regards  his
             financial circumstances. I am not willing to draw an inference
             from the claim that they have never  had  recourse  to  public
             funds in the past and will not now in the future.

     16. It has not been made out that this finding is infected by  arguable
         legal error. The burden was upon the appellants to prove their case
         and they failed to do so. No arguable legal error material  to  the
         decision to dismiss the appeals under  the  Regulations,  that  the
         Tribunal had jurisdiction to determine, has been made out.

Decision

     17. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


    Anonymity.


     18. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an  order  pursuant  to  rule
         45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
         2005. I make such an order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 27 January 2017
