
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27554/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 28 November 2017                       |On 08 January 2018                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                             ruth onyango awinyo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Chakmakjian, instructed by Mondair Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Ruth Onyango Awinyo was born on 6 January 1979 and is  a
    female citizen of Kenya.  She appealed  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State dated 17 July 2015 refusing her leave to  remain  to
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  O'Rourke)  which,  in   a   decision
    promulgated on 14 December 2016, dismissed the appeal.   The  appellant
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I was grateful to Mr Chakmakjian, who appeared for the  appellant,  who
    told me that the appellant did not seek  to  re-open  the  question  of
    asylum/Article 3 ECHR in the appeal before the Upper  Tribunal.   Judge
    O'Rourke did not find that the appellant had been trafficked as she had
    claimed but did find that, "even if she has been trafficked, there  was
    no evidence of any  risk  to  her  in  Kenya  as  a  consequence."   Mr
    Chakmakjian told me that he was not seeking to argue that the appellant
    would be re-trafficked on return to Kenya.  He did,  however,  seek  to
    amend the grounds of appeal by adding a ground challenging the  judge's
    decision on the basis that he failed to consider or  properly  consider
    the appellant's account of having been trafficked.   The  relevance  of
    that amendment, Mr Chakmakjian told me, was that a  proper  finding  as
    regards trafficking would have  an  impact  upon  the  Article  8  ECHR
    proportionality assessment.

 3. I did not give permission for the ground to be amended but, for reasons
    which are detailed below, this is a matter which may need to be  looked
    at again in the First-tier Tribunal.  Permission has  been  refused  in
    the First-tier Tribunal granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer in  the
    following terms:

         "It is arguable that as the decision under appeal was a refusal  of
         a human rights  claim,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  obliged  to
         determine for itself whether or  not  the  appellant's  removal  to
         Kenya would constitute a breach of Article 8 given  the  acceptance
         of the genuineness of her relationship (albeit one found to be more
         recent  and  perhaps  less  developed   than   described   by   the
         appellant)."

 4. The appellant claims to  be  in  a  relationship  with  a  Mr  Nyajure.
    Indeed, the appellant claims to be engaged to Mr Nyajure  and  to  have
    been living with him for a number of months.  The  judge  analysed  the
    evidence regarding the relationship and concluded:

         "... on balance, therefore, I consider the relationship  does  seem
         to be genuine but may be relatively more recent  and  perhaps  less
         developed than described by the appellant."

 5. At [19], the judge found that there were not  "sufficiently  compelling
    circumstances in this appeal to  justify  consideration  of  Article  8
    outside the Rules."

 6. In the preceding paragraph, the  judge  refers  to  "relatively  recent
    relationships [which the appellant] has developed in the  UK  ..."  The
    judge goes on  to  refer  to  "church  membership"  in  Kenya  and  the
    relationships which the appellant might form upon return to her country
    of nationality.  It is not at all clear whether  she  is  referring  in
    that sub-paragraph to the relationship with Mr Nyajure.  Further, it is
    also not clear exactly how the judge considered that relationship;  she
    appears to have accepted that it was genuine but does not  say  exactly
    how recent it was formed and  what  the  judge  meant  by  being  "less
    developed than described by the appellant."  The judge needed  to  make
    unequivocal findings  in  relation  to  the  relationship  and,  having
    established a sound factual matrix,  he  should  then  have  considered
    whether family life existed for the purposes of Article 8 ECHR and,  if
    it did, whether it  would  suffer  a  disproportionate  breach  by  the
    appellant's removal to Kenya.  These issues are all alluded to  in  the
    decision  they  are  not  the  subject  of  unequivocal  findings   and
    conclusions.  I agree with  Judge  Plimmer  that  a  proper  Article  8
    assessment should have been made; at [19] the  judge  appears  to  have
    considered that there was some threshold criteria which  had  not  been
    crossed in the appellant's case.  Mrs  Fijiwala,  for  the  respondent,
    argued that  the  judge  had  (as  the  First-tier  Judge  who  refused
    permission indicated) considered the Article 8 assessment "through  the
    lens" of the Immigration Rules.  I cannot say that I agree.  The  judge
    should have adopted a properly structured approach to Article  8  as  I
    have indicated above.  His failure to do so has vitiated  the  decision
    and I set it aside.

 7. There will need to  be  a  new  fact-finding  exercise  which  is  best
    conducted before the First-tier  Tribunal.   Whilst  I  set  aside  the
    judge's findings, I bear in mind that Mr Chakmakjian's indication to me
    at the Upper Tribunal hearing that no issues that  now  arise  in  this
    appeal as regard the risk of the appellant returning to live in  Kenya.
    The focus of the First-tier Tribunal hearing should, therefore,  be  in
    respect of Article 8 ECHR.  Since I have not preserved the findings  of
    the judge in respect of Article 8, then the question as to whether  the
    appellant was trafficked and the impact  that  a  positive  finding  of
    trafficking may have as regards the evidence and assessment of  Article
    8, are matters which may be left to the First-tier Tribunal.   To  that
    extent, the amended ground of appeal may be of relevance on remittal.

 8. On remittal, the Tribunal will also need to consider in greater  detail
    the medical evidence relating to the appellant.  Judge  O'Rourke  found
    that the threshold in N [2005] UKHL 31 had not been crossed in  respect
    of Article 3 ECHR.  That appears not to have been argued before him or,
    indeed, before the Upper  Tribunal.   I  do  consider,  as  regard  the
    Article 8 ECHR analysis, that more thorough findings in respect of  the
    medical evidence (including the  expert  evidence  -  Maxine  Cranstoun
    Counselling) should be made.

Notice of Decision

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  14
    December 2016 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact  shall  stand
    although asylum/humanitarian protection/Article 3 ECHR will  no  longer
    be argued; the decision will be remade in respect  of  Article  8  ECHR
    only.  The appeal is returned to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not  Judge
    O'Rourke) for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

10. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 3 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

