
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/27579/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12 July 2016                           |On 27 July 2016                   |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Deepkumar Pankajbhai Patel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will  refer  to  the
    original appellant, a citizen of India born on 11 August 1990,  as  the
    appellant herein.  The appellant first entered the UK  on  16  February
    2011 as a student.  He was granted leave until 27 August 2012.   On  24
    August 2012 he applied for leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student.  He was granted leave to remain until 28  June  2014  on  that
    basis.  On 4 March 2013 he was granted leave to remain until 18  August
    2014, again as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  An application for  further
    leave to remain on 18 August 2014 was refused on 21 July 2015  and  the
    appellant's  appeal  against  that  decision  has   resulted   in   the
    proceedings before the Tribunal.

2.   The Secretary of State's decision stated  that  the  appellant  in  his
    application of 24 August 2012 had submitted a  TOEIC  certificate  from
    Educational Testing Service ("ETS") to  the  Home  Office  and  to  his
    sponsor in order for  them  to  provide  him  with  a  Confirmation  of
    Acceptance for Studies (CAS).

3.   The respondent stated as follows:

         "ETS has a record of your speaking test.  Using voice  verification
         software, ETS is able to detect when a single person is undertaking
         multiple tests.  ETS undertook a check of your test  and  confirmed
         to the SSHD that there was significant evidence  to  conclude  that
         your certificate was fraudulently obtained by the use  of  a  proxy
         test taker.  ETS have declared your test to be 'Invalid' due to the
         aforementioned presence of a proxy tester who sat the test in  your
         place, and the scores have therefore been cancelled by ETS.


         On the basis of the information provided to her by ETS, the SSHD is
         satisfied that your certificate was fraudulently obtained.


         As false document(s)  have  been  submitted  in  relation  to  your
         previous application, this application is refused  under  paragraph
         322(2), of the Immigration Rules.


         In light of this, the Secretary of State has deemed that refusal is
         appropriate and is not prepared  to  exercise  discretion  in  your
         favour."


4.   As the application had been refused under one of  the  general  grounds
    for refusal the Secretary of State was not satisfied that the appellant
    met the requirements of paragraph 245ZX(a) of the Immigration Rules.

5.   In relation to the appellant's CAS this had been  checked  on  21  July
    2015 but the appellant's sponsor  was  not  listed  at  that  date  and
    therefore the appellant  could  not  receive  the  required  amount  of
    points.  The respondent recorded in Section B of  the  decision  letter
    that the  appellant  had  been  informed  on  21  July  2015  that  the
    sponsoring college had not been listed as a Tier 4 sponsor at that date
    and the appellant had been allowed 60 days to obtain a new sponsor  and
    CAS but he had not provided a new CAS within that period.

6.   The appellant filed grounds of appeal.  He asserted  that  he  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 245ZX(c) of the Immigration Rules and  had  a
    valid CAS letter.  He stated:
         "The  appellant  will  show  that  meets  [sic]   the   appropriate
         requirement and does not fall for  refusal  under  the  Immigration
         Rules and on the balance of  probabilities  the  appeal  should  be
         allowed.  The respondent is respectfully  requested  to  reconsider
         his [sic] decision."


7.   The appeal came before a First-tier Judge  on  18  January  2016.   The
    appellant did not appear and was not represented.  The judge found that
    the appellant had been notified of the hearing and  had  not  contacted
    the Tribunal and was satisfied that the appeal could be dealt  with  in
    his absence.

8.   The judge noted that the respondent had given the appellant 60 days  in
    which to lodge a valid CAS.  However, this had  been  notified  to  the
    appellant on the same date as the  refusal  of  the  application.   The
    judge considered that there had been a  defect  of  procedure  and  the
    Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with the law.   The
    matter was sent back to the Secretary of State for a lawful decision.

9.   The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  on  the  basis
    that the First-tier Tribunal had failed to deal with  both  strands  of
    the refusal decision.  The judge had not addressed the deception  issue
    at all.  Evidence had  been  provided  to  support  the  allegation  of
    deception.  Reference was made to the  witness  statements  of  Rebecca
    Collings and Peter Millington and the spreadsheet confirming  that  the
    appellant's TOEIC English test was invalid.

10.  If the Tribunal had addressed the deception aspect it would  have  been
    clear that this was not a case where  there  were  issues  of  fairness
    arising.  Reference was made to Patel (India) [2011] UKUT 211.

11.  The appellant did not appear and was not represented before me.   There
    was no explanation for his absence.  Notice of the proceedings appeared
    to have been properly served on the appellant on 21 June 2016.  In  the
    premises I find it appropriate to  proceed  with  the  hearing  in  the
    appellant's absence under Rule 38.

12.  Mr Tarlow relied on the  grounds  of  appeal  and  submitted  that  the
    deception allegation had been missed  by  the  First-tier  Judge.   The
    deception aspect was the main thrust of the refusal and the  judge  had
    simply misjudged that part of the decision.  There was a material error
    of law and I should remake the decision.

13.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.

14.  This does appear to be a case where the First-tier Judge clearly  erred
    in law.  As Mr Tarlow submits the main thrust of the decision  was  the
    deception  issue  which  had  not  been  dealt  with  by   the   judge.
    Furthermore  the  appellant  did  not  raise  any  challenge   to   the
    respondent's contention that he had used deception - I have referred to
    the grounds of appeal above.  On top of  that  the  appellant  did  not
    attend the hearing.

15.  The case of Patel, to which the Secretary  of  State  referred  in  the
    grounds of appeal, states that fairness  requires  that  refusal  cases
    should be dealt with in broadly the same way as curtailment cases.   In
    curtailment cases the Home Office policy applied where an applicant was
    inter alia:  "innocent  of  any  practice  that  led  to  loss  of  the
    sponsorship status" and the comments about  unfairness  did  not  apply
    where applicant had not been "a bona fide student at the college  where
    he is seeking to extend his stay, or where he has participated  in  the
    practices that may have led the college to lose its sponsorship status.
     ..."

16.   As  the  Tribunal  states  in  paragraph  13  of  its  decision,   the
    requirements of fairness always depend upon the context.

17.  The context of this case was that the respondent alleged deception  and
    put forward evidence to support that conclusion.  The grounds of appeal
    did not directly challenge this allegation.   The  appellant  makes  no
    reference to the issue of deception but simply maintains that  his  CAS
    was valid.  Furthermore the appellant did not participate in the appeal
    process at either level and did not attend the hearing before the First-
    tier Tribunal or before me.  Finally, although the  appellant  has  had
    ample opportunity to lodge further material or obtain a CAS nothing has
    been done at all.

18.  The Secretary of State has made an allegation of deception.   This  has
    been supported by the evidence contained in the respondent's bundle  as
    Mr Tarlow submitted.  The burden is on the respondent to make good  the
    allegation of deception.  The challenge  has  gone  unrebutted  by  the
    appellant, who did not engage in any meaningful  way  with  the  appeal
    proceedings.  The burden has clearly been discharged. In the context of
    this case there was no unfairness in the  respondent's  decision-making
    process.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier  Judge  was  materially  flawed  in  law.   I
remake the decision.  I allow the appeal of the  Secretary  of  State.   The
decision of the First-tier Judge is reversed.

Appeal dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Judge made no anonymity order and I make none.

FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date 26 July 2016
G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal

