
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27906/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 2 May 2017                         |On 11 May 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                              Mr tauhidul islam

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Butterworth of Counsel instructed by Waterstone
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who seeks  to  appeal  against
    the decision of the respondent, refusing to  grant  him  leave  in  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.  The date of  the
    decision being that of 27th July 2015.
2.   By way of background the appellant was first  granted  leave  to  enter
    the United Kingdom in October 2010 as a Tier 4 (General) Student  until
    31st December 2012.

3.   On 25th October 2013 the  appellant  made  a  further  application  for
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student.   That  application  was
    refused on 3 December. Judicial review proceedings were  instituted  in
    respect of that decision, upon which there  was  an  agreement  by  the
    respondent to reconsider the application.

4.   Prior to making that decision the  Secretary  of  State  wrote  to  the
    appellant on 4th February 2015  informing  him  that  as  part  of  his
    application he was required to sit a new English language test  because
    his test scores had been  cancelled.   The  appellant  was  advised  to
    submit  those  new  test  scores  by  1st  April  2015  otherwise   the
    application would be refused.  At the same time a further  notification
    was made on 4th February 2015  requiring  the  appellant  to  submit  a
    Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies CAS also by 1st April  2015.   A
    period of 60 days' leave was granted for that purpose.

5.    The  letter  4th  February  2015,  notifying  the  appellant  of   the
    requirement to take  an  English  language  test,  is  of  significance
    because, enclosed  with  that  letter  was  a  certified  copy  of  the
    appellant's passport which  was  retained  by  the  Home  Office.   The
    certification being that it  was  a  true  and  complete  copy  of  the
    original and it is dated 4th February 2015.  The notice also states  as
    follows:-

         "You can use the endorsed copy of your passport enclosed with  this
         letter to prove your identity  when  taking  the  test.   Once  the
         certificate has been issued  it  must  be  sent  to  the  following
         address."

6.   It is right to indicate in summary that the appellant made a number  of
    attempts to obtain that language certificate by contacting a number  of
    the IELTS administrative offices and test centres.

7.   Significantly on 20th February 2015 there was a reply from Poppy  Smith
    of the administrative office of the University of Westminster saying as
    follows:-

         "Thank you for your email due to  British  Council  Regulations  we
         unfortunately cannot accept the certified copy of your passport and
         you would only be able to apply for the  test  with  your  physical
         passport. I'm sorry for this inconvenience."

8.   This was in response to the letter from the Home Office  together  with
    the certified copy of the passport.  On 17th March  2015  there  was  a
    response to an enquiry by the test manager at Bellerbys College to  the
    effect: "Unfortunately we do  not  accept  Home  Office  letters.   All
    candidates must hold a valid passport."  On the same day was a response
    from the examination centre at International House London to the effect
    as follows:-


         "Thank you for your email.  Please be informed that we will  accept
         the letter of  the  Home  Office  however  we  cannot  accept  your
         certified passport copy.  The  passport  copy  does  not  show  the
         expiry date.  Please supply us with the page of your passport where
         the expiry date or extension is stated then  we  will  be  able  to
         fully accept your documents."

9.   On the same date of 17th March 2015 there was also  a  reply  from  the
    Lewisham Southwark College "We cannot register with an expired passport
    your passport has to be in date."

10.  It was this email which alerted the appellant to the  reality  that  he
    did not have a current passport and immediately  he  put  in  train  an
    application for a new passport.  That new passport was  issued  on  4th
    May 2015 but was not received for some time because it had to  be  sent
    from Bangladesh.

11.  Given the problems that he had, a letter was written on his  behalf  to
    the Home Office by solicitors dated 27th March 2015 complaining of  the
    difficulties which  the  appellant  was  having  at  the  various  test
    centres, informing the  Home  Office  that  a  new  passport  had  been
    requested asking for further time to obtain the test and also to obtain
    a new CAS.  No response was made to that letter until the  refusal  was
    issued on 27th July 2015.

12.  The appeal against that decision was lodged and came before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge McIntosh on  29th  July  2016.   In  reality  it  was  a
    challenge to the fairness of the decision, it being said that the  Home
    Office had taken no account of the difficulties which the appellant had
    been facing and that in the circumstances the 60 day grant of leave was
    inadequate for the purposes of obtaining the language  certificate  and
    the CAS.  The appeal was dismissed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.

13.  Permission, however, to appeal  that decision  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey  on  17th  March  2017
    essentially, that of common law fairness.

14.  The Judge at paragraphs 25 and 26  of  the  determination  concentrates
    upon the need to provide a new IELTS.  The  Judge  considers  that  the
    first email to an alternative recognised test centre seemed  to  be  on
    19th February 2015 and the other enquiries around 17th March 2015.  The
    finding of the Judge was that for a period of  almost  four  weeks  the
    appellant was not proactive in ensuring that he was able to submit  his
    IELTS by 1st April 2015.

15.  It seem to me on the evidence that was presented that  such  a  finding
    failed to take into account  the  context  of  what  was  done  by  the
    appellant. He contacted at least four or five centres; he notified  the
    respondent before 1st April of the difficulties and received  no  reply
    and he was proactive in getting a new passport once he realised that it
    had expired.
16.  The Judge finds  there  were  no  reasonable  grounds  as  to  why  the
    applicant could not take the new IELTS and submit a  valid  application
    by 1st April 2015.  I find in relation to that comment that that  is  a
    failure upon  the  part  of  the  Judge  to  understand  the  practical
    difficulties that were placed in the way of the appellant in doing so.

17.  The first difficulty being that the certified true copy  enclosed  with
    the notice of 1st February 2015 was incomplete, such that  it  did  not
    alert to those who would read it necessarily to whether it was valid or
    not.  Clearly it was the belief of all parties initially  that  it  was
    valid. There would have been no purpose in enclosing a  certified  true
    copy of an invalid passport.  It was only in March, as indicated by the
    emails, that it became clear that not only was the certified true  copy
    incomplete as to the expiry when one looked  at  it,  it  had  expired.
    Thus the Secretary of State had invited the appellant to  make  use  of
    that certified copy when it was in reality useless.

18.  A more concerning aspect is the lack of clarity as  to  policy  and  to
    expectation as between the Home Office and the various testing centres.
     On the Home Office point of view it was reasonable to expect that they
    would accept the certified true copy, whereas almost  universally  that
    was not the case.  Mr  Butterworth  most  helpfully  has  produced  the
    latest policy in relation to  securing  English  language  testing  and
    generally it indicates that the original passport should be  presented.
    That certainly would seem to have been the understanding of the testing
    centres.

19.  Some criticism clearly could be made of the appellant in not  notifying
    the Home Office in February  as  to  the  reluctance  on  the  part  of
    certainly one provider to accept the certified copy.   However,  as  it
    transpires, even had the request for an original passport been made  it
    would not have been forthcoming because it had been expired.

20.  Thus the Home Office were expecting the appellant to  obtain  the  test
    on the basis of an expired passport.   The  only  way  forward  was  to
    obtain a new passport and that is precisely what the appellant  did  as
    soon as he realised that he had to do so.

21.  It seems to me that there were entirely reasonable grounds  as  to  why
    the appellant could not take the test in time, namely that  he  had  no
    passport to do so and means to correct that  matter  before  1st  April
    2015.

22.  I find that the reasoning therefore  of  the  Judge  was  defective  in
    failing to see the matter in the whole context and particularly in  the
    light of the fact that communication was made with the respondent prior
    to 1st April as to the difficulties to which no response was made.   It
    was reasonable to expect that some accommodation would  be  arrived  at
    and none seemingly was.

23.  I have no hesitation in finding that the  decision  of  the  Judge  was
    defective particularly on the issue of fairness as to  set  aside  that
    decision.

24.  It falls therefore for that decision to  be  remade  and  I  retain  it
    within the Upper Tribunal in order for that to be  implemented.   Given
    that the respondent had granted a period of time to  the  appellant  to
    obtain that certificate, it was entirely apparent and should have  been
    apparent by 27th March and for the reasons stated in  the  letter  that
    that time was inadequate.  There was a expectation that time  would  be
    further extended in order to permit the use of the new passport.

25.  In any event the challenge is to the decision of 27th July 2015,  which
    makes no reference to the difficulties which have  been  placed  before
    the appellant in either obtaining the language certificate or the  CAS.
    There is no acknowledgment of  the  letter  that  was  written  and  no
    concession to the difficulties which clearly  were  placed  before  the
    appellant in obtaining that requirement.  I find that, having regard to
    the notice of 4th  February  2015,  the  requirements  that  were  made
    pursuant  to  it,  both  as  to  the  language  and  CAS,  were  wholly
    unrealistic given the misapprehension of fact as to the existence of  a
    valid passport.  Indeed if anything the appellant  himself  was  misled
    both as to the document enclosed with the notice and with the  lack  of
    clarity of the policy which should be adopted.

26.  I find therefore  that  there  was  a  fundamental  unfairness  in  the
    procedure such that the decision of  27th  July  2015  was  unfair  and
    unreasonable and unlawful.

27.  In those circumstances the  appeal  in  respect  of  that  decision  is
    allowed such that it should be of no effect.

28.  In terms of Article 8 of the ECHR that is  also  a  decision  which  is
    largely unreasoned it is clearly predicated upon the findings  of  fact
    in relation to the Immigration Rules.  That too I set aside but do  not
    remake it in the absence of any material to do so.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is respect of the Immigration Rules  is  allowed.   The  decision
made in respect of Article 8 of the human rights is set aside.

No anonymity direction is made.



[pic]

Signed                                  Date 10 May 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
