
IAC-AH-sar-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27118/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th March 2015                            |On 27th March 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                            MUHAMMAD RASHID KHAN
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Mahmood of Counsel instructed by Maxim
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Foudy promulgated on 30th September 2014.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan born 11th  April  1979  who
    applied in May 2014 for a residence card as the extended family  member
    of an EEA national.  The application was based  upon  his  relationship
    with his cousin Khalida Amjad and her husband Amjad Wali who  are  both
    Belgian nationals.

 3. The application was  refused  on  26th  June  2014  with  reference  to
    Regulation 8(2)(a) and (c) of The Immigration (European Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the 2006 Regulations) which are set out below;

         8.2  A person satisfies the condition  in  this  paragraph  if  the
             person is a relative of an EEA national,  his  spouse  or  his
             civil partner, and

             (a)  the person is residing in a country other than the United
                  Kingdom and is dependent upon the EEA  national  or  is  a
                  member of his household;

             (c)  the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a),  has
                  joined  the  EEA  national  in  the  United  Kingdom   and
                  continues to be dependent upon him or to be  a  member  of
                  his household.

 4. The Respondent did not accept that the above conditions were satisfied,
    nor was it accepted that the EEA Sponsor  was  a  qualified  person  as
    defined in Regulation 6 of the 2006 Regulations.  The  application  was
    therefore refused both with reference to Regulation 8(2) and Regulation
    (6).

 5. Judge Foudy (the judge) heard the appeal on 26th September  2014.   The
    judge found that the Appellant is the cousin of Ms Amjad and  that  she
    and her husband are Belgian citizens, and Mr Wali was exercising treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom as a self-employed decorator.

 6. The judge did not find that the Appellant had been  maintained  by  the
    EEA Sponsor prior to coming to the United Kingdom and was not satisfied
    that there was evidence of  current  dependency,  and  the  appeal  was
    therefore dismissed.

 7. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal by Judge McWilliam and I
    set out below the grant of permission, in part,  which  summarises  the
    grounds contained in the application;

         "2.  There is an arguable error of law because it is  not  apparent
             that the judge considered prior membership of a household  and
             present membership of a household and instead it  is  arguable
             that she considered the issue of dependency only  (see  Dauhoo
             [2012] UKUT 79).

         3.   It is not clear to me  when  the  Sponsor  started  exercising
             treaty rights, but this can be clarified  at  the  forthcoming
             hearing.

         4.   There are  two  other  files  with  this  one.   IA/31211/2013
             relates to the Appellant's wife and IA/31212/2013  relates  to
             the Appellant.  It appears they both made  joint  applications
             to remain under Appendix FM and their appeals  were  dismissed
             and permission refused".

 8. The appeal came before me on 23rd January 2015.  I found that the judge
    had erred in law by not taking into account the principles  in  Dauhoo,
    the head note of which is set out below;



         "Under the scheme set out in reg 8(2) of The Immigration  (European
         Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006,  a  person   can   succeed   in
         establishing that he or she is an extended family  member   in  any
         one of four different  ways,  each  of  which  requires  proving  a
         relevant connection both prior to arrival in the UK and in the UK:

         (i)  prior dependency and present dependency;

         (ii)     prior membership of a household and present membership  of
             a household;

         (iii)    prior dependency and present membership of a household;

         (iv) prior membership of a household and present dependency.




         It  is  not  necessary,  therefore,  to  show  prior  and   present
         connection in the  same  capacity:  i.e.  dependency-dependency  or
         household membership-household membership ((i) or  (ii)  above).  A
         person may also qualify if able to show (iii) or (iv). "

 9. The judge only considered the issue of dependency and did not  consider
    prior or present membership of a household  and  made  no  findings  on
    this.  For that reason the decision had to be set aside.

10. I found that the following findings had not however been challenged and
    were therefore preserved;

          a) Mr Wali and Ms Amjad are Belgian citizens and are  related  as
             claimed to the Appellant.

          b) At the date of the First-tier Tribunal  hearing  Mr  Wali  was
             exercising treaty rights in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  self-
             employed decorator.

          c) Ms  Amjad  and  Mr  Wali  falsely  claimed  in  their  witness
             statements that they had never claimed  any  public  funds  or
             benefits in the United Kingdom to support their family.

          d) There is insufficient evidence to prove that the Appellant was
             dependent upon an EEA national prior to coming to  the  United
             Kingdom, and insufficient evidence to prove that the Appellant
             continues to be dependent upon an EEA national.

11. The hearing was adjourned for further evidence to be given in  relation
    to membership of the household of an EEA national prior to arriving  in
    the United Kingdom, and current membership of the household of  an  EEA
    national.

Re-making the Decision - Upper Tribunal Hearing 18th March 2015

Preliminary Issues

12. I ascertained that I had received  all  documentation  upon  which  the
    parties intended to rely, and that each party had served the other with
    any documentation upon which reliance was to  be  placed.   I  had  the
    Respondent's bundle  with  Annexes  A-J,  and  the  Appellant's  bundle
    comprising 238 pages.  These bundles had  been  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

13. I received from Miss  Johnstone,  without  objection,  a  copy  of  the
    Appellant's application for entry clearance as a  spouse  made  on  2nd
    September 2004, together with a copy of form ICD1989,  and  details  of
    the immigration history of the Appellant's wife Farhad Alauddin Shaikh,
    and the Appellant's immigration history, and the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter addressed to Ms Shaikh, following her application for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of  her  family  and  private
    life with the Appellant.

14. Both representatives confirmed that they had  received  a  copy  of  my
    error of law decision  dated  28th  January  2015  which  set  out  the
    preserved findings, and the issues to be considered at this hearing.

15. Both representatives indicated that they  were  ready  to  proceed  and
    there was no application for an adjournment.

The Evidence

16. I heard evidence firstly from the Appellant, secondly from  his  cousin
    Khalida Amjad, and thirdly from  her  husband  Amjad  Wali.   All  gave
    evidence with the assistance of an interpreter in Urdu.  I am satisfied
    there was no  difficulty  in  communication.   The  Appellant  and  his
    witnesses did not rely upon the witness statements they had  previously
    made.  I have recorded all  questions  and  answers  in  my  Record  of
    Proceedings and will not repeat them in full here.  I set out  below  a
    summary of the evidence.

17. The Appellant stated that he had lived with  Khalida  Amjad  and  Amjad
    Wali in Pakistan before coming to the  United  Kingdom.   In  answering
    questions put by Mr Mahmood, the Appellant said that he lived with  his
    cousin in rented accommodation in Pakistan from 2002 but for the  first
    two years  there  was  no  rental  contract  and  thereafter  a  rental
    agreement was signed.  There is a rental agreement at pages 205-206  of
    the Appellant's bundle dated 1st January 2004 showing that  a  property
    at 33 Lala Zaar Colony, Mansehra Road, Abbottabad  was  rented  to  the
    Appellant and Amjad Wali for  a  period  of  twelve  months  until  1st
    January 2005.

18. The Appellant confirmed that he lived at that address until  2005.   He
    confirmed that Khalida Amjad and Amjad Wali travelled from  Belgium  to
    live in the United Kingdom in 2011.

19. Cross-examined the Appellant stated that Khalida Amjad became a Belgian
    citizen in 2009 and Amjad Wali in 2007.  Khalida Amjad left Pakistan to
    live in Belgium in January 2005.

20. As to the wedding of Khalida and Amjad this  took  place  in  Pakistan.
    The couple wanted to live independently which is why they took  on  the
    rented property, and the Appellant started living with them.

21. The Appellant stated that Amjad went back to Belgium shortly after  the
    wedding and only returned to  Pakistan  once  in  2004  before  Khalida
    joined him in Belgium in January 2005.

22. The Appellant accepted that the address of the rented property  is  not
    the address shown on his Pakistani passport at that time,  neither  was
    it the address that he gave when he  made  his  application  for  entry
    clearance on 2nd September 2004.

23. The Appellant then said that he moved into the rented  property  at  33
    Lala Zaar Colony in January 2004.  It was pointed out  that  previously
    he had said that he lived there without  a  rental  agreement  for  two
    years prior to January 2004, and he then changed his  evidence  to  say
    that prior to January 2004 he had in fact lived at the  same  household
    as Khalida Amjad in an uncle's property but there was  no  contract  to
    prove that.  He described this property as belonging to  Mr  Khan.   He
    admitted that he had never previously mentioned this because he did not
    have any documents to prove that he lived there.

24. The Appellant said that Khalida left Pakistan to  live  in  Belgium  in
    January 2005 and he moved to the United Kingdom on 26th February  2005.
    He accepted that in March 2012 he had made an application for leave  to
    remain based upon his relationship with  Farhad  Alauddin  Shaikh.   He
    said Ms Shaikh lived alone in London, and subsequently he admitted that
    they had married in 2012 and that they have a son born  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 11th May 2013.  The Appellant confirmed that he had  entered
    the United Kingdom as the spouse of  a  person  settled  here  but  had
    divorced his first wife, and started a relationship with Ms  Shaikh  in
    2007.  He visited her every two or three weeks, having  stopped  living
    with her in London and moved to live with his cousin  and  her  husband
    when they arrived in the United Kingdom in October 2011.

25. There was no re-examination and in answer to some questions that I put,
    the Appellant thought that his cousin married in Pakistan  in  June  or
    July 2002 but was not sure.  He confirmed that he had been living  with
    Ms Shaikh in 2011 and then moved  to  live  with  his  cousin  and  her
    husband because of financial difficulties.

26. Giving evidence-in-chief, Khalida Amjad confirmed  that  the  Appellant
    started living in her household after her wedding which took  place  in
    Pakistan in October 2002.  They started living together at 33 Lala Zaar
    Colony.  Khalida left Pakistan to live in Belgium on 12th January 2005.
     She and her husband moved from Belgium and  started  to  live  in  the
    United Kingdom on 16th October  2011.   After  their  arrival  in  this
    country the Appellant started living with them.

27. When cross-examined,  Khalida  indicated  that  she  became  a  Belgian
    citizen in 2009 and her husband became a Belgian citizen in 2007.  They
    have four children who live with them.

28. Khalida stated that her husband stayed in Pakistan living with her  for
    approximately three weeks after their wedding.  He subsequently visited
    Pakistan two or three times including a visit in January 2005  when  he
    took her back to Belgium.

29. She believed that her husband had visited Pakistan in  2004  but  could
    not remember when.  It was put to the witness that  the  Appellant  had
    stated they started living at 33  Lala  Zaar  Colony  in  January  2004
    whereas she had indicated that they  lived  there  straight  after  her
    wedding in October 2002.  She changed her  evidence  to  indicate  that
    they had lived in another property before  January  2004  and  she  had
    initially been confused in giving different evidence  about  this,  and
    also there was no contract to  prove  where  they  were  living  before
    January 2004.  She explained that she  and  her  husband  took  on  the
    rented property because they wanted to live  independently  from  their
    families after their wedding.

30. There was no re-examination and I asked  where the  witness  had  lived
    before moving into the rented property at 33 Lala Zaar Colony  and  she
    said she lived with a cousin who she knew as Mr Khan.  She did not know
    his full name or his address.  She explained that in Pakistan it is the
    custom to respect elders and one did not need to know their full  name.
    The witness stated she had lived with her  husband  in  Pakistan  after
    their marriage but was unable to give details of where or when.

31. Amjad Wali gave his evidence-in-chief stating the Appellant had been  a
    member of his household in Pakistan since 2002 and they had lived at 33
    Lala Zaar Colony.  Mr Wali and his wife had moved to the United Kingdom
    from Belgium in October 2011, and the Appellant had started living with
    them in this country.  Mr Ali confirmed that the Appellant had a friend
    who he visited in London, but when he was asked whether  the  Appellant
    was married he admitted that he was.

32. When cross-examined, Mr Wali stated  that  he  lived  in  Pakistan  for
    approximately one month after his marriage in October 2002.  He visited
    Pakistan after his marriage on three or four occasions before his  wife
    came to live in Belgium with him.  When asked why he had referred to  a
    friend of the Appellant rather than the Appellant's wife,  he  said  he
    meant to say girlfriend.  He is aware that the Appellant and  his  wife
    have a son.

33. There was no re-examination and in answer to questions that I  put,  Mr
    Wali confirmed that he had lived in Pakistan  after  his  marriage  for
    approximately three weeks.  He said that he and his  wife  spent  their
    time in Islamabad at his brother's house.  He then returned to Belgium.

34. He said that he returned to Pakistan in 2003 for  two  or  three  weeks
    staying at 33 Lala Zaar Colony.  He then changed his  evidence  to  say
    that he had not stayed at that address, but had resided at his  uncle's
    property but he did not know the address.

35. Mr Wali then said that he had returned to  visit  Pakistan  on  two  or
    three separate occasions in 2003.  On the first visit he had stayed  at
    his uncle's address, who  he  named  as  Sardar  Aftab.   He  said  the
    Appellant was also living there.  He did not know the address,  but  he
    stayed there again on his next visit in June  and  July  2003  when  he
    stayed for approximately twelve days.  The Appellant was also  at  that
    address.  Mr Wali visited Pakistan again in December  2013  staying  at
    the same address, and then visiting Islamabad.

36. He said that he did not visit Pakistan in 2004, but then  said  he  was
    not sure.  He thought he had stayed for a few  days  at  33  Lala  Zaar
    Colony but could not recall when.

The Respondent's Submissions

37. Miss Johnstone reminded me that Mr Wali and Ms Amjad had been found  to
    be untruthful before the First-tier Tribunal and that the  finding  had
    been preserved.  I was asked to note the lack of  reliable  documentary
    evidence and Miss Johnstone submitted  that  the  oral  evidence  given
    today was wholly unreliable, inconsistent and vague.

38. I was asked to note the significant differences in the  evidence  given
    and to note it was accepted that neither Ms  Amjad  nor  Mr  Wali  were
    Belgian citizens  when  it  is  contended  that  they  lived  with  the
    Appellant in Pakistan.

39. Miss Johnstone did not make any submissions in relation to Article 8 of
    the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights (1950 Convention),  as  Mr
    Mahmood indicated this was not being pursued.

The Appellant's Submissions

40. Mr Mahmood confirmed that there was no reliance on Article 8.

41. Mr Mahmood submitted that the appeal should be allowed under  the  2006
    Regulations.  I was asked to find  that  the  evidence  indicated  that
    following the marriage of Ms Amjad  and  Mr  Wali,  the  parties  lived
    together  at  a  relative's  house  before  moving  into   the   rented
    accommodation at 33 Lala Zaar Colony on 1st January 2004.   Mr  Mahmood
    accepted that there were inconsistencies in the evidence, but contended
    that in the main it was similar.   Mr  Mahmood  accepted  the  evidence
    proved that Ms Amjad did not become a Belgian citizen until  2009,  and
    Mr Wali until 2007, stating that he could make no oral  submissions  on
    this issue, it was the Appellant's case that he had lived with them  in
    Pakistan prior to them becoming EEA citizens.

42. In relation to the  United  Kingdom,  Mr  Mahmood  submitted  that  the
    evidence is consistent and proved that the Appellant had been a  member
    of the household of an EEA national in this country, after Mr Wali  and
    Ms Amjad arrived in October 2011.

43. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

44. Because of the preserved findings, the issue before  me  is  relatively
    narrow, and relates to whether the Appellant can prove that  he  is  an
    extended family member of an EEA  national,  by  reason  of  his  prior
    membership of the household of an EEA  national,  and  by  his  present
    membership of such a household.  The issue of dependency is not  before
    me, and there is no reliance upon Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

45. The burden of proof is on the Appellant, and the standard of proof is a
    balance of probabilities.

46. I do not accept the Appellant and the two witnesses who gave  evidence,
    as credible or reliable witnesses.

47. I do accept that Amjad Wali left Pakistan to live in Belgium  in  1992.
    He returned to Pakistan to marry Khalida Amjad  in  October  2002.   He
    stayed in Pakistan for approximately  three  weeks  after  his  wedding
    before returning to live in Belgium.

48. In January 2005 Khalida Amjad joined him in Belgium.  On 26th  February
    2005 the Appellant left Pakistan and commenced  living  in  the  United
    Kingdom as the spouse of  a  person  settled  in  this  country.   That
    marriage subsequently ended in divorce.

49. In relation to the evidence presented to me, neither the Appellant  nor
    his witnesses relied upon their witness  statements,  but  relied  upon
    oral evidence.  There were inconsistencies in the evidence as to  where
    the parties  were  living  in  Pakistan,  and  there  were  changes  of
    evidence.

50. The inconsistencies and the changes to the evidence are set out in  the
    evidence which is summarised earlier.  I do not accept that Amjad  Wali
    had a household in Pakistan, where he had not lived since 1992.  It has
    not been proved where Khalida Amjad lived after her wedding  nor  where
    the Appellant lived.  I do not accept that the Appellant was living  in
    the household of an EEA national.  Neither Amjad Wali nor Khalida Amjad
    were EEA nationals while the Appellant lived in Pakistan.   Amjad  Wali
    became a Belgian citizen in 2007, Khalida Amjad in  2009.   Taking  the
    Appellant's case at its very highest, it is therefore clear that he did
    not live in the household of an EEA national before he left Pakistan on
    26th February 2005.

51. Miss Johnstone made the point that reliable  documentary  evidence  had
    not been submitted.  The only  documentary  evidence  purported  to  be
    relevant as to where the parties lived was a  tenancy  agreement  dated
    1st January 2004 which indicated that on that date a tenancy  had  been
    taken out by Amjad Wali and the Appellant on the property  at  33  Lala
    Zaar  Colony,  Mansehra  Road,  Abbottabad.   This  document  has  been
    produced by the Appellant, it is for him to show that it  is  reliable,
    and I must consider whether the document is reliable, having taken into
    account all the evidence in the round.  This I have done.

52. I do not find that reliance can be placed upon that tenancy  agreement.
    There was conflicting evidence as to when Amjad Wali  had  returned  to
    Pakistan from Belgium.  The Appellant and Ms  Amjad  gave  inconsistent
    and conflicting evidence as to when they  contended  they  had  started
    living at 33 Lala Zaar Colony, having at one  stage  stated  that  they
    lived there immediately following the wedding in October 2002, and then
    subsequently changing their evidence to state that at  that  time  they
    lived with another relative whose full name they did not know and whose
    address they did not know, before starting to  live  at  33  Lala  Zaar
    Colony.  The inconsistencies in the evidence go  to  the  core  of  the
    account and are material.  I do not find that reliance  can  be  placed
    upon the tenancy agreement.

53. In my view, it is  clear  that  the  Appellant  did  not  live  in  the
    household of an EEA national before leaving Pakistan.  I do not  accept
    that he lived in the household of either Khalida Amjad or  Amjad  Wali,
    and in any event at  that  time  they  were  not  EEA  nationals.   The
    Appellant therefore cannot satisfy the requirements of Regulation  8(2)
    of the 2006 Regulations and the appeal must therefore fail.

54. Even though the appeal cannot succeed I will  go  on  to  consider  the
    evidence in relation to the claim that the Appellant is  presently  the
    member of a household of an EEA national.  I do not  find  this  to  be
    credible.  The  Appellant  accepts  that  in  March  2012  he  made  an
    application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the  basis  of
    his relationship with Farhad Alauddin Shaikh who  he  married  in  that
    year.  I do not accept as credible his claim that in 2011 when  he  was
    living with Ms  Shaikh,  with  whom  he  claimed  to  have  been  in  a
    relationship since 2007, he left her to go and live  with  his  Belgian
    cousin and her husband.  No satisfactory, or adequate  explanation  has
    been given as to why he would move.  I note that  the  application  for
    leave to remain was refused on 4th July 2013.  Although the  Respondent
    accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  in  a   genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship with Ms  Shaikh,  the  application  did  not  satisfy  the
    requirements of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules, and it  was  felt
    that there would be no breach of Article 8.  The Appellant had no right
    of appeal, as he did not have leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom,
    but Ms Shaikh appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and  her  appeal  was
    dismissed, and permission to appeal refused.

55. Neither the Appellant nor his  witnesses  were  forthcoming  about  his
    marriage, for example Mr Wali initially explained  that  the  Appellant
    had a friend in London whom he visited from time to time.  Subsequently
    he admitted that this friend was in fact the Appellant's wife with whom
    he had a son who was born in 2013.

56. I therefore reject the claim that the Appellant is currently  a  member
    of a household of an EEA national as I found the evidence given on this
    issue to be incredible and conflicting with the  application  that  the
    Appellant made for leave to remain with his partner.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal is dismissed.


Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no request for anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal and no  anonymity  order
is made.



Signed        Date 20th March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.



Signed        Date 20th March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

