
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27242/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 August 2013                              |On 21 August 2013            |
|Prepared 7 August 2013                        |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Umeshkumar Ramanbhai PATEL

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Jeshani, of Counsel instructed by Messrs
                    Markand & Company


                           Decision And Directions


1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Abebrese  who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 3 April 2013 allowed the appellant's  appeal  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State made on 7 November  2012  to  refuse
    the appellant's leave to remain under the provisions of  Article  8  of
    the ECHR.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before me I  will  for
    ease of reference refer to  her  as  the  respondent  as  she  was  the
    respondent of the First-tier Tribunal.  Similarly for ease of reference
    I will refer to Mr Umeshkumar Ramanbhai Patel as the  appellant  as  he
    was the appellant for the First-tier Tribunal.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of India born on 22 August 1981 who  entered
    Britain as a visitor on 30 October 1997.

4.   He overstayed and then applied for leave to remain as  a  dependant  of
    his father in 2004.   That  application  was  refused.   The  appellant
    appealed and became appeals right exhausted on 22 June 2006.

5.   He was served a notice as a person liable to removal on 18 April  2006.



6.   On 23 March 2012 the appellant made an application for leave to  remain
    under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.

7.   That application was refused on 7 November 2012 on the basis  that  the
    appellant had been issued with the form IS151A as a  person  liable  to
    removal on 18 April 2006 which had the effect of "stopping the  clock".
    The Secretary of State also refused  applications on the issues of  the
    appellant's rights under Article 8 of the ECHR referring to  the  terms
    of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

8.   The appellant appealed.  His appeal was heard by Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Abebrese on 12 March 2013.

9.   The judge noted  the  evidence  of  the  appellant  which  included  an
    assertion that he had not been aware of the application  for  leave  to
    remain as a dependant had been made by his father and  stated  that  he
    had never seen the notice of removal before the hearing.

10.  The appellant's evidence included the fact that his father  resides  in
    India and he has siblings there and that his mother travels to India on
    a regular basis to see his father.

11.  The judge  noted that the appellant's representative made a  submission
    that "the test in Kugathas is  satisfied  in  that  the  appellant  was
    completely dependent on his mother and brother beyond normal ties."

12.  Having found that the appellant could not benefit from the  Immigration
    Rules relating to private and family life the  judge  referred  to  the
    decision of the House of Lords in Razgar [2004] UKHL  27  and  then  in
    paragraph 15 stated that he found that removal would interfere with the
    appellant's family and private life and that Article 8 was engaged.  He
    also found that the decision was in accordance with the law and  was  a
    decision which the Secretary of State was entitled to  make.   He  then
    went on to say:-

         "The  decision  I  find  however  the   decision   (sic)   is   not
         proportionate for the following reasons.  The appellant has been in
         the United Kingdom since the age of 15 he resides with  his  mother
         and depends on her and his elder brother.  He has provided evidence
         of his social ties in this country in respect of charity events and
         I found his evidence to be credible.  The appellant's  evidence  in
         respect of charity events was not  challenged  by  the  respondent.
         The appellant does have ties in India as stated above but  he  also
         has ties in the United Kingdom and his  mother,  cousins,  maternal
         uncles and aunts.  I also found the appellant and his witnesses  to
         be credible in respect of the  family  of  the  appellant  in  this
         country and the closeness of the family.  On  balance  the  removal
         would not be proportionate bearing in mind his ties in  the  United
         Kingdom and the length of time in this country."


13.  In paragraph 12 of the determination the judge  considered  whether  or
    not the appellant satisfied the provisions of  paragraph  276B  of  the
    Rules.  He stated that he accepted from the evidence the appellant  had
    been in the United Kingdom for a period of sixteen years since 1997 but
    went on to say that he was of the view that the appellant had not  been
    in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of ten  years.   He  then
    stated:-

         "I do not find it credible that the appellant and his brother  were
         not aware of the application made by his father.  The appellant  at
         the time that his father made the application was an adult  and  on
         balance his father because of the  importance  of  the  application
         would have made him and his brother aware of  the  application.   I
         also do not find it credible the appellant and  his  brother  would
         not have been served with the liable to removal notice on 18  April
         2008.  The service of the documents did therefore  stop  the  clock
         from continuing to run."

     The judge therefore  went on to allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

14.  The Secretary of State appealed stating that the judge  had  failed  to
    make any findings as to whether the appellant had ties with his  mother
    in Britain that went beyond mere emotional ties.  The  grounds  pointed
    out the appellant was 27 years of age and referred to the  judgment  of
    the Court of Appeal in Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ  31  which  had  stated
    that there was no presumption that a person has family life  even  with
    members of a person's immediate family.  It was stated that  the  judge
    had erred in law by finding that the appellant had established   family
    life in the United Kingdom.

15.  It was also  argued that it was wrong for the judge  to  find  that  it
    would be a disproportionate breach of the appellant's Article 8 private
    life rights if he were removed.  It was noted the appellant carried out
    charity events but it was stated it was no  reason  why  he  could  not
    carry out those in India and it was pointed out  that  his  father  had
    returned to settle there and the family maintained close contact.   Any
    private or family life ties which he  had  established  here  could  be
    maintained through visits and modern means of communication.

16.  Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Garratt on 25 June 2013.

17.  On 12 July 2013  the  appellant's  representatives  served  a  response
    under Rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

18.  The response submitted that the judge had referred to Kugathas  in  the
    determination and that that case had been cited both by the appellant's
    representatives in oral submissions but also in the  skeleton  argument
    submitted.  The response went on to state that it was implied that  the
    judge had been  satisfied  that  there  was  family  life  between  the
    respondent and his mother "as per the Kugathas test" and that the judge
    was perfectly entitled to reach  the  decision  which  he  had  on  the
    totality of the evidence.

19.  It was also argued that the judge had been wrong to  decide  that  form
    IS151A had been served on the respondent and the clock had  stopped  on
    18 April 2006 and as a result paragraph 276B of the  Immigration  Rules
    had not been satisfied.


21.  At the hearing of the appeal before me Mr Deller first argued that  the
    judge should not have considered that the  appellant  had  family  life
    which could properly be considered to have sufficient  strength  as  to
    mean that the breach thereof would infringe the rights of the appellant
    under Article 8(1) of the ECHR.  Indeed  he  referred  to  the  adverse
    finding made by the Secretary of State in 2004 - it having  been  found
    then, and on appeal, that the appellant could not qualify as  dependent
    relative.

22.  He further argued that  the  judge  had  not  properly  considered  the
    guidance in Kugathas.

23.  He indicated however that if it were the case that it  was  found  that
    the appellant had not been properly served with the decision  with  the
    IS151 notice that, given the transitional provisions when  Appendix  FM
    of the Rules was brought in the issue  would  be  whether  or  not  the
    appellant met the long residence requirements of the Rules when he made
    the application rather than at the date of the decision.

24.  Mr Jeshani relied on the response and emphasised  that  the  judge  had
    referred to the Kugathas test and the fact that he had not set out  the
    principles thereof in the determination did not mean that he  had  made
    an error of law.  He argued that the  judge  had  made  findings  after
    applying the principles in Kugathas and having in mind the vast  amount
    of evidence which had been submitted - he referred to  a  bundle  which
    comprised 313 pages - and that he had reached findings  of  fact  which
    were fully open to him on the evidence.  He asked me to find  therefore
    that there was no material error of law in  the  determination  of  the
    Immigration Judge.

25.   I  have  found  that  there  are  material  errors  of  law   in   the
    determination.  The appellant is aged 32.  As an adult  the  principles
    set out in the judgment in Kugathas apply.  These make  it  clear  that
    when considering the issue of family life between adults the principles
    set out in  the decision in S v United Kingdom [1984] 40 DR 196  apply.
    That decision stated:-

         "Generally, the protection of family life under Article 8  involves
         cohabiting dependents such as parents and  their  dependent,  minor
         children.  Whether it extends to other relationships depends on the
         circumstances  of  the  particular  case.   Relationships   between
         adults, a mother and her 33 year old son in the present case, would
         not  necessarily  acquire  the  protection  of  Article  8  of  the
         Convention without  evidence  of  further  elements  of  dependency
         involving more than the normal emotional ties".

     In Kugathas Sedley LJ endorsed that  approach.   The  reality  in  this
    case is that when, in the penultimate paragraph  of  the  determination
    the judge turns to the issue of the proportionality of removal not only
    does he not refer to the leading judgment in Kugathas but he  does  not
    set out the accepted principles therein let alone give  any  indication
    as to how he applied that guidance in this particular case.  It is  not
    correct that it should be implied that he was applying  the guidance in
    Kugathas because the appellant's representative referred to  that  case
    in his oral submissions and in the skeleton  argument.   It  cannot  be
    taken for granted that the judge had those principles in mind  when  he
    wrote the determination and clearly there is nothing to  indicate  that
    he did.

26.   I  consider  therefore  that  the  lack  of  application  of  accepted
    principles as well as a lack of reasons for his decision amount  to  an
    arguable error of law.

27.  Mr Deller argued that the judge should not have found  that  Article  8
    was engaged.  I consider that argument has less merit.  The reality  is
    that the rights under Article 8 are composite and given the  length  of
    time which the appellant had lived here it would have  been  difficult,
    when considering his rights under the Convention not to have  concluded
    that the appellant was exercising private  life  here  which  would  be
    infringed by his removal.

28.  The judge  recorded  that  it  was  not  argued  before  him  that  the
    appellant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules as regards  his
    rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.  That was clearly correct.

29.  With regard to the issue of whether or not  the  appellant  was  served
    with the notice under IS151A in April 2006 the judge, I consider,  that
    when the judge found that the appellant had  been  served  he   reached
    conclusions  which  were  open  to  him  in   paragraph   12   of   the
    determination.  Nevertheless I consider that on the rehearing  of  this
    appeal that is an issue which can still be argued - Mr Deller indicated
    that there was considerable case law in  which  he  would  have  relied
    should it have been reargued in the Upper Tribunal.

30.  Mr Deller made it clear that he did not have the authorities  on  which
    he would wish to rely and I did not have the bundle of  evidence  which
    has been submitted before the First-tier.  In these  circumstances  and
    given that findings of fact on the evidence would have to be made these
    having been absent from the determination of the  First-tier  Judge  it
    was agreed that it would be  appropriate  that  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier for a hearing afresh.  I consider that it is
    an appropriate case to follow this course of  action  and  that  in  so
    doing  the  requirements  of  the  Senior  President  in  the  Practice
    Statement paragraph 7.2(a) are met.

Decision
31.  The appeal is therefore remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    hearing afresh on all issues.  The relevant issues relate not  only  to
    the rights of the appellant under Article 8 of the ECHR  but  also  the
    issue of whether or not time stopped running when the  form  IS151  was
    served in 2006.
Directions
32 As the bundle of documents before me is no longer with the file I  direct
    that a fresh bundle of documents be served  fourteen  days  before  the
    hearing and furthermore that the respondent shall  serve  all  relevant
    authorities on which the respondent wishes to rely with regard  to  the
    issue of service of form IS151.
         This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  at
    Taylor House on 9 December 2013.  A Gujarati  interpreter  is  required
    and there is a time estimate of two hours.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


