
st
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27150/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At  Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 7th April 2015                    |18th May 2015                         |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                         MR MUGOVE TOBIAS MATONHODZE
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Duncan, Counsel, instructed by N.C.Brothers and
                    Co, Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe, born on 1 December 1963.

 2. He came to the United Kingdom on a six months visit visa, valid from 24
    September 2001. He has remained since. In the interval he made  various
    in  country  applications  for  leave  as  a  student.  Typically   the
    applications were in time but not successful and he would exercise  his
    right of appeal. Some applications were successful.

 3. Time passed and on 3 October 2011 he married Ms Susan Margaret Jocelyn,
    a British national. He then made further unsuccessful  applications  to
    remain as her spouse.

The decision under appeal

 4. The respondent treated representations made in correspondence dated  30
    January 2013 and 11th June 2014 as fresh applications. By letter  dated
    19 June 2014 the respondent refused  to  grant  leave  to  remain.  The
    appellant was served with removal directions on 21 June 2014  which  he
    appealed.

 5. In the letter of 19 June 2014 various  reasons  were  given.  Regarding
    leave to remain as a partner under Appendix FM,  it  was  accepted  the
    appellant was married to a British citizen. Reference  was  made  to  a
    lack of evidence to show it was a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
    for two years prior to the application. They have no  children  so  the
    provisions relating to family life as a parent did not apply.

 6. His application was also refused under the suitability provisions. This
    concerns whether the appellant's presence would  be  conducive  to  the
    public good. The rules refer to the commission of offences which  cause
    serious harm or persistent offending showing disregard for the law.  On
    15th November 2005 the appellant was convicted of driving  with  excess
    alcohol and disqualified from driving. On 15 June 2006 he was convicted
    of failing to provide  a  specimen,  driving  whilst  disqualified  and
    having no insurance. On 9  October  2006  he  was  again  convicted  of
    driving whilst disqualified and  uninsured.  Because  of  this  he  was
    considered to be a persistent offender who disregarded the law.

 7. Regarding private life paragraph 276 ADE (vi) was not satisfied  as  he
    had not been in the United Kingdom 20 years.

 8.  The  respondent  had  regard  to  EX1  and  concluded  there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles for family life continuing outside the  United
    Kingdom.

 9. The representations state the appellant is HIV-positive. The respondent
    referred to an absence of corroborative evidence of the  diagnoses  and
    in any event treatment was available in Zimbabwe.

The First tier Tribunal

10. The appeal was heard by Judge Majid on 5 November 2014.  His  decision,
    allowing the appeal was promulgated on 13 November 2014.

11. The respondent sought permission to appeal on the basis  that  adequate
    reasons for the decision were not given. The judge  appeared  to  allow
    the appeal not only under the immigration rules but also on  the  basis
    of Article 8 outside the rules. However, he failed to explain  why  and
    did not indicate he had considered current jurisprudence in relation to
    Article 8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis there  was  an
    arguable error of law in relation to the reasoning provided.

The Upper Tribunal

12. Mr Duffy accepted that the appellant's  marital  relationship  was  not
    disputed. Paragraph 20 of the refusal letter appears to be mistaken  in
    referring to a requirement for evidence of  the  relationship  existing
    for two years. The appellant is married not cohabiting.

13. The refusal letter does not  raise  finance  or  the  English  language
    requirements. Rather, the central  issue  relates  to  the  suitability
    requirements.

14. Assessment of the  appellant's  criminal  convictions  was  central  to
    consideration of whether his  application  failed  on  the  preliminary
    ground of suitability within Appendix FM. In considering his appeal the
    judge is required to consider whether his  past  offending  has  caused
    serious harm or indicates he is a persistent  offender  who  are  shown
    disregard for the law.

15. Mr Duffy submitted that Judge Majid did not clearly set  out  what  the
    appeal was about and did not provide a proper Article  8  analysis.  He
    submitted that paragraphs 1 to  12  of  the  Determination  contain  no
    findings and paragraph 16  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  appellant's
    situation.

Consideration

16. The determination of Judge Majid lacks clarity and largely consists  of
    generic paragraphs. Having considered the Determination I  would  agree
    with most of the points raised  in  the  respondent's  application  for
    leave. However, given that finance and so forth have  not  been  raised
    and there is no longer any issue about  his  marital  relationship  the
    substantive issue relates to the suitability provisions in appendix FM.



17. Paragraph 10 of  the  Determination  is  crucial  to  the  question  of
    suitability. There is a lack of clarity as to when  findings  are  made
    and whether the judge  is  simply  reciting  submissions  made  on  the
    appellant's  behalf.  Paragraph  10  is   preceded   by   the   heading
    `Dispositive Reasons and Deliberations'. This suggests this section  of
    the  Determination  is  dealing  with  findings  and  conclusions.   In
    paragraph 10 Judge Majid refers to  `the  dispositive  aspects  of  the
    case' and then states:

         "After perusing the  statement  of  the  Appellant  dated  13th  of
         October 2014 carefully the following  salient  points  come  to  my
         mind:-

             (a).  This  appellant,  as  Mr  Duncan  submitted,  has   only
             committed traffic offences and they were all in the past -  it
             is important to note that since his marriage  on  3rd  October
             2011 he has not committed any crime at all."

    At paragraph 12 of the Determination the judge refers to the submission
    of the appellant's representative that the offences were old.

18. It  is  my  conclusion  that  from  the  above  it  can,  at  least  by
    implication, be taken that the judge is accepting  the  submissions  of
    the appellant's representative with regard to the offences.  There  are
    two particular points. Regarding the offences the judge repeats `he has
    only committed traffic offences'. Whilst  traffic  offences,  including
    driving with excess alcohol are not trivial or to be dismissed  lightly
    by implication the judge is  not  viewing  them  as  the  most  serious
    offences. Furthermore  the  age  of  the  offences  is  highlighted  as
    relevant. The type of offences; when they were committed  and  evidence
    of  rehabilitation  are  all  relevant  when  considering  whether  the
    appellant has committed serious harm or shown disregard for the law.

19. On the basis of the nature  of  the  convictions,  their  age  and  the
    appellant's subsequent marriage and behaviour, it was open to the judge
    to conclude that the suitability requirements were  met  and  that  the
    appeal could be allowed under the immigration rules. If the application
    succeeds under the rules  then  the  judge's  treatment  of  Article  8
    outside the rules is not crucial as to  whether  there  is  a  material
    error of law.

Decision.

20. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  on  13  November
    2014, allowing the appellant's appeal does not contain a material error
    of law and shall stand



FJ Farrelly
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
