
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27197/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 25th February 2015                        |On 31st March 2015            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD

                                   Between

                               ms Xueqin weng
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Adophy, Solicitor of Rana & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by Ms Xueqin Weng,  a  citizen  of  China  born  23rd
    February 1979.  She appeals against  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge K Henderson issued on 19th November 2014 dismissing  her
    appeal against the decision of the Respondent made on 20th June 2014 to
    refuse leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 2. On 20th January 2015, having heard submissions  a  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge granted permission to appeal.  She noted that the grounds  assert
    that the Judge committed a material error of  law  because  he  wrongly
    declined to allow an adjournment.  The Appellant and her representative
    had attended the Tribunal at Richmond on 5th November 2014 as they  had
    been advised by a Notice of Hearing issued on 6th  August  2014.   They
    were not aware that a letter had  been  issued  by  the  administration
    altering the  hearing  venue  to  Hatton  Cross.   An  adjournment  was
    requested because Counsel was unable to travel to Hatton  Cross  as  he
    was also representing another client at Richmond and it not possible to
    travel between both courts in one day.  The Appellant argued that  they
    had not received the amended notice and there was no proof of delivery.



 3. The Judge who granted permission noted that there was  no  evidence  in
    the court file that the amended Notice of  Hearing  had  been  sent  or
    received or that the Appellant or her representatives had received  any
    such notice.  The fact that they had turned up for the hearing  at  the
    first mentioned venue indicated that they were actively involved in the
    appeal and would have had no reason to attend  a  different  court  had
    they been advised of the change  of  venue.   She  found  that  it  was
    arguable that the Judge did not act in the interests of  justice  which
    required that the Appellant be given proper opportunity to  participate
    in her appeal.  The position of the  Respondent  as  per  the  Rule  24
    notice is that he does  not  oppose  the  Appellant's  application  for
    permission to appeal and invited the Tribunal to remit the matter  back
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

Notice of Decision

In the interests of fairness and given that the Respondent has no  objection
I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  due  to  procedural
unfairness and remit the appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard
anew.







Signed                              Date: 30th March 2015

N A Baird
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Baird



