
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/27600/2015
                                                               IA/27602/2015
                                                               IA/27604/2015
                                                               IA/27606/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 December 2017                  |On 15 January 2018                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                  Mary [A]
                                  James [a]
                                    [e a]
                                    [o a]
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms A Childs, Counsel, instructed by Rashid and
Rashid Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants are a family unit of parents  and  children.  They  are
      Nigerian nationals born respectively on [ ] 1972, [ ] 1972, [  ]  2004
      and [ ] 2011. The first three appellants are all visitor  over-stayers
      having arrived here in January 2006; the  fourth  appellant  was  born
      here. The appellants have made various applications to remain  all  of
      which were refused. The most recent application  was  rejected  on  21
      July 2015 and that refusal gives rise to these proceedings.

   2. The respondent refused the application  because  she  found  that  the
      first and second appellants did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
      partner route because neither had leave to remain  and  they  did  not
      meet the parent route because it would not be unreasonable  for  their
      children to leave the UK. The third and fourth appellants did not meet
      the requirements of the child route under Appendix  FM  because  their
      parents had no leave to remain and they did not meet the  requirements
      of paragraph 276ADE as the fourth appellant had  not  lived  here  for
      seven years and it was reasonable for them both to return to  Nigeria.
      The respondent found there were  no  exceptional  circumstances  which
      warranted a grant of article 8 leave outside the rules.

   3. The joint appeals against the  respondent's  decision  were  heard  by
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio at Hatton Cross on 22 December 2016 and
      allowed on human rights grounds by way of a determination  promulgated
      on 20 January 2017. The respondent sought and obtained  permission  to
      appeal on the basis that the judge had  failed  to  factor  in  public
      interest grounds when assessing proportionality and  the  matter  then
      came before me on 25 September 2017. In a determination promulgated on
      3  October  2017,  I  set  aside  the  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge's
      determination  for   the   following   reasons   (at   10-13   of   my
      determination):

             "I have carefully considered whether there  is  merit  in  the
             respondent's complaint that the public interest  factors  were
             disregarded by the judge when he conducted the proportionality
             assessment. I have had regard to the fact  that  he  commenced
             his findings of fact with an acknowledgement  that  the  adult
             appellants had no legal status in  the  UK  (at  14  and  19).
             However, for the following reasons I do not accept Ms Daykin's
             submission that this was sufficient to discharge the  duty  on
             him to consider the public interest.

             Whilst there was reference to MA Pakistan [2016] EWCA  705  at
             paragraph 20 of the determination, it would  appear  that  the
             judge did not correctly  apply  its  principles  and  did  not
             appreciate that there are two issues requiring  consideration:
             the best  interests  of  the  child(ren)  and  whether  it  is
             reasonable to expect them  to  leave  the  UK.  In  the  first
             matter, the conduct of  parents  is  irrelevant  (as  per  the
             Supreme Court cases of ZH (Tanzania) and Zoumbas). However, in
             the second, wider public interest factors are to be weighed in
             the balance, including the conduct and the immigration  status
             of the parents.

             The respondent argues that there was no consideration  at  all
             of the public interest  when  considering  reasonableness  and
             that  this  was  particularly  problematic  given  the   heavy
             reliance placed on  the  use  of  public  resources  by  these
             appellants. I have to concur with that criticism.  Whilst  the
             findings are somewhat muddled and do not address the issues in
             an  orderly  fashion,  the   judge   only   deals   with   the
             reasonableness issue at paragraphs 20 and 21.  Those  sections
             of the determination focus entirely on the  two  children  and
             their needs. There  is  no  consideration  whatsoever  of  the
             public interest in this section and that is an error  of  law.
             It is material because consideration of these matters may have
             led to a different outcome.  The  best  interests'  assessment
             does not automatically  resolve  the  reasonableness  question
             (MA; paragraph 47).

             It is correct, as the respondent complains, that the judge has
             focused entirely on the needs of  the  children,  particularly
             the third appellant, and  that  he  has  been  swayed  by  her
             special needs when making his decision. Whilst such a decision
             might have been open to him, it must be  made  after  all  the
             relevant factors have been considered and in  this  case  they
             were not. The only s.117  consideration  referred  to  in  the
             determination  (at  19)  is  the  maintenance  of  immigration
             control and even that has not been examined in any  meaningful
             way."




         The Hearing

   4. At the hearing before me, I heard oral evidence  from  the  two  adult
      appellants followed by submissions. At the commencement of the hearing
      I brought to the  attention  of  the  parties  an  incomplete  witness
      statement/letter and queried whose statement it was (the  second  page
      was missing from the bundle). Ms Childs was  able  to  confirm,  after
      instructions, that it was written by  the  third  appellant  and  that
      attempts would be made to obtain a full copy from the  solicitors.  In
      the event, the solicitors did not have  the  document  and  the  third
      appellant, who was present in the building, re-wrote the missing  page
      from memory.

   5. I first heard evidence from Mary [A],  the  principal  appellant.  She
      confirmed her address and the contents of her statements as  true  and
      accurate. She confirmed that  her  daughter  had  written  the  letter
      referred to above. She was then tendered for cross examination.

   6. In response, to Mr Tarlow's questions, the appellant stated  that  her
      daughter had hearing difficulties. She explained  that  they  had  not
      realised this until they came to the UK when the  child  was  some  18
      months old and someone at church asked why she was not speaking.  They
      took her to see a doctor  and  after  tests  were  carried  out  at  a
      healthcare centre she was referred to St Thomas'  Hospital  where  she
      was diagnosed as having severe hearing  loss  on  the  left  side  and
      moderate hearing loss on the right. She now had hearing aids. She  had
      check-ups every 6 months and although she was in a  mainstream  school
      she and another student received extra support. Whilst at  school  she
      also  wore  a  radio  aid;  that  remained  at  the  school.  She  was
      progressing well with her education. The  support  teacher  encouraged
      the two students with hearing  difficulties  to  have  confidence  and
      explained anything they did not understand.

   7. The appellant stated that she did not believe that her daughter  would
      receive support in Nigeria. She said she had never seen  anyone  there
      wearing hearing aids. She admitted she had not made any enquiries.

   8. The appellant stated that she had entered the UK in 2006 as a visitor.
      She confirmed that her husband had applied for an  EEA  card  in  2008
      which was refused in August  2009  and  that  three  subsequent  human
      rights applications had all been  refused.  She  said  that  they  had
      decided to overstay when they  realised  their  daughter  had  hearing
      problems. They had not sought to extend their leave as  they  did  not
      know how to do so. When asked who they had come  here  to  visit,  the
      appellant said: "a person, like a sister, a friend". She said  she  no
      longer knew where she lived as they had lost contact. When  asked  who
      the EEA sponsor had been, she said she did not know  much  about  that
      and that a lawyer  had  advised  her  husband.  That  completed  cross
      examination. There was no re-examination.

   9. I then heard evidence from the second appellant,  James  [A].  He  too
      confirmed his address and adopted his statements.

  10. He was then  cross-examined.  He  stated  that  he  had  realised  his
      daughter was deaf about six months after they came here as visitors in
      January 2006. They had no  idea  that  she  had  hearing  problems  in
      Nigeria. They did not return to Nigeria when their visa  ran  out.  He
      did not recall whether they had been given entry for  six  months.  He
      did not have his passport. It had expired.

  11. The appellant stated that he had applied for an  EEA  residence  card.
      His sponsor was his  father's  brother's  son  and  he  was  a  German
      citizen.

  12. The appellant was asked why they  had  not  returned  to  Nigeria.  He
      stated that there  was  a  lot  of  insecurity  there;  secondly,  his
      daughter had a hearing problem and thirdly there was unemployment.  He
      was a graduate but it had taken him 5-7 years to find  work.  He  said
      his daughter would not receive health care in Nigeria. He had not made
      enquiries but had checked on the internet and there  were  "no  better
      facilities" there.  He had never seen anyone wearing a hearing aid.

  13. In re-examination, the appellant stated that he was not aware  of  any
      special schools. It was not common that people used hearing aids.

  14. I then put some questions to the appellant for clarification. I  asked
      how the family was supported. He said that he taught at the church and
      was paid by the students. I asked him for the reason of his visit.  He
      said they came for a holiday. He had been in work for two years  prior
      to arrival but then lost his job. I asked whether his  wife  knew  his
      cousin. He asked which one.  I clarified I meant the one who had acted
      as his sponsor in the EEA application. He said she did  not.  I  asked
      what family he had in Nigeria. He told me that he had six siblings  of
      whom five were in Nigeria along with his mother.  His  wife  had  five
      siblings and her parents.  He  and  his  family  lived  in  Lagos.  He
      graduated in mathematics and statistics and worked in a bank. His wife
      was a graduate in computer science but had been unable to find work.

  15. Neither party had any questions arising and that  completed  the  oral
      evidence.  I then heard submissions.

  16. Mr Tarlow submitted that there was a public  interest  in  maintaining
      immigration control in circumstances where the family  had  overstayed
      and made use of facilities at public expense. The adult appellants had
      spent the majority of their lives in Nigeria, were familiar  with  the
      language and customs and they both had large families there. There was
      no reason why the family could not return. Hearing aids could be taken
      with them. Reliance was placed on the refusal letter. I was  asked  to
      dismiss the appeal.

  17. Ms Childs relied on her skeleton argument. She submitted that no issue
      had been taken with the findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      regarding the best interests of the children and submitted  that  they
      should stand. Ms Childs relied on paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)  in  respect
      of the third appellant and submitted that she had been here for eleven
      years. She submitted that the child would  have  developed  a  private
      life of her own which should not be diminished by a lack of leave. She
      relied on Azimi Moayed (decisions affecting children; onwards appeals)
      [2013] UKUT 00197 and MA Pakistan [2016] EWCA Civ  705  and  submitted
      that there were no powerful reasons  to  require  her  to  leave.  The
      family  spoke  English  and  had  not  received  state  benefits.  She
      submitted that the third  appellant's  physical  and  moral  integrity
      would be affected by removal. She submitted that  taking  the  hearing
      aids to Nigeria was not a solution. They were moulded to the  ear  and
      had to be programmed and regularly replaced. Furthermore, she was in a
      school with support. It was important for her to  stay  in  mainstream
      education and not to show her deafness. She wanted to become a midwife
      when she grew up. Her parents would also  be  able  to  work  and  pay
      something back to the NHS and the school system. The  child  had  over
      seven years of residence  and  health  issues.  The  poor  immigration
      history of her parents could not outweigh  her  strong  private  life.
      Schools in Nigeria had no funding and few were able to offer  support.
      It was  unlikely  that  the  parents  would  have  known  about  their
      daughter's hearing defect in Nigeria as hearing was not tested  there.
      Even if it was the case that they had stayed just to get treatment for
      the child, that should not prejudice  her  position.  She  only  spoke
      English and her ability to integrate  would  be  impeded.  The  appeal
      should be allowed.

  18. At the conclusion of the hearing, I reserved my determination which  I
      now give.




         Legal Framework

  19. Paragraph 267ADE(1) sets out the requirements which, when met, lead to
      a grant of leave. This states:

             The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain
             on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the  date
             of application, the applicant:

                  (i)  does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in
                  Section S-LTR 1.2 to  S-LTR  2.3.  and  S-LTR.3.1.  to  S-
                  LTR.4.5. in Appendix FM; and

                  (ii) has made a valid application for leave to  remain  on
                  the grounds of private life in the UK; and

                  (iii)      has lived continuously in the UK for  at  least
                  20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

                  (iv)  is  under  the  age  of  18  years  and  has   lived
                  continuously in the UK for at least 7  years  (discounting
                  any period of imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable
                  to expect the applicant to leave the UK; or

                  (v)  is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and  has
                  spent at least half of his life living continuously in the
                  UK (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

                  (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is  aged  18  years  or
                  above, has lived continuously in the UK for less  than  20
                  years (discounting any period of imprisonment)  but  there
                  would be very significant  obstacles  to  the  applicant's
                  integration into the country to which he would have to  go
                  if required to leave the UK.

  20. Sub paragraph (i) sets out  grounds  on  which  an  applicant  may  be
      refused leave even if the requirements are  met.  None  of  these  are
      applicable to the circumstances of this case. Sub  paragraph  (iv)  is
      relied on for the  third  appellant;  it  is  argued  that  she  is  a
      qualifying child and that it would not be reasonable to expect her  to
      leave the UK.

  21. Sections 117A and 117B of Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002 relate to public interest considerations and apply  in
      all cases where a court is required to determine  whether  a  decision
      made by the respondent breaches the applicant's rights  under  article
      8.

  22. Sections 117A sets out the following:

             (1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

                  (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and

                  (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.

             (2) In considering the public interest question, the court  or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                  (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                  117B, and

                  (b)   in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
                  criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C.

             (3) In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means
             the question of whether an interference with a person's  right
             to respect for private and  family  life  is  justified  under
             Article 8(2).

  23. Section 117B sets out the considerations referred to in 2(a) above as:

             (1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
             the public interest.

             (2) It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

                  (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (3) It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

                  (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers,  and  (b)  are  better
                  able to integrate into society.

             (4) Little weight should be given to-

                  (a)   a private life, or

                  (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that
                  is established by a person at a time when the person is in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)  Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.

             (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where-

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                  leave the United Kingdom.

  24. Section 117D sets out the definition of a qualifying child as:

             a person who is under the age of 18 and who-

                  (a)  is a British citizen, or (b) has lived in the  United
                  Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years or more;

  25. Both paragraph 276ADE(iv) and section  117B(6)  require  seven  years'
      residence of a child and that it be unreasonable to expect that  child
      to leave the UK. Although the period  for  the  assessment  is  stated
      differently in each, it was held in MA Pakistan that as  a  result  of
      section 85(4) of the 2002 Act, it was the date of the hearing that was
      the correct date for assessment (at paragraph 13). It was also pointed
      out that only the child could apply under paragraph  275ADE(iv)  which
      covered private life, whereas section 117B was concerned with  article
      8 applications covering private and family life and under  which  both
      parents and children could apply. It was held  that  the  question  of
      whether it was reasonable  to  expect  a  child  to  leave  should  be
      approached in the same way in each context.

  26. At paragraph 21 the court held:

             "It does not, however, necessarily follow from the  fact  that
             section 117B(6) exhaustively identifies all the factors  which
             a court can take into account that the  wider  pubic  interest
             criteria, including those identified in section 117B(1) to (5)
             are of no relevance to  applications  which  fall  under  that
             subsection. That depends upon the meaning and  application  of
             the term "reasonable" in the  context  of  asking  whether  it
             would "not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave"  in
             paragraph (b). The Secretary of State submits that even if the
             subsection is self-contained, the  concept  of  reasonableness
             brings back into play all potentially relevant public interest
             considerations, including the matters  identified  in  section
             117B. On this analysis, it is a matter of no real  consequence
             whether section 117B(6) is self-contained  or  not.  The  same
             range  of  considerations  falls   to   be   considered   when
             determining an application under section  117B(6)  as  in  any
             other article 8 determination. Construing the section in  this
             way, the only relevance of the seven year period is that  once
             a child has been in the UK for that length of time, this is  a
             factor which should be given particular weight when  assessing
             whether it would be reasonable for the child to leave  the  UK
             or not."

  27. The court distinguished the current legislation from the  respondent's
      DP5/96 (7 year) policy, noting that the current provisions fall  short
      of the starting point of the policy which was that a child with  seven
      years' residence should be refused leave to remain only in exceptional
      circumstances (at 44). It held that the long residence  of  the  child
      had to be given significant weight when the  proportionality  exercise
      was carried out (at 46) but that even if the focus were  only  on  the
      child, it would not follow that leave must  be  granted  whenever  the
      child's best interests were in favour of remaining. Thus even where  a
      child's best interests were to stay, it may  still  be  reasonable  to
      expect the child to leave. Such a decision would involve an assessment
      of the nature and extent of links with the UK and in  the  country  to
      which return is proposed (at 47).

  28. A similar point was made in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 where
      the court analysed how a court should approach the question of removal
      where one or both parents had no right to stay in the UK and  how  the
      proportionality test should be applied  where  wider  public  interest
      considerations were involved and where the best interests of the child
      dictated that they should remain. Several factors were  identified  as
      being relevant when assessing a child's best  interests.  These  were:
      (a) their age; (b) the length of time that they have  been  here;  (c)
      how long they have been in education; (c) what stage  their  education
      has reached; (d) to what extent they have become  distanced  from  the
      country to which it is proposed that they return;  (e)  how  renewable
      their connection with it may be; (f) to what  extent  they  will  have
      linguistic, medical or other difficulties in adapting to life in  that
      country; and  (g)  the  extent  to  which  the  course  proposed  will
      interfere with their family life or their rights (if they have any) as
      British  citizens  (at  35).  The  court  held   that:   "If   it   is
      overwhelmingly in the  child's  best  interests  that  he  should  not
      return, the need to maintain immigration control may well not tip  the
      balance. By contrast if it is in the child's best interests to remain,
      but only on balance (with some factors pointing the  other  way),  the
      result may be the opposite" (at 36). It noted that factors to be taken
      into account on the other side of  the  balance  included  the  strong
      weight to be given to "the need to  maintain  immigration  control  in
      pursuit of the economic well-being of the country and the  fact  that,
      ex hypothesi, the  applicants  have  no  entitlement  to  remain.  The
      immigration history of the parents may also be relevant e.g.  if  they
      are overstayers, or have acted deceitfully"  (at  37).  However,  when
      assessing the best  interests,  those  should  be  determined  without
      reference to the immigration history or status of the parent(s).

  29. Section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009
      establishes an obligation  to  have  regard  to  the  welfare  of  all
      children present  in  the  UK,  whether  lawfully  or  not.  This  was
      emphasised in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 where the  court  held  that
      the best interests of a child were a primary consideration  which  had
      to be taken into account in all cases where  children  were  involved.
      This is, of course, relevant when applying  the  reasonableness  test.
      The respondent's guidance provides for  the  wishes  and  feelings  of
      children to be taken into account where practicable.

  30. In Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74, the court set out seven  principles  to  be
      considered when assessing the best interests of a  child.  These  were
      paraphrased as:

             (1) The best interests of a child are an integral part of  the
             proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR;

             (2) In making that assessment, the best interests of  a  child
             must be a primary consideration, although not always the  only
             primary consideration; and the child's best interests  do  not
             of themselves have the status of the paramount consideration;

             (3) Although the best interests of a child can  be  outweighed
             by the cumulative effect of  other  considerations,  no  other
             consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;

             (4) While different judges might approach the question of  the
             best interests of a child in different ways, it  is  important
             to ask oneself the right questions in  an  orderly  manner  in
             order to avoid the risk that the best  interests  of  a  child
             might be undervalued when other important considerations  were
             in play;

             (5) It is  important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of  a  child's
             circumstances and of what  is  in  a  child's  best  interests
             before one asks oneself whether those interests are outweighed
             by the force of other considerations;

             (6)  To  that  end  there  is  no  substitute  for  a  careful
             examination of all relevant factors when the  interests  of  a
             child are involved in an article 8 assessment; and

             (7) A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she
             is not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent.

  31. Applying the guidance of these cases, the court held  in  MA  Pakistan
      that the seven-year residence of a child should be  given  significant
      weight in the proportionality exercise for two reasons: first, because
      it is relevant to the determination of the nature and strength of  the
      child's  best  interests  and  secondly  because  it  establishes  the
      starting point that leave should be granted unless there are  powerful
      reasons to the contrary (at 49).  It found,  however,  that  the  best
      interests did not necessarily resolve the reasonableness question. The
      court held that: "There is  nothing  intrinsically  illogical  in  the
      notion that whilst the child's best interests are for him  or  her  to
      stay, it is not unreasonable to expect him or her to go" (at 54).

  32. I have had careful regard to this guidance and all these principles in
      reaching my decision.




         Findings and conclusions

  33. I have given careful consideration to all the evidence, both oral  and
      written, presented in the three bundles from the appellants and in the
      respondent's bundle. I would say at this stage  that  the  documentary
      evidence has not been properly presented.  The  photocopying  of  many
      documents is poor and some, especially the photographs, are  illegible
      either partially or in full. Many documents are duplicated (in Bundles
      A and B) which made the examination of the  evidence  even  more  time
      consuming. Some documents have missing pages. The index to the bundles
      also could have been more detailed (for example in Bundle B pp  38-176
      are  unhelpfully  and  lazily  listed  as  "evidence   for   the   3rd
      appellant"). I have regard to the facts as at the day of  the  hearing
      and to the balance of probabilities being the appropriate standard  of
      proof to be  met  by  the  appellants.  I  also  have  regard  to  the
      submissions of the parties and the case law relied on  :  MA  Pakistan
      [2016] EWCA Civ 705, Azimi Moayed [2013] UKUT 00197 and EV Philippines
       [2014] EWCA Civ 874. Given that there  is  an  issue  over  the  best
      interests of the two child  appellants,  I  propose  to  approach  the
      proportionality assessment by assessing their best interests and then,
      undertaking the balancing exercise. First, I set out  the  facts  that
      are established by the evidence.

  34. It is  evident  from  the  papers  before  me  that  the  first  three
      appellants arrived here on 26 January 2006 as visitors.  Whilst  their
      visas were valid for entry for a two-year period  from  5  July  2005,
      they would have received six months leave to enter  which  meant  that
      their  leave  expired  towards  the  end  of  July  2006.  They   then
      overstayed. The second appellant applied for a residence  card  as  an
      extended family member of an EEA national in December  2008  but  this
      was refused in August 2009. He then made a  human  rights  application
      with his wife and daughter as his dependants in November 2010 but that
      was refused in January 2011. The fourth appellant was born in November
      2011. On 18 March 2013, the third appellant then made a  human  rights
      application with her parents and brother as dependants  but  this  was
      rejected in May 2013. On 12 March 2014, the first appellant then  made
      a human rights application with the rest of the family as  dependants.
      This was refused on 12 October 2014 without a right of appeal.  On  10
      December 2014, the appellants filed an application for  permission  to
      bring judicial review proceedings arguing that article 8 had not  been
      considered and that the third appellant's condition had not been given
      due consideration. The matter was disposed of by consent  on  10  June
      2015 with the respondent agreeing to reconsider the case. The  result,
      however, was another negative decision dated 21 July 2015 but with  an
      in country right of appeal and is the basis of the current  challenge.
      It is incorrect  as  maintained  in  the  skeleton  argument  and  the
      chronology that  the  appeal  is  brought  against  the  October  2014
      decision.

  35. The third appellant who accompanied her parents to the UK  in  January
      2006 has bilateral sensorineural hearing loss. This was diagnosed when
      she was about 2 �  years  old.  Although  the  skeleton  argument  and
      witness statement refer to her being at a special  needs  school,  the
      evidence of the first appellant was that it  is  a  mainstream  school
      with support for the appellant. Whichever it is, plainly [EA] receives
      one to one support from specialists. According to  evidence  from  the
      school support centre, she receives weekly speech and language therapy
      for hourly sessions. She has had bilateral hearing aids since 2008 and
      has the added assistance of a radio aid whilst at school.  The  latest
      report from the Audiology Centre at St Thomas' Hospital  is  dated  31
      March 2016 and indicates that there have been no  recent  changes  and
      that the third appellant generally hears well.  It  is  reported  that
      whilst she wears her hearing aids at school  she  takes  them  off  at
      home. She is in good health. Data logging revealed average use of five
      hours a day. An earlier report  dated  9  December  2015  confirms  no
      changes noted at that stage either but that some adjustments were made
      to the hearing aids.

  36. The fourth appellant, [OA], was born here in  November  2011  and  has
      never travelled to Nigeria. He is at primary school.

  37. I do not accept Ms Childs' submission that there were no issues  taken
      with the findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge as regards the best
      interests of  the  children.  The  respondent's  grounds  specifically
      challenge these (at paragraph 4). As errors of law were found with the
      manner in which the assessment was undertaken, those findings were not
      and cannot be preserved.

  38. I now proceed to assess the best interests of both  children  although
      the evidence and submissions essentially focus on [EA]. My  assessment
      will be somewhat repetitive of what is said  above  as  I  incorporate
      those facts into it.

  39. [EA] was some 18 months old when she accompanied her  parents  to  the
      UK. She has not returned. That means she had been in  the  UK  for  11
      years at the date of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and 12
      years at the date of the present hearing. That is a significant period
      of time. In July, she will turn 14. She lives with her parents and her
      younger brother and attends school. I have no reason to  believe  that
      she is not well cared for. By  all  accounts  she  is  an  intelligent
      child, a fast learner and she appears to be content although there  is
      mention of being argumentative with  class  mates.  She  also  attends
      church where she is active in the choir although  I  have  no  further
      details of that. In the letter dated 17 December 2017, she prepared in
      support of the appeal, [EA]  states that she wants  to  be  a  midwife
      when she grows up, she has just started her GCSE subjects, that she is
      settled here and has friends. I  take  her  letter  into  account.  It
      expresses her feelings.

  40. [EA] has bilateral hearing difficulties. She has received a great deal
      of support here since 2007 when she was first taken  to  an  audiology
      clinic. At present,  she  attends  what  her  mother  described  as  a
      mainstream school which has special support for children with  hearing
      impairment. She receives weekly therapy in  language.  She  wears  her
      hearing aids in class and also uses a radio aid. At home, she tends to
      remove the hearing aids. The reports confirm she manages without them,
      although there are references to the volume of the  television  having
      to be turned up loud and to her family having to repeat things to  her
      until she hears them.  The  medical  reports  confirm  that  [EA]  had
      problems with her speech  but  that  has  greatly  improved  with  the
      support she has received. She is otherwise  is  in  good  health.  She
      appears to receive a lot of love and support from her parents and from
      the church community.

  41. [OA] is the younger of the two children of the family. He is now  just
      over 6 years old and attends primary school. He was born in the UK and
      has never been to Nigeria. He too has friends here and appears  to  be
      doing well at school. He has been tested for hearing difficulties  and
      has been given a clean bill of health. He too, has prepared  a  letter
      in support of the appeal although the  letter  is  plainly  not  in  a
      child's handwriting and uses phrases such as: "I have integrated  into
      society" and "Please tender (sic) mercy with justice" which I  do  not
      accept a six-year old would use.  Nevertheless,  I  accept  that  [OA]
      enjoys parks and gardens and that he has friends  at  school.  He  too
      lives with his family and  attends  church.  He  appears  to  be  well
      settled and is doing well in school.

  42. On the evidence I have seen, and taking account of the guidance in the
      judgments referred to earlier in my determination, I find that  it  is
      in the best interests of both children to remain with each  other  and
      with their parents, to receive an education  and  to  have  access  to
      health care. For [EA], the latter is particularly important. Given the
      length of time they have been here,  their  integration  into  society
      here, their lack of contact with family in Nigeria and because of  the
      support [EA] has received with respect to her hearing  loss  over  the
      past eleven years, I further find that their best interests  would  be
      to remain in the UK.

  43. I now consider whether it would be reasonable to expect [EA]  to leave
      the UK and return to Nigeria. [OA] has not lived here seven  years  or
      more and so is not a qualifying child although he is less than a  year
      short of becoming one. The  reasonableness  test  does  not,  however,
      arise in respect of his circumstances at the moment.

  44. The guidance provided by the courts is that where a seven-year  period
      of residence has been achieved, there must be powerful  factors  which
      would make it reasonable for the child to leave the UK. In  this  case
      the main factor for removal and against the appellant is  the  conduct
      of her parents. Plainly that does not factor into the consideration of
      best interests but is a relevant consideration  when  I  consider  the
      issue of reasonableness and the proportionality of removal.

  45. It is a fact that the adult appellants have  not  behaved  well.  They
      have deliberately chosen  to  flout  the  immigration  laws.  No  good
      explanation was given by either of them for why no attempt was made to
      extend their leave before it expired. Indeed, there have been  several
      periods of unlawful residence. The first period of  leave  would  have
      expired in July 2006 but no application was made to  regularize  leave
      until the application for a residence card in  2008  about  which  the
      first appellant claimed to know nothing, not  even  the  sponsor,  and
      which was refused on 27 August 2009. The next application was not made
      until 4 November 2010, 15  months  later.  That  was  rejected  on  13
      January 2011 but still the appellants remained and the first appellant
      subsequently became pregnant and gave birth to the fourth appellant in
      November 2011. The next application was made on 18  March  2013,  over
      two years after the  refusal  of  the  previous  application.  It  was
      refused on 22 May 2013 and then there was  then  a  further  delay  of
      nearly a year until another application was made in  March  2014.  The
      adult appellants plainly have no respect for the laws of  the  UK  and
      have blatantly disregarded the Immigration Rules. That is a  matter  I
      take account of and which is  an  important  public  interest  factor.
      Whilst it is accepted that the sins  of  the  parents  should  not  be
      visited  upon  the  children,  that  principle  does  not  lessen  the
      importance of immigration control (as per paragraph 42: MA Pakistan).

  46. They have also worked without authority and failed  to  pay  taxes  or
      national insurance. I do not  accept  that  the  only  work  done  was
      teaching in church as the evidence before me shows that  Mrs  [A]  was
      noted as working as a support worker for a care company  and  that  Mr
      [A] was a security guard and kitchen assistant. They have  taken  from
      the state in the form of substantial use of the health care system, to
      which they were not entitled, and the use of  the  educational  system
      for two children over a number of years. Whilst it is argued for  them
      that they did not claim benefits they plainly have  drawn  heavily  on
      state resources which are already  stretched.  They  have  also  shown
      themselves to be lacking in integrity and honesty,  contrary  to  what
      their letters of support from  church  members  have  said.  They  are
      plainly not of good character as far as a respect  for  the  laws  and
      rules are concerned and have not shown  themselves  to  be  good  role
      models to their children. It  is  difficult  to  see  how  Mr  [A]  is
      considered a suitable person to be teaching morals and good  behaviour
      to children at his church. It is certainly a matter  of  concern  that
      the pastor and other church officials appear to give no importance  at
      all to the fact of his unlawful residence in this country and describe
      him and his wife as "law abiding" and of "good character" in spite  of
      their lack of status and abuse of the rules over many years.

  47. I do not accept for a moment that Mr and Mrs  [A]  genuinely  intended
      just a holiday when they came here. The evidence is that  Mr  [A]  had
      lost his job and it makes no sense at all that the family  would  take
      on the huge expense of a trip to London at such a time and  especially
      only to visit someone whom Mrs [A] could not even  identify  and  with
      whom they no longer have any contact. I also do not believe that  they
      were totally unaware that their daughter could not hear. I consider it
      would have been clear to them that they had a child who could not hear
      anything. I find that they came here specifically to find work and  to
      get help for [EA]  and that they had no intention of leaving. They are
      wholly undeserving of status here and were there no children  involved
      in this appeal, I would have no hesitation is dismissing it.

  48. The fact remains, however, there are two children  involved  and  they
      are not responsible for their parents' bad  and  dishonest  behaviour.
      [EA] has been here since she was eighteen months old and  most  likely
      recalls nothing about Nigeria. [OA] has been  here  6  years  and  two
      months and has never left the country. Whilst it would appear that the
      church community is largely or completely made up  of  Nigerians,  the
      children plainly interact with others of  a  different  background  at
      school and have grown up essentially viewing  this  country  as  their
      home. There is no evidence that any of their extended family have been
      here to visit them and so their links  with  Nigeria  and  the  family
      there are tenuous.

  49.  [EA] has progressed well in her studies and her speech thanks to  the
      facilities of the NHS. It is unlikely that she  would  have  made  the
      same progress in Nigeria. I have taken  account  of  the  respondent's
      submission that she could take her hearing aids with her  to  Nigeria.
      Contrary to the appellant's submission that there  are  no  facilities
      that would support [EA]  in Nigeria, I find the  evidence  shows  that
      there are centres for  those  with  hearing  impairment  although,  of
      course, the quality of those facilities would not compare to those she
      enjoys here and there is a question  of  cost.  I  should  point  out,
      however, that much of the information provided is out of date and  the
      sources relied on in the articles  are  largely  from  the  1980s  and
      1990s. The situation may well have improved since.

  50. I am also not impressed by the claim that [EA] would be stigmatised or
      even harmed because of her disability. That is speculative and  I  was
      not referred  to  any  evidence  in  support  of  such  a  claim.  The
      background material I  have  examined  does  not  indicate  that  such
      treatment would be reasonably likely, particularly in the cities and I
      note that the family come from Lagos.  I also consider it  speculative
      that Mrs [A]'s family would put pressure on  her  to  try  traditional
      healing for [EA]. There is  no  suggestion  that  her  family  of  her
      husband's family have ever said or done anything  to  support  such  a
      contention. In any event, both parents are well educated  and  capable
      of standing up to any views taken by their families  with  which  they
      disagree. I was not referred to any evidence to support the contention
      that children such as the appellant are badly treated in Nigeria.

  51. Nevertheless, [EA]'s  hearing  difficulties  are  but  one  factor  to
      consider. Her lengthy period of  residence  is  the  most  substantial
      factor and the basis of which this appeal essentially turns. I  accept
      that both children consider the UK as their home. I accept  in  [EA]'s
      case that there can be no recollection of anything else and  that  for
      [OA] there never has been any other home. Whilst [OA] is  still  young
      and could adapt to life outside the UK in due course, the situation is
      different for [EA] who has now been  here  for  twelve  years;  twelve
      formative years.   I also note that she is now in secondary school and
      has just started on her GCSE subjects. She is therefore at  a  crucial
      stage in her education.

  52. The question then is whether the conduct and behaviour of the parents,
      their  poor  immigration  history,  their  heavy  reliance  on   state
      resources and unlawful  employment  constitute  powerful  reasons  for
      removal. To put it another way, do the  public  interest  issues  take
      priority over the positive factors I have identified above in  respect
      of [EA]. I find that they do not. However deplorable  I  consider  the
      conduct of the parents to be, [EA] is an innocent victim. I find  that
      balancing all the factors for and against removal,  it  would  not  be
      reasonable to expect her to leave everything she has here to return to
      Nigeria. Although both adult appellants have family  there  and  would
      have support on return until  they  could  establish  themselves,  the
      children have not had contact with their  extended  family  and  would
      face huge disruption having to integrate and to adjust to a completely
      different environment.

  53. I accept also that [EA] would have difficulties  in  learning  another
      language although I do not accept her mother's evidence that  she  has
      no knowledge of Yoruba. I note that several  of  the  reports  in  the
      bundles refer to Yoruba being spoken at home but I accept that  it  is
      possible that [EA] does not have fluency in  the  language  and  would
      struggle to learn it well enough to pursue an education in it.

  54. Another relevant factor mitigating  against  the  public  interest  of
      removal is the lack of any attempt on the part of  the  respondent  to
      remove this family much earlier on. Steps could  have  been  taken  to
      remove them after they overstayed their  visit  leave,  or  after  the
      suspect EEA application was made (it is simply not credible  that  Mrs
      [A] would know barely anything about it had it been genuinely made) or
      after any of the ensuing human rights  applications.  Had  enforcement
      action been taken years ago,  there  would  have  been  no  seven-year
      period of residence and no consequential issues of removal to  decide.
      The lack of action on the part of the respondent also  counts  against
      attributing  more  weight  to  the  public  interest  in   maintaining
      immigration control where two children are involved.

  55. Having therefore considered all  the  evidence,  the  public  interest
      factors and those  factors  relevant  to  the  best  interest  of  the
      children and the reasonableness  of  removal,  I  conclude  that  this
      appeal must be allowed.  The third appellant meets the requirements of
      paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv) and in that context  removal  of  the  family
      would be disproportionate.




         Decision

  56. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was found to contain  material
      errors of law and was set aside. I now re-make the decision and  allow
      the appeal under the Immigration Rules and on article 8 grounds.




         Anonymity order

  57. I was not asked to make an anonymity order and there is no  reason  to
      do so.




         Signed










         Upper Tribunal Judge


         Date: 12 January 2018


