
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27376/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 6th May 2014                               |On 8th May 2014              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    S B M
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Melvin - Senior Home Office presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: Mr Oommen instructed under the Direct Access
provisions.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Lingam promulgated on 3rd February 2014 following hearing  at
        Taylor House in which the Judge  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the
        Immigration Rules but allowed it under Article 8 ECHR.


     2. SBM is a citizen of Malawi born in  March  1985.   Her  immigration
        history shows she entered the United Kingdom on 25th  October  2004
        as a visitor. She was granted leave to remain which was  varied  to
        permit her to study until 31st July 2006 and thereafter until  31st
        October 2009.  The final period of leave granted on 5th August 2010
        was to allow her to remain as a  spouse,  valid  until  5th  August
        2012.


     3. By an application dated 30th July 2012 SBM sought to vary her leave
        further on the basis of being the spouse of a  person  present  and
        settled in the United Kingdom. This application was refused by  the
        Secretary of State  in  a  decision  dated  18th  June  2013  which
        included,  in  addition  to  the  decision  to  refuse,  a  removal
        direction made pursuant to section 47 of  the  Immigration,  Asylum
        and Nationality Act 2006.


     4. The Judge considered the written and oral evidence and sets out her
        findings from paragraph 13 of the determination.  The  Judge  found
        that SBM failed under the Immigration Rules [13  -31].   The  Judge
        noted at the hearing that SBM adduced evidence of  a  son  born  in
        October 2009.  There is no contact with the child's natural father.
        It is not disputed that SBM is married to MR.


     5. In paragraphs 35 and 36 the Judge finds:


     35.  Thus, whilst the appellant fails to discharge her burden under the
              Suitability  criteria  and  therefore  fails  to  benefit  the
   provisions under             paragraph EX.1; she can show, on a  balance,
   under paragraph                  276ADE (vi) that she has built a  lawful
   significant private life of nine              and a half years in the  UK
   and that she has no social or cultural  ties             to  the  country
   nominated to effect removal.


     36.  On balance, the appellant makes out  her  claim  under  the  above
          provision of the Immigration  Rules.  I  go  on  to  consider  the
     appellant's alternative Article 8 ground as follows.


     6. The Judge finds that at the  date  of  hearing  SBM  remains  in  a
        subsisting relationship with her husband [37].  It is  acknowledged
        that the Secretary of State was not provided with an opportunity to
        consider the relationship with her son [37] which is a finding made
        because SBM failed to mention that she had a son in her application
        for further leave.


     7. Having set out the Razgar guidelines [38 -44]  the  Judge  accepted
        that if SBM were compelled to seek a settlement  visa  from  either
        Malawi or Zimbabwe, she would be forced to survive in Malawi  where
        she has no family or social support network and equally in Zimbabwe
        where she would probably  be  without  accommodation  or  financial
        support. Accordingly the Judge accepted that  a  forced  return  to
        either country would be unreasonable [45].


     8. The Judge then considered the best interests of the child,  T,  and
        discussed a number of cases [46-57] before  concluding  that  SBM's
        son T, who is four years old and who was born in the United Kingdom
        but who is not a British national, and who has  recently  commenced
        nursery education, has a close bond with his  mother  and  probably
        has developed a close bond with his stepfather [58].


     9. The Judge accepted that if SBM had to leave the UK she will have no
        option other than to take her son with  her  which  may  result  in
        uncertainties with regard to maintenance and accommodation  for  T.
        It was also said that T's relationship with  his  stepfather  would
        also suffer due to uncertainty with regard to the  length  of  time
        away from the UK and for these reasons it  was  accepted  that  the
        best interests of T will be for him to remain in the UK [59].


    10. There was little evidence of  SBM's  husband's  employment  in  the
        United Kingdom  although  the  Judge  accepted  that  he  might  be
        employed. He is  a  British  national  and  the  Judge  found  that
        requiring him to leave the UK with his  wife  would  interrupt  his
        work, his relationship with his mother and siblings and a son  from
        a previous relationship. He has no ties to Malawi or  Zimbabwe  and
        it was therefore held unreasonable to require him to leave  the  UK
        with his wife [60].


    11. The Judge refers to the public interest in paragraph 61  and  SBM's
        willingness to engage in deceit against the Secretary of  State  in
        paragraph 62 although then concludes:  "I  accept  for  my  reasons
        stated above that requiring the departure of the appellant, her son
        or [MR]  for  the  purpose  of  maintaining  effective  immigration
        control and economic interest of the public, would lead to hardship
        that would go beyond the baseline. Therefore, I accept the  removal
        of the  appellant  would  be  a  disproportionate  and  unjustified
        measure against the respondent's lawful obligation" [62]. It is  on
        this basis the appeal was allowed under Article 8 ECHR.


    12. The Secretary of State challenges the determination on the basis of
        an alleged failure to give adequate reasons for findings made and a
        failure to properly assess the human rights elements of the appeal.



Discussion



    13. The Judge was required to consider the merits of the  human  rights
        claim in accordance with the approach  set  out  by  the  Court  of
        Appeal in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ  1192,  the  High  Court  in
        Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and by the Upper Tribunal in  Gulshan
        [2013] UKUT 640, as confirmed by Shahzad (Art  8:  legitimate  aim)
        [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC).  These judgments have made it  clear  that
        the question of proportionality must be looked at in the context of
        the Immigration  Rules  with  no  need  to  go  on  to  a  specific
        assessment under Article 8 if it is clear from the facts that there
        are no particular compelling or exceptional circumstances requiring
        that course to be taken.


    14. That approach is consistent with what the Court of Appeal  said  in
        MF  (Nigeria)  and  with  the  approach  of  the  House  of  Lords,
        particularly in cases such as  Huang  [2007]  UKHL  11  and  Razgar
        [2004] UKHL 27.  In Shahzad it was found that where an area of  the
        Rules does not have such an express mechanism such as that found in
        the deportation provisions, the approach  in  Nagre  ([29]-[31]  in
        particular) and Gulshan should be followed: i.e. after applying the
        requirements of the Rules, only  if  there  may  be  arguably  good
        grounds for granting leave to remain outside them is  it  necessary
        for Article 8 purposes to go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are
        compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them.


    15. The starting point for the Judge was to look at the Rules  and  see
        whether the Applicant was able to meet their requirements. If  not,
        the question arises whether the decision would lead to a breach  of
        Article 8 but in the context  of  whether  there  are  factors  not
        covered by the Rules which  give  rise  to  the  need  to  consider
        Article 8 further.


    16. The key question in relation to the  assessment  of  Article  8  is
        whether the decision to  refuse  to  grant  leave  will  result  in
        compelling  circumstances  giving  rise  to   unjustifiably   harsh
        consequences for the Applicant or any family  member,  such  as  to
        establish an arguable case at this time.  In Gulshan  it  was  held
        that the term "insurmountable obstacles"  in  provisions  such  as
        Section EX.1 are not obstacles which  are  impossible  to  surmount
        They concern the practical  possibilities  of  relocation.  In  the
        absence of such insurmountable obstacles, it is necessary  to  show
        other  non-standard  and  particular  features  demonstrating  that
        removal will be unjustifiably harsh. The material provided  to  the
        Judge did not arguably establish that such circumstances exist.


    17. This approach has been further confirmed by the Court of Appeal  in
        the more recent case of Haleemundeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558  in
        which the Court found :


          40  I, however, consider  that  the  FTT  Judge  did  err  in  his
   approach to Article 8. This is                because he did not consider
   Mr.    Haleemudeen's    case    for    remaining    in     the     United
   Kingdom on the basis of his private and family life against the Secretary
   of State's policy            as contained in Appendix FM and Rule  276ADE
   of  the  Immigration  Rules.  These  new            provisions   in   the
   Immigration Rules are a  central  part  of  the  legislative  and  policy
   context             in which the interests  of  immigration  control  are
   balanced against the interests and rights              of people who have
   come to this country and wish to settle in it. Overall the  Secretary  of
     State's policy as to when an interference with an Article 8 right  will
   be regarded as                   disproportionate is more  particularised
   in the new Rules than it had previously  been.  The            new  Rules
   require stronger bonds with the United Kingdom before leave will be given
              under them. The features of the policy contained in the  Rules
   include the requirements of           twenty  year  residence,  that  the
   applicant's   partner   be   a   British   citizen    in    the    United
   Kingdom, settled here, or here with leave as a  refugee  or  humanitarian
   protection, and              that where  the  basis  of  the  application
   rests  on  the  applicant's  children  that  they  have              been
   residents for seven years.


    18.  It  was  also  acknowledged  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  that  the
        authorities make it clear that the focus of any assessment  whether
        an interference with private life pursuant to the  requirements  of
        immigration  control  is  proportionate  should  be   whether   the
        Secretary of  State's  decision  is  in  accordance  with  the  new
        provisions [42].  The Court refer to  Nagre  and  the  judgment  of
        Sales J at [26] and [29] that it is necessary to  find  "particular
        factors in individual cases... of especially  compelling  force  in
        favour of a granted leave to remain" even though those factors  are
        not fully reflected in and dealt with in  the  new  Rules  and  "to
        consider   whether   there   are   compelling   circumstances   not
        sufficiently recognised under the new rules to require the grant of
        such leave" [43].


    19. In paragraph 44 the Court state;  "...........  at  least  in  this
        court, in light  of  the  authorities,  it  is  necessary  to  find
        "compelling circumstances" for going outside the Rules.


    20. The Judge does refer to the cases of Nagre and Gulshan and  to  the
        fact SBM failed under the Rules and the suitability requirements of
        S-LTR.2.2(a) which refers to false information, representations  or
        documents having been submitted in  relation  to  the  application.
        The refusal notice refers to the fact that in support of her  claim
        to be in a  genuine  relationship  with  her  British  partner  she
        provided a number of documents including Halifax bank statements as
        evidence of her cohabitation. The Halifax bank statements have been
        confirmed as being false.  The  Judge  considered  the  explanation
        provided and notes that SBM accepts they are not genuine  documents
        although did not find any other aspect of the explanation  provided
        to be credible. In paragraph 28  of  the  determination  the  Judge
        finds "Therefore, I accept that the appellant has  been  deliberate
        in misleading the respondent with  the  false  document,  which  is
        intended to bolster the application".  In addition the Judge  found
        that SBM failed under S-LTR.2.2 (b) which relates to a  failure  to
        disclose material facts in  relation  to  the  application  as  she
        admitted she had left her sons details out in her application  form
        merely to save costs.


    21. As a result of SBM's deliberate acts of deceit she failed under the
        Immigration Rules in relation to the "partner"  route  as  well  as
        276ADE. Both rules  include  a  requirement  to  satisfy  specified
        criteria before moving on to consider the individual elements.  The
        Judges finding that the appeal under the Immigration Rules must  be
        dismissed is correct in law as is the  direction  in  paragraph  29
        that the outcome under the Rules has an  impact  on  the  remaining
        considerations although the Judge arguably errs in law when stating
        that that impact is  limited  to  consideration  of  the  remaining
        requirements under the Rules. Such a statement suggests an arguable
        compartmentalisation in the Judges mind of the  claims  made  under
        the Rules and that under Article 8  ECHR  which  is  an  impression
        further reinforced by the statement in paragraph 36 [page 7 of  the
        determination  prior  to  the  error  in  numbering  which   occurs
        thereafter] where the  Judge  stated  that  she  was  going  on  to
        consider SBM's alternative Article 8 grounds as if such claim could
        somehow be separated from the findings under the Immigration Rules.
        This is a structural failure and a material misdirection in law.


    22. SBM was unable to succeed under the Immigration Rules  and  so  the
        requirement  upon  the  Judge  was  to  consider  whether  on   the
        particular facts of this case there are any  especially  compelling
        circumstances such as to require a grant of leave to remain. It was
        for this reason that the case before the Upper  Tribunal  proceeded
        with a discussion relating to  whether  the  error  identified  was
        material in light of the findings the Judge had made.


    23. I find that there are a number of  further  difficulties  with  the
        determination in addition to that set out above. The first of these
        is that in paragraph 45 the Judge  claims  SBM  has  no  family  or
        social support network in Malawi or Zimbabwe and will  probably  be
        without accommodation or financial support. There is  no  reference
        in the determination to the statement in the  reasons  for  refusal
        letter that depending upon the case  reintegration  assistance  and
        support for a sustainable return may be available.  Mr  Melvin  was
        asked during the hearing whether such support will be available and
        although he did not specifically  commit  himself,  as  this  is  a
        decision that will be made by others and in relation  to  which  he
        has no specific authority, he did confirm that the facts  of  SBM's
        case fit within the relevant criteria. This appears to be a case in
        which it is reasonable to expect that such support will be provided
        to SBM meaning that she and T will not be destitute or without  the
        means  to  find  suitable  accommodation  and  to  facilitate   her
        reintegration into society in her home state. It has not been shown
        that such ties as may be  required  to  live  effectively  in  such
        society cannot be reformed, even if currently lost.


    24. The finding that it is unreasonable for her husband to return based
        upon his connections with the United Kingdom do not appear to  have
        been assessed against the relevant criteria set out in the case law
        although if he has ongoing contact  with  a  son  from  a  previous
        relationship it may not be reasonable to expect him to return  with
        SBM, meaning this is a family splitting case.


    25. The failure to consider the  evidence  adequately  means  that  the
        finding that it would not be reasonable for SBM to  return  due  to
        the economic reality is infected by legal error  and  unsustainable
        and based on a failure to consider all the available evidence and a
        lack of adequate reasoning. Indeed applying the relevant  standard,
        the balance of probability, it is likely that such support  as  may
        be required will be available according to Mr Melvin's response.


    26. The claim to be entitled to remain based upon her private  life  in
        the United Kingdom fails under the Rules. Notwithstanding the  fact
        that SBM has remained lawfully to date, and been granted  leave  in
        the  past,  she  chose  to  undertake  acts  of  dishonesty   which
        effectively excluded her from the right to remain under the  Rules.
        That is illustrative of the  weight  approved  by  Parliament  that
        should  be  given  to  such  acts  of  dishonesty  in  relation  to
        individual seeking to remain on private or family life grounds.


    27. It has not been shown that  sufficiently  compelling  circumstances
        exist such as to entitle SBM to remain based upon her  relationship
        with her husband and time in the UK, on the evidence. The  question
        is, therefore, whether the circumstances of T are such that  return
        would result in  consequences  of  sufficient  severity  so  as  to
        warrant a grant of leave.  The finding by the Judge in paragraph 62
        that return would lead  to  hardship  that  would  go  "beyond  the
        baseline" is inadequately reasoned as the  Judge  fails  to  define
        what that baseline may be and, in light of her apparent segregation
        of the assessment of Article 8 under the Rules and ECHR, it may  be
        either.  The Court in Haleemundeen remark on the formidable  hurdle
        created by the new Rules (Appendix FM and  Paragraph  276ADE)  when
        considering the issue of proportionality under Article 8  which  is
        the correct staring point.


    28. The Judge is of the opinion that  it  would  not  be  in  the  best
        interests of T to have  to  return  with  his  mother  due  to  the
        findings  regarding  the  situation  on  return  and  the   child's
        relationship with his stepfather. The Secretary of State was unable
        to consider T's situation in the refusal notice as  SBM  failed  to
        include any reference in section 4 of the form to the child.   Such
        an omission may indicate that she was not in fact seeking any  form
        of leave for her son although her explanation provided to the Judge
        was that she was trying to save costs, which must be interpreted as
        a deliberate attempt to avoid having to pay the required fee for  a
        child applicant. Notwithstanding her failure to mention her son she
        seeks to rely upon his situation as a means to avoid removal.


    29. In Zoumbas v Secretary of state for the Home Department [2013] UKSC
        74, at paragraph 10, the Court paraphrase  the  principles  arising
        from the cases of ZH (Tanzania) [2011] 2 AC 166, H v Lord  Advocate
        [2012] SC (UKSC) 308 and H(H) v Deputy Prosecutor  of  the  Italian
        Republic [2013] 1 AC 338, as follows:


              (1) The best interests of the child are an  integral  part  of
   the                          proportionality assessment under  article  8
   ECHR;


              (2)      In making that assessment, the best interests of  the
   child must be  a                   primary  consideration,  although  not
   always the  only  primary                        consideration;  and  the
   child's best interests do  not  of  themselves                  have  the
   status of the paramount consideration;


              (3) Although the best interests of the child can be outweighed
   by the                  cumulative effect  of  other  considerations,  no
   other consideration                   can be treated as  inherently  more
   significant;


              (4)      While different judges might approach the question of
   the best                     interests of the child in different ways, it
   is important to ask  oneself                the  right  questions  in  an
   orderly manner in order to avoid the risk                   that the best
   interests   of   the   child   might   be    undervalued    when    other
   important considerations were in play;


              (5)      It is important to have a clear  idea  of  a  child's
   circumstances and                what is  in  a  child's  best  interests
   before  one  asks  oneself  whether                those  interests   are
   outweighed by the force of other considerations;


              (6)      To that end there is  no  substitute  for  a  careful
   examination of all               relevant factors when the  interests  of
   the child are involved in an                  article 8 assessment; and


              (7) A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she
   is not                  responsible, such as the conduct of a parent.


    30. There is insufficient evidence of an adverse affect upon the  child
        if he is removed from the United Kingdom in relation to  any  bonds
        that he may have with his stepfather. The child is  four  years  of
        age and it has not been shown that his needs cannot be met  by  his
        mother in the UK or elsewhere. Had a child application  being  made
        it has not been shown that T could have succeed under the  relevant
        section of Appendix FM, which sets out the requirements  for  leave
        to remain as a child.  One of the necessary requirements is that  a
        valid application for leave to remain must have been made (which it
        was  not)  although  I  appreciate  that  GEN.1.9  of  Appendix  FM
        specifies that the requirement to make a valid application will not
        apply when an Article 8 claim  is  raised  in  an  appeal  (GEN.1.9
        (iv)). The requirement for there to be serious and  compelling  (my
        emphasis) family or other considerations which make  the  exclusion
        of the child undesirable has not been  established  on  the  facts.
        There is also the issue that the financial  requirements  of  Rules
        have not been shown to be met on the limited evidence; although  it
        was accepted that SBM's husband was working.


    31. Having considered all the material available to the  Judge  I  find
        that she has erred in law in a way  material  to  her  decision  to
        allow the appeal under Article 8  ECHR  for  the  reasons  set  out
        above. Although Mr  Melvin  submitted  that  it  appears  to  be  a
        determination written to allow SBM to remain in the United  Kingdom
        I make no such finding.  Any judge will be  fully  aware  that  the
        obligation upon them is to apply the law  to  the  facts  properly,
        irrespective of any view they may have as an  individual  regarding
        whether a person should be allowed to remain in the United  Kingdom
        or not.


    32. I set aside the decision. SBM's immigration history, composition of
        the family, attributes of its members, and the  finding  under  the
        Immigration Rules shall be preserved findings. I find  in  addition
        that the conclusion SBM's husband cannot be expected to  leave  the
        United Kingdom is preserved  as  this  is  not  challenged  by  the
        Secretary of State.


    33. In light of the fact there are resources available to  SBM and T on
        return and that on  balance  she  would  be  able  to  access  such
        resources, I do not find that it has  been  shown  that  there  are
        particularly   compelling   or   exceptional   circumstances   that
        necessitate a separate assessment under Article 8 outside the Rules
        although if such an assessment was  undertaken,  for  the  sake  of
        completeness, it will be necessary to look at whether the  evidence
        establishes the existence of compelling circumstances  giving  rise
        to unjustifiably harsh consequences for SBM or any  family  members
        such as to establish an arguable case at this time.  There  may  be
        difficulties regarding relocation but it has not been shown that it
        is unreasonable to expect SBM in all the circumstances to do so  or
        that other non-standard and particular features exist demonstrating
        that the removal of SBM and T  will  be  unjustifiably  harsh.  The
        Judge touched on the  period  of  separation  but  this  is  not  a
        situation in which the Secretary of State is seeking to  enforce  a
        policy to remove SBM from this country with  a  view  to  making  a
        fresh application to return. It is a case involving a failure to be
        able to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules  as  a  result  of
        deliberate  acts  of  deceit  by  SBM.   This  is   an   additional
        requirement in this case which sets it  apart  from  other  similar
        cases for which SBM is responsible.


    34. I find T's best interests will be to remain with his mother who  is
        his primary carer and with whom he has his primary bond. It has not
        been shown that he will suffer  adverse  consequences  such  as  to
        enable him to succeed or for SBM to remain in line based  upon  the
        consequences of his removal with his mother.


Decision

    35. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    36. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
   (Upper              Tribunal) Rules 2008 to protect the identity  of  the
   child.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 7th May 2014







