
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27517/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17th November 2016                |On 05th December 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                     MJC
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly.  This order  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this order could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse her leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
    on the basis of her private life under paragraph 276ADE of the Rules or
    pursuant to Article 8 outside the Rules.

 2. On  the  morning  of  the  hearing,  I  received  a  message  that  the
    appellant's Counsel had been taken ill  at  Tottenham  on  her  way  to
    Court, coupled with  a  request  for  an  adjournment.   The  appellant
    herself was present, and is a vulnerable person.

 3. Since I am satisfied that the error of law is apparent on the  face  of
    the decision (the lack of a finding as to  whether  the  appellant  has
    spent more than half her life in the United Kingdom) I did not consider
    it necessary or  proportionate  to  adjourn  the  appeal  hearing.  The
    paragraph 276ADE decision turns on whether the appellant has spent more
    than half her life in the United Kingdom and there is no clear  finding
    on that point in the First-tier Tribunal decision. For the  respondent,
    Mr Tufan did not seek to argue that the findings of fact were adequate,
    on that point.

 4. The grounds of appeal also rely on a want of reasoning in  relation  to
    Section 117(3),  117(5)  and  117A(1)(a)  and  (2)  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision and observe that the appellant was a minor  when  she
    was forced to enter the United Kingdom and her precarious state was  no
    fault of her own.  The appellant further contends that the  finding  of
    the Tribunal that  under  paragraph  117B(3)  she  is  not  financially
    independent is unduly harsh and unreasonable. It is not  necessary  for
    me to reach a finding on those grounds.

 5. In the light of the inadequate findings of fact I consider that  it  is
    appropriate to allow  this  appeal  and  remit  it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing afresh with no findings of fact  or  credibility
    maintained.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision. The decision in this appeal will be remade in  the
First-tier Tribunal on a date to be fixed.


Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson                Date: 2 December 2016
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


