
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27243/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 November 2017                           |On 12 January 2018            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                           Ricardo Alphanso martin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica.  He  was  born  on  11  November
    1977.  He arrived in the United Kingdom as a visitor on  11  May  2001.
    However he was given further leave to remain  as  a  student  until  30
    September 2004.  From September 2004 he has remained as an  overstayer.
    On 17 January 2014 (that was nearly ten  years  after  his  last  leave
    expired) he applied for leave to remain as the  husband  of  a  British
    citizen, [FM], whom he had married on 8 November 2013.  The application
    was refused on 24 February 2014 and it was certified as being  'clearly
    unfounded'.  That was challenged by a series of  proceedings  and  this
    resulted in an unsuccessful challenge on 17 July 2015.

 2. The application was made the subject of an earlier decision  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge J R A Hanratty, whose determination was promulgated
    on 28 October 2013.  The principal feature is that the appellant formed
    a relationship with  [TS].   She  had  two  children  already  and  the
    appellant is the father of her third child who was born on [ ] 2008 and
    she is now 9 years old.  The appellant started a relationship with [FM]
    in about September of 2012 and [FM]  has  a  child  with  whom  it  was
    accepted that the appellant had a relationship  of  ordinary  affection
    and genuine involvement.  The stepson has  some  medical  difficulties,
    principally he has a considerable stammer.

 3. The appeal was dismissed in October  2013  and  eleven  days  later  he
    married [FM].  He applied in January 2014 to remain  on  the  basis  of
    being married to a British citizen.  The appeal eventually was heard by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver.  At that stage the appellant was in a
    relationship with [FM] and he considered that  relationship.   He  also
    considered the fact that at that time  the  appellant  was  not  seeing
    anything of [TS], or at least not  in  the  sense  of  his  enjoying  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship, but they obviously saw each  other
    in the context of contact.  He told the judge that he and his  daughter
    had contact but he did not see eye-to-eye with his  daughter's  mother.
    In those  circumstances,  the  Judge  reached  the  conclusion,  having
    considered s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009,
    that this fell short of a  protected  relationship.   The  relationship
    that the appellant had with his stepson, [FM]'s son, was not such as to
    prevent his removal.

 4. Bearing in mind the fact that the appellant had no leave to remain  and
    that the relationships which he  had  with  both  [TS]  and  [FM],  who
    remains his wife, were all created and developed at a time when he  had
    no leave, it is unsurprising that he did not meet the requirements  for
    leave to remain under the  Immigration  Rules.   The  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State where these considerations were set out is one which
    is plainly a lawful  one,  and  the  judge  cannot  be  criticised  for
    reaching the conclusions he did.  In those circumstances, I dismiss the
    appeal.

 5. I will add, however, that the  appellant  told  me  that  he  had  been
    separated from [FM] some time in 2015 and that he is  currently  living
    at an address, [ ] in Surrey where he moved last Friday.  He is  living
    with [TS] and that is known to the immigration authorities because both
    the address and the identity of his surety has  changed  from  [FM]  to
    [TS].  That was a change which was recognised  by  the  UK  authorities
    when he made that application at Lunar House.  Accordingly,  there  are
    very different circumstances which exist at the moment.  This does  not
    alter the fact that the judge when he dealt with this case at  the  end
    of December of 2016 was entitled to reach the decision he did  and  did
    not commit any error of law.

 6. I will also add  one  thing  about  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    criminal convictions.  I have not taken those into account at all, even
    though they obviously featured in the decision  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  The reason why I have not done so  is  that,  although
    they  are  matters  which  would  normally  come  into  play   in   the
    proportionality balance, in the context of this case, I am  looking  to
    see whether the appellant has established any right to remain under the
    Immigration Rules, regardless of whether he has criminal convictions or
    cautions or any other matters found against him.  The decision  I  have
    made is on the basis that the appellant presently  has  an  immigration
    status which gives him no right to remain.  The  fact  that  he  has  a
    child in the United Kingdom and was in a relationship with [FM] and  is
    now in a relationship with [TS], does not alter the fact that the judge
    made no error of law.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no error  on  a  point  of  law  and  his
determination of the appeal shall stand.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



