

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: IA/27282/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
|On: 25th April 2017                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                      |On: 12th June 2017                   |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                               Md Shahin Reza
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr ZT Simret, Counsel instructed by Simon
Noble Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh date of  birth  20th  October
    1986.  He appeals with permission[1] the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge MJ Gillespie) dated 11th October 2016  to  dismiss  his
    appeal against decisions to refuse to grant him further leave to remain
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant and to remove him from the United
    Kingdom.  The Respondent's decisions arose as a result of what was said
    to be the Appellant's involvement in an 'ETS fraud'.
 2. It was the Respondent's case that the Appellant had  used  a  proxy  to
    take an English language test on his behalf on the 12th  December  2012
    at the London College  of  Social  Studies.  Using  voice  verification
    software ETS was able to detect when a single person is taking multiple
    tests. ETS  undertook  a  check  of  the  Appellant's  test  and  found
    "significant evidence to conclude" that a proxy had been  present.  The
    Appellant's TOEIC certificate, issued as a result  of  that  test,  was
    cancelled as "invalid". The Respondent refused to grant further  leave,
    invoked s47 of the Immigration Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006  and
    applied paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules, alleging  that  the
    Appellant had used deception.


 3. When the matter came before Judge  Gillespie  the  Appellant  protested
    that he had taken that test.   He described the  procedure  applied  at
    the test centre, and pointed to his educational history in  the  UK  to
    submit that it would be very unlikely that he would use a proxy to take
    his test when  he  could  himself  speak  very  good  English.    Judge
    Gillespie describes that as a "grossly unsatisfactory response" to what
    he found to be persuasive evidence of fraud.  The Judge commented  that
    the Appellant's spoken English, "as demonstrated during the  course  of
    his evidence, is not such as inspires one with confidence  that  he  is
    likely to have taken the test and to  have  achieved  the  good  result
    reflected on the certificate.  His  English  is  heavily  accented  and
    reflects a foreign idiom that, with the accent, made it very  difficult
    to follow, even in the orderly and quiet setting of court proceedings".
     The appeal was dismissed.

 4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the following grounds:

              i) The First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  failing  to  apply  the
                 principles in SM & Qadir v Secretary of State for the  Home
                 Department (ETS - evidence - burden of proof) [2016]  00299
                 (IAC) / Shen v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
                 (paper appeals - proving dishonesty) [2014] UKUT 236 (IAC);


             ii) The Tribunal further erred in failing to take into account/
                 give sufficient weight to the Appellant's evidence;

            iii) And in failing to identify the weaknesses in the  Secretary
                 of State for the Home Department's case;

             iv) And in so doing demonstrated bias.



    Error of Law: Findings


 5. To say that these grounds have no merit  would  be  an  understatement.
    Judge Colyer appears to have been persuaded to grant permission on  the
    mistaken premise that the First-tier Tribunal had not had  the  benefit
    of the Tribunal's judgement in SM & Qadir and as such that it might  be
    arguable that the Tribunal had taken the wrong approach to  the  burden
    of proof.  The grounds are misleading in  that  respect.  In  fact  the
    Tribunal expressly had regard to SM & Qadir [see paragraph 7] and it is
    quite clear that it applied its guidance on the matter  of  the  burden
    and  standard  of  proof.  The  'generic  evidence'  supplied  by   the
    Respondent is found  to  be  sufficient  to  discharge  the  evidential
    burden: paragraph 10. The Appellant's evidence in rebuttal is  rejected
    and good reasons given why. The Appellant failed  to  provide  a  prima
    facie innocent explanation  for  the  evidence  of  fraud.  Unlike  the
    appellants SM & Qadir, he was unable to satisfy the Tribunal that  this
    could all  have  been  an  innocent  mistake:  paragraphs  11-14.   The
    Tribunal was entitled  to  conclude,  having  regard  to  all  of  this
    evidence, that the Respondent had discharged the burden upon her.


 6. The second ground takes the  form  of  a  general  complaint  that  the
    Tribunal rejected the appellant's evidence to the effect  that  he  did
    take that test himself. The grounds read as follows:

         "He gave witness before the court without  taking  any  interpreter
         with full confidence, which also proves that  he  has  satisfactory
         level of speaking capability, did not  necessity  of  taking  proxy
         helper".


    Insofar as I understand this point, it is being said that the  Tribunal
    failed to give due weight to the English speaking  skills  demonstrated
    by the Appellant at the hearing.  There is clearly  no  merit  in  that
    ground, since the Tribunal expressly  addressed  the  Appellant's  oral
    evidence and used its poor quality as a means to reject his  contention
    that he achieved a score of 180 in his TOEIC speaking exam.


 7.  As  to  the  weaknesses  in  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department's case much was made before me of an issue that arose before
    the First-tier Tribunal as to whether the Appellant  had  also  used  a
    proxy to take a test with  a  provider  known  as  'Bfluent':  this  is
    mentioned at paragraph 9 of the determination. Mr Simret submitted that
    it was an error of law for the Tribunal to have weighed this factor  in
    the balance since there was no evidence produced, for instance  by  way
    of photographic ID, that the person recorded as  having  taken  a  test
    with Bfluent  was  in  fact  the  Appellant.    Even  if  it  could  be
    established that the Bfluent matter should have  been  ignored,  it  is
    apparent from paragraph 14 of the determination that  this  would  have
    made no difference at all to the outcome of the appeal. That is because
    the Tribunal there gave good reason why the Appellant had not given  an
    innocent explanation as to why the results were as they are in  respect
    of the London School of Social  Studies,  and  why  the  overall  legal
    burden on the Secretary of State was discharged.




 8. There is nothing whatsoever to substantiate the allegation of bias made
    in the grounds, which amount to no more than a  disagreement  with  the
    conclusions reached by the Tribunal.




    Decisions


 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law such that the decision must be set  aside.   The  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is upheld.


10. There is no direction for anonymity.







                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               9th June 2017


                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted on the 3rd March 2017 by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Colyer


