
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27682/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14th March 2014                              |On 27 March 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON



                                   Between

                             GULAM MUJTABA FAHAD
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr W Talukder of Kalam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of India born on  13th  December  1984.
    On 2nd March 2013 he applied for leave to remain in the UK as a Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrant.  That application was refused for  the  reasons
    given in a Notice of Decision dated 14th June 2013.  At the  same  time
    the Respondent decided to remove the Appellant under the provisions  of
    Section 47 Immigration  and  Nationality  Act  2006  as  amended.   The
    Appellant appealed, and his appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Khan (the Judge) sitting at Hatton Cross on 8th January  2014.
    He decided  to  dismiss  the  appeal  for  the  reasons  given  in  his
    Determination promulgated on 16th January 2014.  The  Appellant  sought
    leave to appeal that decision, and on 3rd February 2014 such permission
    was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Appellant's application for leave to remain was refused because the
    Appellant failed to score sufficient points  for  access  to  funds  as
    required by paragraph 245DD(b) and Appendix A  of  HC  395.   This  was
    because the Appellant relied upon third party funding but he had failed
    to provide the documentary evidence as required by paragraph  41-SD  of
    Appendix A.

 4. The Judge dismissed the appeal because according to what  he  wrote  at
    paragraph 26 of the Determination, he was likewise not  satisfied  that
    at the time of application, documents in the required format  had  been
    submitted.  The Judge was satisfied that  the  Respondent's  Evidential
    Flexibility Policy did not apply in the circumstances of this case.

 5. At the hearing, I heard  submissions  from  both  representatives.   Mr
    Talukder referred to  the  grounds  of  application  and  his  skeleton
    argument and argued that the Judge had erred in  law.   The  Judge  had
    failed to properly consider  the  documents  which  the  Appellant  had
    submitted with his application appearing at pages E1, E2, F1, and F2 of
    the Bundle.  They provided sufficient information to  comply  with  the
    requirements of paragraph 41-SD.  This was further established  by  the
    letter from a lawyer dated  21st  December  2013  and  other  documents
    submitted with the Bundle for today's hearing.   Finally,  Mr  Talukder
    pointed out that the Judge had not made an Article 8 ECHR decision.

 6. In response, Mr Wilding submitted that there had been no such errors of
    law.  The arguments of the Appellant go to the contents of the  Refusal
    Letter and not those of the Determination.  The Appellant has merely re-
    argued his original case.  The Judge made a specific decision that  the
    letter from HDFC Bank relied upon by the Appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph  41-SD.   The  Appellant  could  not  produce
    further evidence at this stage by virtue of the provisions  of  Section
    85A(3)(b) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   Finally,  Mr
    Wilding argued that it was not a material error of law for the Judge to
    omit to deal with the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights as only generic
    grounds had been relied upon.

 7. I find myself in agreement with the arguments  of  Mr  Wilding.   Where
    third party financial support  is  relied  upon,  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 41-SD are very specific.  The Judge  found  that  the  letter
    from HDFC Bank was defective in that it did  not  contain  the  contact
    details of the third party, and that the declaration by the third party
    was not supported by sufficient evidence from a legal representative in
    that it did not contain a declaration of validity nor any  confirmation
    of registration or authority to practise in India.  These are  findings
    of fact which were open to the Judge on the evidence  before  him.   It
    followed that there was no error of law  subsequently  concluding  that
    the requirements of paragraph 245DD(b) and therefore Appendix A  of  HC
    395 were not met.  It was not open to the Judge  to  consider  evidence
    not submitted with the application.  As a consequence of  the  decision
    in SSHD v Rodriguez and  Others  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  2,  the  Evidential
    Flexibility Policy can have no application in a case  of  this  nature,
    and the Judge was right to find accordingly.

 8. It is true that the Judge failed to deal with the Appellant's Article 8
    ECHR rights.  This I find not to be a material error of law.  The issue
    was not argued before the  Judge,  and  no  evidence  was  produced  in
    respect of it.  It therefore must be the case that the Judge would have
    concluded that there were no arguably good grounds for  granting  leave
    to  remain  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  and  nor  any  compelling
    circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised  under  them.    Therefore
    following the decision in Gulshan (Article 8  -  new  Rules  -  correct
    approach) [2013] UKUT  00640  (IAC)  the  Judge  would  not  have  been
    required to consider the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  find  no
reason to do so.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
