

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27865/2014
                                                               IA/27866/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre         |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 3 March 2015                               |On 11 March 2015             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             SUKANYA LAHIRI (1)
                             AMRITASH LAHIRI (2)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Vokes, instructed by Malik Law Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  against  the
    decision and reasons statement of First-tier  Tribunal  Judges  Cheales
    and Butler that was promulgated on 28 November 2014.  The panel allowed
    the appeals of the  above  named  mother  and  son,  who  are  now  the
    respondents, on the basis that the first succeeded under article 8 ECHR
    applied directly and the second succeeded under the  immigration  rules
    when properly applied.

 2. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal are not  entirely  coherent.
    They challenge the panel's approach to the first respondent, submitting
    that the panel could not have allowed her appeal under the  immigration
    rules because she did not  meet  the  suitability  requirements.   This
    ground falls away, as Mr Mills  conceded,  because  it  is  clear  from
    paragraph 20 that the  panel  found  the  first  respondent  could  not
    succeed under the immigration rules.  The panel  went  on  to  consider
    article 8 ECHR applied directly.

 3. The grounds take issue  with  that  approach.   However,  as  Mr  Mills
    confirmed, on the facts of this case it was necessary for the panel  to
    consider article 8 directly.  The first respondent's husband  had  been
    granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  after  completing  five   years
    residence as a tier 2 (general) migrant.  The impact on him that  would
    arise from the negative immigration decision had to be  considered  and
    could not be considered within the immigration rules.

 4. Turning to the second respondent, Mr Mills conceded that the provisions
    of s.3C of the Immigration Act 1971 applied  to  the  first  respondent
    because she had made her application  to  vary  her  leave  before  her
    previous leave expired.  Therefore, as found  by  the  panel,  she  was
    lawfully present in the UK and the provisions of paragraph  319J(e)(iv)
    relating to her son, the second respondent, were  met.   As  such,  the
    panel's decision, expressed at paragraphs 17 and 18 of  its  statement,
    was correct in law.

 5. Mr Mills added that the fact that the second respondent  qualified  for
    indefinite leave to remain merely strengthened the position in relation
    to article 8.  He confirmed that even if there were technical errors in
    the statement, they could have no bearing on the  outcome  because  the
    balancing exercise clearly came done in favour of the first respondent.
     Mr Mills acknowledged that  the  offence  (failure  to  report  a  car
    accident) that led to the adverse immigration decision  was  outweighed
    by the factors of private and family life of all three members  of  the
    family group.

 6. In light of the comments and concessions made by Mr Mills, there was no
    need for me to hear from Mr Vokes.   It  is  clear  that  there  is  no
    material  legal  error  in  the  decision  and  reasons  statement  and
    therefore it stands.



Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  dismissed  because
there is no error on a point of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
and reasons statement and its decision stands.



                               Signed                     Date


                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
