
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/27724/2013
                                                               IA/27725/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|On 9 September 2014                  |On 14 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                         (1) Mohammad Rashedul Hasan
                              (2) Mahmuda Akter
                         (Anonymity orders not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr M Biggs of Counsel instructed by JS Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. These are  linked  appeals  against  the  decisions  of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Froom promulgated  on  6  May  2014  dismissing  the
         Appellants' appeals against decisions of the  Respondent  dated  17
         June 2013 to refuse them variation of leave to remain in the UK and
         to remove each of them pursuant to section 47 of  the  Immigration,
         Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

    Background

      2. The personal  details  of  the  Appellants  and  their  immigration
         histories are summarised in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
         (paragraphs 1 and 4), and it  is  unnecessary  to  reproduce  those
         matters here or otherwise set out any further detail other than  is
         incidental for the purposes of this document.  Suffice  to  say  at
         this stage that the Second Appellant  is  the  wife  of  the  First
         Appellant and her appeal, as was identified  by  Judge  Froom,  "is
         entirely  dependent"  on  the  First  Appellant's  appeal.  In  the
         circumstances I  adopt  Judge  Froom's  stylisation  of  the  First
         Appellant as 'the Appellant'.

      3. The Appellant's appeal was primarily concerned with a  decision  to
         refuse  his  application  for  leave  to  remain  as   a   Tier   1
         (Entrepreneur) Migrant.

      4. In the Respondent's  combined  'reasons  for  refusal'  letter  and
         Notice of Immigration Decision issues were identified in respect of
         three documents submitted  by  the  Appellant  in  support  of  his
         application. The Respondent expressed herself not to  be  satisfied
         that the evidence complied with the requirements of paragraph 41-SD
         of Appendix A of the Immigration Rules. Moreover it was stated that
         "the decision has been made not to request additional documentation
         or exceptionally consider the application under the  provisions  of
         paragraph 245AA as it anticipated that addressing the  omission  or
         error would lead to a grant of leave".

      5. Further to the above the decision-maker added "we have not  carried
         out full verification checks on the documents you submitted or  the
         statements that you have made on your application form (or in  your
         interview - delete if not applicable) as your application falls for
         refusal on other grounds as outlined above",  before  "reserve[ing]
         the right in future to request independent third-party verification
         of any piece of supporting documentation  that  you  provided  with
         this application".

      6. Before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Appellant's  representative
         conceded that the Appellant had not met  the  requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rules (paragraph  13)  and  in  the  circumstances  the
         appeal was dismissed under the  Rules  (paragraph  15).  The  Judge
         otherwise  rejected   submissions   in   respect   of   'evidential
         flexibility' with reference to paragraph 245AA of  the  Rules,  the
         Respondent's evidential flexibility policy, and the common law duty
         of fairness (paragraphs 16-24). The Tribunal also  determined  that
         the Respondent's decision did not breach  Article  8  of  the  ECHR
         (paragraph 25-32).

      7. The Appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  initially
         refused by Designated First-tier Tribunal  Judge  MacDonald  on  10
         June 2014, but subsequently granted by Upper  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Rintoul on 24 July 2014, who also issued Directions for the  future
         conduct of the appeal.

      8. The Respondent has filed a Rule 24 response dated 5 August 2014.




    Consideration: Error of Law

      9. The deficiencies in the documentation submitted in support  of  the
         Appellant's application when measured against the  requirements  of
         the Rules were, in the Respondent's refusal decision,  said  to  be
         these:

        (i) A letter from the BRAC Bank did not confirm that  the  bank  was
             duly regulated (notwithstanding that the bank appears  on  the
             list of financial institutions whose financial statements  are
             accepted in Table 12 of Appendix P of the Rules).

        (ii) A letter from Mr MD Wali Ullah Abbasi, purportedly an  Advocate
             and Notary Public in Bangladesh, did not allow the  Respondent
             to confirm the authority of the  writer  to  practice  law  in
             Bangladesh, did not confirm signatures  to  be  those  of  the
             third-party investors, and did not identify the details of the
             identification document of one of the third party investors.

     10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge identified the  deficiencies  in  the
         following terms at paragraph 14 of the determination - the  numbers
         in parenthesis being references to sub-paragraphs of paragraph  41-
         SD(d)(ii):

        "[Mr Abbasi's] letter does not  include  the  number  of  the  third
             parties' identity documents or the dates of issue  and  expiry
             (7). It also seems to me  that  the  stamp  or  seal  are  not
             sufficient to state the registration or authority of the legal
             representative to practise (2). The letter  contains  a  space
             for the registration number but, at least on my copy, it  does
             not appear to have been included".

     11. In the premises it is to be noted that  the  Respondent's  decision
         letter of 17  June  2013  confines  its  reasoning  in  respect  of
         evidential flexibility to the passage quoted at paragraph 4  above.
         The wording reflects paragraph 245AA(c). Beyond the fact that  more
         than one deficiency was identified, no other reason  is  given  for
         the assertion that it  was  not  anticipated  that  addressing  the
         omission or error would lead to a grant of leave. No other concerns
         in respect of the Appellant's  application  were  articulated  such
         that "the application will be refused for other reasons".

     12. The Judge set out the terms of paragraph 245AA (paragraph  16).  He
         then acknowledged  that  "in  cases  in  which  documents  are  not
         submitted in the right format, this rule  gives  case  workers  the
         option of giving the applicant  a  further  five  days  to  produce
         documents in the correct format" (paragraph 17). The Judge  was  in
         error in specifying five  days  in  circumstances  where  the  rule
         refers to "7 working days". I am  not  persuaded  that  this  is  a
         material error in circumstances where the Judge correctly  set  out
         the wording of the Rule itself in the preceding  paragraph  of  his
         decision, and also makes reference  to  "7  days"  (albeit  not  '7
         working days') in the following paragraph of  the  decision.  I  am
         inclined to the view that the reference to 5 days was  a  slip  and
         did not affect the Judge's overall reasoning.

     13. At paragraph 17 the Judge identified that paragraph 245AA gave  the
         Respondent a discretion to request the correct documents. The Judge
         did not determine that the discretion did  not  arise  -  in  other
         words he implicitly accepted that at least one of the circumstances
         specified at 245AA(b)(i)-(iii)  applied  -  and  indeed  in  making
         reference  to  documents  "not  submitted  in  the  right   format"
         reflected the wording of 245AA(b)(ii).  It  was  then  stated  "the
         exercise of discretion may be reviewed  by  the  Tribunal  (section
         86(3)(b) of the 2002 to Act)", but the Judge concluded  that  there
         was "no basis to do so", which he explained at paragraph 18.

     14. Paragraph 18 is concerned only with the letter of Mr Abbasi. I make
         the following observations.

        (i) Although the Judge makes reference to the Respondent's  position
             that paragraph 245AA(c) applied because the application  would
             be  refused  "for  different  reasons",  the  Judge  does  not
             expressly identify what those different reasons might  be.  As
             already noted, beyond the deficiencies  in  the  documents  no
             other basis of refusal was advanced by the Respondent.

        (ii) In so far as the bank letter potentially constituted a basis of
             refusal  different  from  the  deficiencies   in   the   legal
             representative's letter, the Judge did not  expressly  address
             the bank letter in the context  of  'evidential  flexibility',
             whether by reference to the Rules or policy.

        (iii) The only deficiency identified in the bank letter had been the
             omission of confirmation that the  bank  was  duly  regulated.
             This is a matter which potentially might have been  overlooked
             by the Respondent pursuant to 245AA(d) given the inclusion  of
             the bank in Table 12 of Appendix  P.  Alternatively  it  might
             otherwise have itself been dealt with  as  the  subject  of  a
             request to  provide  such  a  letter  in  the  correct  format
             pursuant to 245AA(b). Yet further in the alternative it  might
             have been dealt with under version  2.0  of  the  Respondent's
             'Guidance - PBS evidential flexibility' policy valid  from  20
             May 2013, which expressly identifies "missing information from
             the required letters or documents" in a  Tier  1  Entrepreneur
             type case to be a circumstance where "it maybe appropriate for
             the caseworker to [make a relevant] request".

        (iv) The Judge determined that it was  "highly  improbable"  that  a
             substitute legal representative's letter "would  be  available
             within 7 days" (paragraph 18). The Judge does not explain  the
             basis of such a conclusion. Whilst the timetable may indeed be
             tight - although not as tight as 7 days because 7 working days
             if spread over two weekends may amount to 11  days  in  total,
             and otherwise in any event extend to 9 actual days - the Judge
             identifies no evidential basis for  evaluating  delivery  time
             through commercial courier services, and was otherwise not  in
             a position to evaluate how quickly the already drafted  letter
             could be re-prepared with the  few  necessary  corrections  to
             make it compliant with the Rules. It is in  any  event  to  be
             noted that the 'timetable' does not appear  to  have  informed
             the Respondent's exercise of discretion or to  have  otherwise
             been advanced by the Respondent as a reason for  declining  to
             exercise  the  discretion  under  245AA  to  request   correct
             documents in the Appellant's favour.

     15. In  my  judgement  in  considering  for  himself  the  exercise  of
         discretion under paragraph 245AA  the  Judge  erred  in  failed  to
         identify that the Respondent had not explained her own decision  in
         respect of the exercise of discretion. It was merely asserted  that
         a request  for  information  was  not  anticipated  to  lead  to  a
         different result; but given that no other  basis  of  refusing  the
         application was identified such  reasoning  was  unsustainable.  It
         followed that that the Respondent had herself erred in  considering
         the exercise of discretion and as such  the  Respondent's  decision
         was not in accordance with the law.

     16. Further, in my judgement, the Judge erred in failing to explain  by
         reference  to  any  evidential  basis  his  finding   as   to   the
         improbability of the Appellant obtaining corrected documents within
         7 working days. The Judge's own consideration of  the  exercise  of
         discretion pursuant to section 86(3)(b) was  therefore  erroneously
         premised.

     17. In the circumstances I find that there was a material error of  law
         and the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  respect  of  the
         Immigration Rules must be set aside  in  appeal  IA/27724/2013.  In
         such circumstances the decision in appeal IA/27725/2013  must  also
         be set aside.

    Re-making the Decisions in the Appeals

     18. For the reasons already given above, I find that  the  Respondent's
         decision to decline to exercise the discretion in  paragraph  245AA
         was not in accordance with the law. (See in particular paragraph 15
         above.)

     19. In such circumstances both appeals are allowed. The applications of
         both Appellants remain outstanding and require to be considered  by
         the Respondent in accordance with the law.

    Notice of Decisions

     20. The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error
         of law, and are set aside.

     21. I remake the decisions in the appeals. The  Respondent's  decisions
         were not in accordance with the law, and  accordingly  the  appeals
         are allowed  to  the  extent  that  matters  are  remitted  to  the
         Respondent to determine the  applications  of  both  Appellants  in
         accordance with the law.

     22. No anonymity orders are sought or made.






    Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis 11 May 2015
