
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27467/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25 April 2013                                |On 14 June 2013            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                Sudager Singh
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Sudager Singh, was born on 10 November  1974  and  is  a
    male citizen of India.  The appellant entered the United Kingdom on  30
    December 2001 when he claimed  asylum.   His  application  was  refused
    after he failed to attend for interview.  Subsequently,  the  appellant
    appealed to the Adjudicator who dismissed his appeal on 3 October 2002.
     Thereafter, the appellant absconded.  On 13 May  2009,  the  appellant
    made an application for leave to remain "on human rights grounds".  The
    application was refused by a decision dated 13 June 2012.  He  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Reed)  which,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 22 October 2012, "allowed  the  appeal  to  the  limited
    extent that the decision was not otherwise in accordance with the law".
     A further decision was then taken on 9 November  2012  to  refuse  the
    appellant's application for leave to enter the United  Kingdom  on  the
    grounds that his removal would not place the United Kingdom  in  breach
    of its obligations under the Human  Rights  Act  1998.   The  appellant
    appealed that  decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  T  R  P
    Hollingworth) which, in a determination promulgated on  6  March  2013,
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Granting permission, Judge Kamara, wrote:

         "Taking into consideration the respondent's failure to comply  with
         the directions to file and serve evidence in relation to the legacy
         policy, along with the fact that the  appellant's  previous  appeal
         was allowed to the limited extent that the  respondent  'reconsider
         the appellant's circumstances  in  accordance  with  the  published
         policies for legacy cases' and that this was not done, I find  that
         it is arguable, on the evidence before him, that the judge erred in
         concluding the appellant 'could never  be  a  candidate  under  the
         scheme' because of his understanding  that  the  legacy  provisions
         applied only to those cases which had not been finally concluded."

 3. Judge T R P Hollingworth considered the "so-called  legacy  provisions"
    at [28] et seq.:

         "The purpose of the so-called  legacy  provisions  was  to  resolve
         unresolved asylum cases where the claim for asylum was made  before
         5 March 2007.  And, where for a variety of reasons, the  claim  had
         not been finally concluded (see paragraph 4 of Mohammed [2012] EWHC
         3091 (Admin)).  Included within the  class  were  cases  where  the
         asylum claim had been refused, but where the appellant had not  yet
         left the UK or whether (sic) further representations had been made.
          The Directorate responsible for such  cases  was  set  up  in  the
         summer of 2006.

         The reality was there was no decision outstanding  in  relation  to
         the appellant.  Any decision about his refugee status was  resolved
         after a  full  Tribunal  hearing  in  2002.   Furthermore,  it  was
         resolved against him.  In circumstances where he was not  found  to
         be a refugee.  In my judgment  the  letter  from  Jasvir  Jutla  of
         13/5/09 is disingenuous.  Because it does not refer to  any  asylum
         decision at all.  The application's position therefore in May  2009
         according to them, amounted to a completely fresh  claim  based  on
         Article 8."

 4. The respondent's refusal letter of 9 November 2012 states:

         "Furthermore, it was stated in the determination  [of  Judge  Reed]
         that proper consideration had not been given to your client's  case
         under the "legacy" programme as it had never been referred  to  the
         former Case Resolution Directorate (CRD)  nor  its  successor,  the
         Case Assurance and Audit Unit (CAAU).  This is not, however, unique
         to your client's case.  There are several casework units throughout
         the UK Border Agency and there is  no  policy  or  rules  that  are
         unique to the CRD or CAAU; they apply equally to all those casework
         units and therefore the same policy and  rules  will  be  followed.
         CRD was established as an additional casework unit to  those  units
         already in existence in order to help deal with  the  backlog  that
         had arisen.  As such, your client's case would not  be  transferred
         to CAAU and will continue to be considered at its current  location
         that has, prior to and throughout the existence of  CRD  and  CAAU,
         considered post-appeal representations from failed  asylum  seekers
         or other persons with no lawful basis of stay in the UK."




 5. Judge Reed, at [7] of his determination wrote:

         "Although the caseworker who dealt with this matter and  wrote  the
         refusal letter has referred to the legacy policy and paragraph 353B
         of the Immigration Rules, it is clear that the appellant's case had
         never been referred to either CRD or  the  CAAU.   It  should  have
         been.  There was nothing to indicate that any  proper  attempt  was
         made by the  decision  maker  to  deal  with  the  case  under  the
         respondent's legacy policy."

 6. The Senior Home Office Presenting Officer submitted that Judge Reed had
    been under a misapprehension, namely that the appellant's case  had  to
    be referred to a specialist unit (the CRD or its successor, CAAU) as  a
    legacy case.  As the refusal  letter  made  clear,  the  same  policies
    applied to all the casework  teams  operating  within  the  UK  Borders
    Agency not only to the CRD or CAAU.  She submitted that being  referred
    for consideration as a legacy case did  not  in  any  way  entitle  the
    appellant to any form of amnesty or an  immediate  grant  of  leave  to
    enter/remain.  The Senior Home Office Presenting  Officer  provided  me
    with a copy of  a  Home  Office  document  which  she  told  me  is  an
    introduction to the work of the CRD:

         "The Case Resolution Directorate (CRD) was set up to deal with case
         records outstanding before the new asylum  model  (NAM)  took  over
         assessing asylum claims.  These cases are called "the legacy".  CRD
         aims to conclude these cases by  July  2011.   Each  case  will  be
         considered on its merits and in line with existing policy and  law.
         If the case is unmeritorious the Agency will remove the individuals
         from the United Kingdom.

         The legacy is defined as all asylum cases that  are  incomplete  or
         not being processed by regional asylum team.  All new cases  lodged
         after March 2007 are processed by these teams as are some that were
         lodged between March 2006 and March 2007.  Further  representations
         which amount to a fresh claim from an individual, who  already  has
         an unresolved asylum claim before March 2007, will be considered by
         CRD.  This instruction applies only to cases which fall within this
         definition ..."

 7.  The  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  referred  me  to   the
    Administrative Court decision in Mohammed  [2012]  EWHC  3091  (Admin).
    Echoing the "introduction" document which I have quoted from above,  Mr
    Stephen Morris QC, sitting as a Deputy High Court Judge, noted at [4]:

         The Claimant's case is what is commonly referred to  as  a  "legacy
         case". A "legacy case" is an  unresolved  asylum  case,  where  the
         claim for asylum was made before 5 March 2007,  and  where,  for  a
         variety of reasons, the  claim  had  not  been  finally  concluded.
         Included within the class are cases where the asylum claim had been
         refused, but where the applicant had not yet left the UK  or  where
         further representations had been made. The CRD was set  up  in  the
         summer of 2006 specifically for the purpose of  dealing  with  such
         legacy cases. The Claimant's case fell to be dealt with by the CRD.
         The  CRD  closed  on  1  April  2011  and  outstanding  cases  were
         transferred to a new unit within the UK Border Agency ("UKBA"), the
         Case Assurance and Audit Unit ("CAAU").

 8. The court in Mohammed found the decision of the Secretary of  State  to
    have been  Wednesbury unreasonable.  It directed the Secretary of State
    to make a fresh decision on the representations made by the claimant in
    a letter.  The judge noted  that  the  former  paragraph  395C  of  the
    Immigration Rules had been deleted from those Rules and replaced  by  a
    new paragraph (353B).  The judge said this at [107]:

         The  question  arises  as   to   whether,   when   giving   further
         consideration to the Claimant's case following the quashing of  the
         decision in the  7  February  2011  letter,  the  Defendant  should
         consider the matter under the  present  rule,  or  under  the  rule
         existing at the time of the decision  which  I  have  found  to  be
         Wednesbury unreasonable. At the outset it struck me as  potentially
         unfair for the Claimant to be prejudiced by the more stringent rule
         in paragraph 353B  where,  had  the  Defendant  acted  properly  in
         February 2011, it is  possible,  at  least,  that  she  would  have
         benefited from the more  generous  provisions  of  paragraph  395C.
         Subsequent to the hearing, I  invited  and  have  received  further
         written submissions from the parties on this issue.

 9. At [120] et seq., the judge concluded:
         Applying the above principles, I reach the following conclusions.
         Following the quashing of the decision of 7 February  2011,  it  is
         now for the Defendant to reach a fresh decision exercising her  own
         discretion. It is not for this court to grant any  remedy  directly
         nor even to direct the Defendant to grant leave to  remain  in  the
         present case.
         However, the Defendant should make that decision in  the  light  of
         this judgment. The following factors apply to consideration of that
         decision.  First,  in  principle,  the  current  rules,   including
         paragraph  353B,   apply   and   are   not   displaced.   Secondly,
         nevertheless, the Defendant has a  discretion  not  to  remove  the
         Claimant under s.10 IAA 1999 and to grant some  form  of  leave  to
         remain. Thirdly, in exercising that discretion the Defendant should
         seek to correct any injustice that may have arisen as a result of a
         combination  of  the  unlawful  decision  in  February   2011   and
         subsequent "repeal" of paragraph 395C. Thus, in  my  judgment,  the
         Defendant should consider now whether, applying paragraph 395C  and
         the Ch. 53 EIG  guidance  as  it  was  in  February  2011  (and  in
         particular giving proper weight to the length  of  residence),  she
         would have granted the Claimant leave  to  remain  under  paragraph
         395C and if so, should then take  into  account  now  the  need  to
         correct any resulting injustice. In this way, the Defendant will be
         able both to apply current rules and to correct any injustice  that
         may have arisen from the decision which I have decided to quash

10. The Senior Home Office Presenting Officer submitted  that,  given  that
    the appellant was not entitled, as a "legacy" applicant, to any kind of
    amnesty, the most  that  he  could  expect  was  to  have  his  further
    representations  considered  under  the   (more   generous,   but   now
    "repealed") Rule 395C.  That is exactly what the author of the  refusal
    letter of 9 November 2012 has  done  at  [4]  et  seq.   Judge  T  R  P
    Hollingworth  had  not  subjected  the  respondent's   application   of
    paragraph 395C to his own analysis although he  should  have  done  so.
    However, it was submitted that this was not a  material  error  in  the
    light of the judge's analysis of the Article 8 ECHR issues.

11. Mr Mahmood, for the appellant, both in his skeleton argument and in his
    oral submissions did not accept that Judge Reed's direction (that a new
    immigration decision should be made  by  the  CRD  or  CAAU  under  the
    "legacy provisions") had ever been put into effect.  As a  consequence,
    Judge T R P Hollingworth's determination was vitiated and  there  would
    need to be a new hearing.

12. I am satisfied that [3] of the refusal letter of 9 November  2012  sets
    out accurately the position regarding legacy cases and the  involvement
    in those cases of the CRD and its successor, the CAAU.  What is said in
    the letter appears to be  backed  up  by  the  "introduction"  document
    produced by the respondent.  I consider that Judge Reed was not  helped
    by the Presenting Officer who herself appears to have been uncertain as
    to the nature and extent of the legacy policy.  This led Judge Reed  to
    remit the matter to  the  respondent  on  a  basis  which  was  not  in
    accordance with the respondent's  own  policies.   I  also  agree  with
    Senior Home Office  Presenting  Officer   who  sought  to  explain  the
    contents of the refusal letter  in  the  context  of  the  decision  in
    Mohammed.  In  Mohammed,  the  court  found  that  the  only  prejudice
    suffered by the claimant who had been entitled to be  considered  as  a
    "legacy" case was that he was that he should have his own circumstances
    considered under the (more generous)  provisions  of  the  now  deleted
    paragraph 395C.  Mr Mahmood, although he was unable to explain how  the
    legacy policy might have materially assisted his client,  could  do  no
    more than submit that Judge Hollingworth's determination should be  set
    aside and the matter reconsidered. In the light of what the Senior Home
    Office Presenting Officer  had  told  the  Tribunal  about  the  legacy
    system, I do not consider anything at all would be achieved by  such  a
    course of action.

13. It would have been helpful if the author of the letter  of  9  November
    2012 had made it clear at [4] why the provisions of paragraph 395C were
    considered rather than those of the new  paragraph  353B.   However,  I
    find it likely that the respondent was seeking to apply the  principles
    in Mohammed.

14. The refusal letter considers at length  part  (ii)  of  paragraph  395C
    concerning length of residence in the United Kingdom.   It  notes  that
    the appellant had been resident for almost eleven years but that he had
    delayed in making representations and that he had absconded and  failed
    to report to the UK Border Agency in accordance with the terms  of  his
    temporary admission.  It records that the appellant had "remained  here
    clandestinely for the majority of [his] time in the UK" and that he had
    been "untruthful  in  respect  of  [his]  personal  details".   It  was
    "considered that your client's length of residence is not  sufficiently
    compelling to justify allowing him to remain in the UK".

15. Judge T R P Hollingworth, although he did not  address  paragraph  395C
    directly, touched on those matters in his determination.  I  find  that
    the judge erred in law in not addressing paragraph 395C but, because  I
    find that the judge was aware of all the relevant facts  and  addressed
    many of these in his analysis of the Article 8 ECHR appeal, I  exercise
    my discretion not to set aside his determination.  I do so because I do
    not consider it likely that Judge T R  P  Hollingworth  (or  any  other
    judge of the First-tier Tribunal rehearing the case) would find that  a
    proper application of paragraph 395C to the facts should have  led  the
    Secretary of State to grant any form of leave to  this  appellant.  The
    observations of the respondent contained in the refusal letter are,  in
    my opinion, entirely valid.

16. A challenge is also made to the judge's analysis of Article 8 ECHR.   I
    agree that there are problems in the judge's analysis which is at times
    muddled.  The appellant has a relationship with his partner, Ms Renard.
     That fact was accepted by the judge [61].  However,  the  judge  noted
    that the relationship  was  "not  of  long  duration".   There  are  no
    children of the relationship nor  is  there  any  suggestion  that  the
    parties would marry.  At [64], the judge wrote:

         "It therefore follows that this is not a Chikwamba  or  Beoku-Betts
         case.  In that as at the date of the appeal, the  appellant  cannot
         show a  relationship  akin  to  marriage.   So  that  there  is  no
         guarantee that if he is required to return to India  and  makes  an
         out-of-country application to return based on his relationship with
         Ms Renard that it is bound to succeed.  It will be a  case  of  the
         Respondent Department (sic) to  consider  any  application  on  its
         merits."

17. That paragraph is problematic.  It is not clear what the judge means by
    "a relationship akin to marriage" or why individuals who are parties to
    a relationship (which the judge found to be the case) but who  are  not
    married should be deprived of the protection provided by Article 8.  In
    those circumstances, it is also not clear why the principles of  Beoku-
    Betts should not apply.

18. However, the judge somewhat redeemed his  analysis  in  the  subsequent
    paragraphs of his determination.  He makes the valid point at [67] that
    Ms Renard "has commenced any relationship in  the  knowledge  that  the
    appellant may have to be removed if his application to  remain  fails".
    While he does not cite the case, he is  here  referring  to  principles
    which were enunciated in KONSTATINOV  v.  THE  NETHERLANDS  -  16351/03
    [2007] ECHR 336 (26 April 2007):

         The Court further reiterates that, moreover,  Article  8  does  not
         entail a general obligation for  a  State  to  respect  immigrants'
         choice of the country of their residence and  to  authorise  family
         reunion in its territory. Nevertheless, in a  case  which  concerns
         family life as  well  as  immigration,  the  extent  of  a  State's
         obligations to admit to its territory relatives of persons residing
         there will vary according to the particular  circumstances  of  the
         persons involved and the general interest. Factors to be taken into
         account in this context are the extent  to  which  family  life  is
         effectively ruptured, the extent of the  ties  in  the  Contracting
         State, whether there are insurmountable obstacles in the way of the
         family living in the country of origin of one or more of  them  and
         whether there are factors of immigration control  (for  example,  a
         history of breaches of immigration law) or considerations of public
         order  weighing  in  favour   of   exclusion.   Another   important
         consideration will also be whether family life  was  created  at  a
         time when the persons involved  were  aware  that  the  immigration
         status of one of them was such that the persistence of that  family
         life within the host State would be precarious from the outset. The
         Court has previously held that where this is the case it is  likely
         only to be in the most exceptional circumstances that  the  removal
         of the non-national family member will constitute  a  violation  of
         Article 8 (see Rodrigues da Silva and Hoogkamer v. the Netherlands,
         no. 50435/99, � 39, ECHR 2006 ..., with further references).[48]

19. The judge noted that  the  relationship  had  been  formed  whilst  the
    appellant had no status in the United Kingdom as an immigrant and after
    he had absconded from the terms of his temporary  admission.   He  also
    wrote at [68]:

         "It is arguable if the appeal fails, the  partner  could  accompany
         the appellant to India if she wishes.  Whilst it  is  true  to  say
         that she has extended family in the  United  Kingdom  and  has,  of
         course, lived all  her  life  here,  that  is  precisely  what  the
         appellant herself did.  While such a position would  not  be  easy,
         nevertheless, the partner appears to  make  any  continuing  family
         life conditional upon it being confined to the United Kingdom."



    The Senior Home Office Presenting Officer submitted that  the  judge's
    finding that it would be reasonable for Ms  Renard  to  accompany  the
    appellant to India effectively disposed of the Article 8  appeal.   Mr
    Mahmood, on the other hand, submitted that the  principles  of  Sanade
    and  others  (British  children  -  Zambrano  -  Dereci)  [2012]  UKUT
    00048(IAC) were violated by the judge's  approach.  Ms  Renard,  as  a
    British?EU citizen could not reasonably required to leave  the  United
    Kingdom and reside outside the European Union.




20. Ms Renard is not the appellant's spouse but I am aware  that  what  the
    Tribunal says in Sanade may equally apply to non-spouses.  However, the
    judge has made the very valid points that (i) the  relationship  is  of
    reasonably  short  duration,  (ii)  the  parties   have   entered   the
    relationship in the  full  knowledge  of  the  appellant's  immigration
    history and his lack of status and (iii)  that  the  appellant  and  Ms
    Renard should  not  have  expected  or  continue  to  expect  that  her
    relationship with the appellant may only be pursued within  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Senior Home Office Presenting Officer submitted that  the
    dismissal of the Article 8 appeal was an outcome available to the judge
    and that his findings on the particular facts in this appeal  were  not
    perverse.   I  agree  with  that  submission.   I  acknowledge  that  a
    different Tribunal may have come to a different result but it was  open
    to the judge to dismiss the Article 8 appeal for the reasons  which  he
    has given.  Although his  application  of  the  jurisprudence  and  his
    statement of the principles governing the operation of Article 8 is, at
    times, inelegantly expressed, I am  satisfied  that  his  findings  are
    valid and I can find no reason to  interfere  with  the  outcome.   For
    these reasons, the appeal is dismissed.







DECISION

21. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 2 June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
