

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/27767/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                    |                  Decision and Reasons  |
|                                    |Promulgated                             |
|On 16 June 2015                     |                  On 23 June 2015       |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                         STEPHANIE MICHELLE DARROCH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McGrade, promulgated on 2 October  2014,  dismissing  her  appeal
    against a decision of the respondent, made for reasons explained  in  a
    letter dated 19 June 2014.

 2. On 3 June 2015 notice of the hearing fixed for 16 June was sent to  the
    appellant's solicitors and to her directly at her home address.

 3. The Upper Tribunal was advised by letter faxed on 15 June 2015 that the
    appellant's solicitors had withdrawn from acting on her behalf.  It  is
    to  be  presumed  that  they  also  advised  the  appellant  of   their
    withdrawal.

 4. At the time fixed for the hearing on 16 June,  the  appellant  did  not
    appear and was not represented, and nothing had been heard from her  or
    on her behalf (nor has anything been heard up to the  time  of  issuing
    this determination).  The hearing proceeded in her absence in terms  of
    Rule 38 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 5. The grounds on which permission was sought are not  in  substance  more
    than repetition of her case.

 6. Permission to appeal was refused by a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  but
    was granted by a Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  on  the  basis  of  an
    arguable error in relation  to  section  117B  of  the  2002  Act,  and
    arguable failure to give "sufficient weight to the principles  set  out
    in EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41".

 7. Mr Matthews submitted that any error in  failing  to  take  account  of
    section 117B could only have acted in favour of the appellant,  because
    explicit reference to the considerations set out paragraph  5A  of  the
    Act was more likely to be adverse than  beneficial  to  her  case.   He
    submitted that the grounds and the grant of permission, read  together,
    disclosed no legal error.  The grounds did not amount to any more  than
    repetition of the circumstances which the appellant put to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 8. I indicated that I was satisfied that  no  material  error  of  law  is
    disclosed.  Neither section 117B of the 2002 Act nor  the  case  of  EB
    contains any legal proposition which might change the  outcome  of  the
    appellant's case.

 9. The consequences of the respondent's decision no  doubt  weigh  heavily
    upon the appellant and her UK citizen husband.   The  Judge  recognised
    that.   He  found  that  her  departure  from  the   UK   would   cause
    "considerable inconvenience and a degree of hardship".   However,  such
    outcomes are inherent in the operation  of  immigration  control.   The
    Judge found that the consequences were not "so  serious  as  to  render
    removal disproportionate".  That conclusion discloses no error of  law.
    The determination shall stand.

            [pic]


            18 June 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




