
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/27652/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On  17 December 2015                 |On 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Ms MONICA ELAINE SHARP
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Mehtab Malhotra (Counsel), instructed by
                    Chipatiso Associates LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lingam,  promulgated  on  4  December
2015, which allowed the Appellant's appeal both under the Immigration  Rules
and on article 8 ECHR grounds.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 9 June 1968 and is a national of Jamaica.

4.    On 16 June  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for leave to  remain  in  the  UK  on  the  basis  of  her  long
residence in the UK

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Lingam  ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeal  against   the
Respondent's decision.

6.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 14 May 2015 Upper Tribunal  Judge
Warr gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "The case was heard before the judgements in Singh v Secretary of State
    [2015] EWCA Civ 74 and Islam v The Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2015] EWCA Civ 312.  What is said in paragraphs 56 to 57 of
    Singh & paragraphs 24 to 26 in  Islam  may  have  application  to  this
    appeal when the date of decision is 16 June 2014."

7.    In a decision promulgated on 13 October 2015 the  Upper  Tribunal  set
aside the Judge's decision finding that  it  contained  material  errors  of
law. The Upper Tribunal directed that the case should be considered  of  new
at a resumed hearing of the Upper Tribunal.

The Hearing

8.     I  have  the  documents  which  were  placed  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal, which are the respondent's PF 1 bundle and  two  bundles  for  the
appellant containing the items listed on the  indices  to  the  bundles.  In
addition the appellant now produces an independent psychiatric report  dated
20 November 2015 together with a report  from  Kings  Renal  Unit  dated  16
September 2015.

9.    The appellant gave evidence;  she  was  taken  to  the  terms  of  her
witness statement dated 28th of October  2014,  which  she  adopted  as  her
evidence in chief, before  answering  a  few  supplementary  questions.  The
appellant then answered questions in cross examination.  No  questions  were
asked in re-examination. Norman Chipatiso gave evidence for  the  appellant.
He adopted the terms of his witness statement dated 28 October 2014  as  his
evidence in chief before answering questions in cross  examination.  He  was
then briefly re-examined. I then heard parties agent submissions.

My Findings of fact

10.   The appellant entered the UK 19 July 1998 in possession of  a  student
visa valid until 17 January 1999. When  that  Visa  expired,  the  appellant
stayed in the UK & did not return to Jamaica. The respondent  heard  nothing
further from the appellant until, on 4 April 2011, she applied for leave  to
remain as an unmarried partner. The respondent refused that  application  on
1 July 2011. The respondent's refusal did not attract  a  right  of  appeal,
but the appellant made a number of  requests  for  reconsideration  each  of
which was refused.

11.   On 4 April 2014 the appellant was served with a  notice  of  liability
to removal and a notice under section 120 of the 2002 Act. On 29 April  2014
representations were submitted on the appellant's behalf  seeking  leave  to
remain. The respondent rejected those representations on 16  June  2014.  It
is against that decision that the respondent appeals.

12.   In 2001 the appellant met  Norman  Chipatiso,  a  British  citizen  of
Zimbabwean  origin.  They  have  been  in  a  relationship  since  then.  Mr
Chipatiso  has three adult children from a previous  relationship.  His  two
oldest children are independent. The youngest  child  is  19  and  is  still
dependent on him. Mr Chipatiso is employed as a chef. He is  a  hard-working
man with two jobs; he  works seven days a week.

13.   The appellant has two sisters. One sister lives in the UK,  her  other
sister lives in the  USA.  The  appellant's  mother  continues  to  live  in
Jamaica. The appellant's mother is no  longer  a  young  woman  and  she  is
assisted in the activities of daily living  by  the  appellant's  cousin  in
Jamaica. The appellant's mother plans to move to the USA to  live  with  the
appellant's sister.

14.   The appellant suffers from type I diabetes. In 2010 the appellant  was
diagnosed with renal failure, and in 2011 the appellant was  diagnosed  with
hypertension  hyperlipidaemia.  The  appellant  now  receives  haemodialysis
three times a week at the Bromley renal service. Because  of  her  diabetes,
the appellant suffers from neuropathy and  retinopathy.  The  appellant  now
has fistulas in her left arm to assist with haemodialysis.

15.   The  appellant's  partner  provides  the  appellant  with  significant
support. Until  recently  it  was  the  appellant's  partner  who  took  the
appellant to hospital for dialysis treatment.  Recently  the  appellant  has
traveled to and from hospital by ambulance. When the appellant is ill it  is
the appellant's partner who assists her the  ordinary  activities  of  daily
living.

Analysis

The Immigration Rules

16.   The respondent considered the  appellant's  application  in  terms  of
appendix FM and then moved on to consider the appellant's application  under
paragraph EX.1. The respondent rejected the appellant's application  arguing
that no reason  has  been  submitted  to  demonstrate  why  the  appellant's
partner could not accompany the appellant to Jamaica.

17.   In R (on the application of Agyarko) [2015] EWCA  Civ  440  considered
the phrase "insurmountable obstacles" as  used  in  paragraph  EX.1  of  the
Rules.  "... The phrase as used in the Rules is intended to  have  the  same
meaning as in the Strasbourg jurisprudence. It is clear  that  the  European
Court of Human Rights regards it as a formulation imposing a stringent  test
in respect of that factor, as is illustrated by Jeunesse v Netherlands  (see
para. [117]: there were no insurmountable obstacles to the  family  settling
in Suriname, even though the  applicant  and  her  family  would  experience
hardship if forced to do so). "

18.   At paragraph 26 of that decision "The mere facts that Mr Benette is  a
British citizen, has lived all his life in the United Kingdom and has a  job
here - and hence might find it difficult  and  might  be  reluctant  to  re-
locate to Ghana to continue their family life there - could  not  constitute
insurmountable obstacles to his doing so."

19.   What is argued for the appellant is that the  insurmountable  obstacle
to return is that she is dependent upon her partner, and her  partner  is  a
British citizen with employment and  family  commitments  in  the  UK  which
prevent him from going to Jamaica. The problem for  the  appellant  is  that
the case of Agyarko is  directly  against  her.  The  circumstances  of  the
appellant and her partner are similar to that of Mr Bennette in the case  of
Agyarko. It has already  been  judicially  determined  that  the  facts  and
circumstances  pled  by  the  appellant  do  not  amount  to  insurmountable
obstacles. The appellant cannot succeed under paragraph EX.1

20.   The  real  focus  in  this  case  (under  the  immigration  rules)  is
paragraph 276 ADE(vi). The purpose of the resumed hearing  was  specifically
to address the question of whether or not the appellant has  lost  all  ties
to Jamaica. In Bossadi (paragraph 276ADE;  suitability;  ties)  [2015]  UKUT
00042 (IAC) it was held that the requirement set  out  in  paragraph  276ADE
(vi) (in force from 9 July 2012 to 27 July 2014) to show that a  person  "is
aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the UK for  less  than  20
years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but has  no  ties  (including
social, cultural or family) with the country to which he would  have  to  go
if required to leave the UK", requires a rounded assessment as to whether  a
person's familial ties could result in support to him in the  event  of  his
return, an assessment taking into  account  both  subjective  and  objective
considerations and also consideration of what lies within the  choice  of  a
claimant to achieve.

21.   The evidence indicates that the appellant still has ties  to  Jamaica.
The appellant is a Jamaican national.  The  appellant's  mother  and  cousin
still live in Jamaica. The appellant spent the first 30 years  of  her  life
in Jamaica. Even though the appellant has now been in the UK for  17  years,
the harsh truth is that she spent almost 64% of  her  life  in  Jamaica  and
only  36%  of  her  life  in  the  UK.  The  appellant  cannot  fulfil   the
requirements of paragraph 276 ADE(vi) of the rules

ECHR Out-with the Rules.

Article 3

22.   In N v UK Application 26565/05 the Grand Chamber upheld  the  decision
of the House of Lords and said that in medical cases Article 3 only  applied
in very exceptional circumstances particularly as the suffering was not  the
result of an intentional act or omission of a State or non-State body.   The
European court of Human Rights said that Article 3 could not  be  relied  on
to address the disparity in medical care between Contracting States and  the
applicant's state of origin.  The  fact  that  the  person's  circumstances,
including his or her life expectancy, would  be  significantly  reduced  was
not sufficient in itself to give rise to a breach of Article 3.  Those  same
principles had  to  apply  in  relation  to  the  expulsion  of  any  person
afflicted with any serious, naturally occurring physical or  mental  illness
which might cause suffering pain or reduced  life  expectancy  and  required
specialist medical treatment that might not be readily  available  or  which
might only be available at considerable cost.  Notably the court  held  that
no separate issues arose under Article 8(2) in that case and so it  was  not
even necessary to consider the  Claimant's  submission  that  would  removal
would engage her right to respect for private life.

23.   In GS (Article 3 - health  -  exceptionality)  India  [2011]  UKUT  35
(IAC) the Indian claimant suffered from kidney failure and required  regular
dialysis. Dialysis would cost 10,000 to 12,000  rupees  per  week  in  India
which the claimant could not afford.   It was submitted that the  judge  had
erred in law by holding that the claimant's inability  to  access  available
treatment in  India  met  the  exceptional  test.  The  Tribunal  held  that
Article 3 does not impose a medical  care  obligation  on  the  contracting
state.  The clear result  of  allowing  that  claimant  to  remain  in  this
country would be to impose such an obligation on the United Kingdom.

24.   I take full account of the case of  GS  and  EO  and  GS  (India).  In
reality, a high threshold is set.  The  appellant  requires  dialysis  three
times each week. I do not minimise the impact  of  her  medical  conditions,
but  the  argument,  in  reality,  is  a  comparison  of  the   psychiatric,
psychological and support services available to the  appellant  in  Jamaica.
The evidence before me makes  it  quite  clear  that  the  quality  of  such
services in the UK is better than the services in Jamaica, but that  is  not
the test for an Article 3 consideration.

25.   In Nacic and Others v Sweden (Application no. 16567/10)  ECtHR  (Fifth
Section) 2012 it was held that aliens who were subject  to  expulsion  could
not, in principle, claim any entitlement to remain in  the  territory  of  a
Contracting State in order to continue to benefit from  medical,  social  or
other forms of assistance and services provided by the expelling State.  The
fact that an  applicant's  circumstances,  including  his  life  expectancy,
would  be  significantly  reduced  if  he  were  to  be  removed  from   the
Contracting State was not sufficient in itself to give rise to a  breach  of
Article 3. The decision to remove an alien who was suffering from a  serious
mental or physical illness  to  a  country  where  the  facilities  for  the
treatment  of  that  illness  were  inferior  to  those  available  in   the
Contracting State may raise an issue under Article 3, but  only  in  a  very
exceptional case, where the humanitarian grounds against  the  removal  were
compelling.  (As I have already indicated, in N v  UK  Application  26565/05
the European court of Human Rights said that Article 3 could not  be  relied
on to address the disparity in medical care between Contracting  States  and
the applicant's state of origin).

26.   Whilst I have sympathy for the Appellant, the  nature  and  extent  of
her conditions do not approach the  elevated  threshold  for  engagement  of
Article 3 of the 1950 Convention.

Article 8 ECHR

27.   In MM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2012]
EWCA Civ 279 the Court of Appeal noted that the courts had declined  to  say
that Article 8 could never by engaged by the health consequences of  removal
but they had never found such a breach and had not been  able  to  postulate
circumstances in which such a breach was likely to be established. The  only
cases where the absence of adequate medical  treatment  in  the  country  to
which a person is to be deported would be relevant to Article  8  are  those
where it is an additional factor to be weighed in  the  balance  with  other
factors that engaged Article 8 (paras 17 - 23). This approach  was  endorsed
by Laws LJ in GS (India) and Others 2015 EWCA Civ 40 (para 86).

28.   In Akhalu (health claim: ECHR Article 8) [2013] UKUT 00400  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) MM (Zimbabwe) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2012] EWCA Civ  279  does  not  establish  that  a  claimant  is
disqualified from accessing the protection of article 8 where an  aspect  of
her claim is a difficulty or inability to access health care in her  country
of nationality unless, possibly, her private or family life  has  a  bearing
upon her prognosis. The correct approach is not  to  leave  out  of  account
what is, by any view, a material consideration of central importance to  the
individual  concerned  but  to  recognise  that  the  countervailing  public
interest in removal will outweigh the consequences for  the  health  of  the
claimant because of a disparity of health care facilities in all but a  very
few rare cases; (ii) The  consequences  of  removal  for  the  health  of  a
claimant who would not be able to access equivalent  health  care  in  their
country of  nationality  as  was  available  in  this  country  are  plainly
relevant to the question of proportionality. But, when weighed  against  the
public interest in ensuring that the limited  resources  of  this  country's
health service are used to the best effect for  the  benefit  of  those  for
whom they are intended, those consequences  do  not  weigh  heavily  in  the
claimant's favour but speak cogently in support of the public  interests  in
removal.

29.   In R (on the application of Esther Ebun Oludoyi & Ors) v Secretary  of
State for the Home Department (Article 8  -  MM  (Lebanon)  and  Nagre)  IJR
[2014] UKUT 00539 (IAC) it was held that there is nothing  in  R  (Nagre)  v
SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin), Gulshan (Article  8  -  new  Rules  -  correct
approach) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) or Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate  aim)
[2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC) that  suggests  that  a  threshold  test  was  being
suggested as opposed to making it clear that there was a  need  to  look  at
the evidence to see if  there  was  anything  which  has  not  already  been
adequately considered in the context of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  which
could lead to a successful Article 8 claim. These authorities  must  not  be
read as seeking to qualify or fetter the assessment of Article  8.  This  is
consistent with para 128 of R (MM & Others) v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985,
that there is no utility in  imposing  a  further  intermediate  test  as  a
preliminary to a consideration of an Article 8  claim  beyond  the  relevant
criterion-based Rule. As is held in R (Ganesabalan) v SSHD [2014] EWHC  2712
(Admin), there is no prior threshold which dictates whether the exercise  of
discretion should be considered; rather the nature  of  the  assessment  and
the  reasoning  which   are   called   for   are   informed   by   threshold
considerations.

30.   In SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ  387  Lord  Justice  Richards
said at paragraph 33 "In our judgment, even though a test of  exceptionality
does not apply in every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it  is
accurate to say that the general  position  outside  the  sorts  of  special
contexts referred to above is that compelling circumstances  would  need  to
be identified to support a claim for grant of LTR outside the new  Rules  in
Appendix FM. In our view, that is a formulation which is not as strict as  a
test of exceptionality or a requirement of  "very  compelling  reasons"  (as
referred to in MF (Nigeria) in  the  context  of  the  Rules  applicable  to
foreign criminals), but  which  gives  appropriate  weight  to  the  focused
consideration  of  public  interest  factors  as  finds  expression  in  the
Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules in Appendix  FM.  It  also
reflects the formulation in Nagre at para. [29], which has been  tested  and
has survived scrutiny in this court: see, e.g.,  Haleemudeen  at  [44],  per
Beatson LJ".

31.   Section 117 of the 2002 Act is a factor to be taken  into  account  in
determining proportionality.  I  appreciate  that  as  the  public  interest
provisions are now contained in primary legislation they  override  existing
case law, Section 117A(2) requires me to have regard to  the  considerations
listed in Sections 117B and 117C.  I am conscious of my  statutory  duty  to
take these factors into account when coming to my conclusions.   I  am  also
aware that Section 117A(3) imposes upon  me  the  duty  of  carrying  out  a
balancing exercise. In so doing I remind myself of  the  guidance  contained
within Razgar.

32.   The respondent's decision places the appellant and her  partner  in  a
difficult position. Section 117  the  2002  Act  declares  that  immigration
control is in the public interest. The  respondent's  decision  is  made  to
preserve fair and effective immigration control. From the point of  view  of
the appellant and her partner they will have to decide  where  their  future
lies. The appellants partner will have to decide if he is able to leave  his
home, his work and his adult children and follow the appellant to Jamaica.

33.   In F & ANR v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  EWCA
Civ 76 one of the arguments was that the principle in  Zambrano  applied  so
far as the Appellant's British citizen husband was concerned.  It  was  held
that Zambrano was not applicable to that case as the Claimant's husband  was
an adult British citizen who would be both entitled and able to  remain  and
to reside in the UK without  his  wife.   He  was  not  dependent  upon  the
Claimant:  Zambrano distinguished.  It was also said that if  that  Claimant
were to be removed, her husband might follow her to Pakistan if he chose  to
do so, but his rights in the UK and in the  EU  were  not  impaired  by  her
removal (paras 10 - 11)

34.   In SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387 in  relation  to  one  of
the appeals, (Richards LJ) the sponsor had arrived in the  UK  aged  7  from
Somalia; he became a British citizen in 2010. He and the  Appellant  entered
the marriage  knowing,  in  effect,  she  would  have  to  comply  with  the
Immigration Rules.  Richards LJ said that the fact that he  would  lose  his
job in the United Kingdom if he had to leave to enjoy family life  elsewhere
and hence would prefer to establish family life  here  does  not  constitute
compelling circumstances to require the grant of  Leave  to  remain  outside
the Rules: as the authorities make clear, Article 8 does not create a  right
for married couples to choose to live in a Contracting State.

35.   Because of Section 17B of the  2002  I  must  give  little  weight  to
private life created when the appellant's presence in the UK is unlawful  or
precarious. For this appellant, private life was established long after  her
Visa expired. Immigration control is in the public interest. Both the  case-
law and section 117B of the 2002 Act  indicate  that  that  public  interest
outweighs the interests of the appellant and her partner. I  therefore  have
to find that, in so far as I am able to consider the appellant's  article  8
ECHR rights out-with the immigration rules, the respondent's decision  is  a
proportionate interference with both family and private life.

Decision

35.   The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

36.   The Appeal is dismissed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.


Signed      Date 23 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
