
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27115/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30th  March 2016                  |On 12th April 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                VINCENT ARUWA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms H Short, Counsel instructed by Wilson Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The respondent (hereinafter "the claimant") is a citizen of Nigeria  born
   on 13 August 1974. On 19 May 2014 he applied  for  a  residence  card  as
   confirmation of his right to reside in the UK as the unmarried partner of
   an EEA national. The appellant (hereinafter  "the  Secretary  of  State")
   refused the  application  on  the  basis  that  the  claimant  failed  to
   demonstrate he was in a durable relationship with an  EEA  national  such
   that  Regulation  8(5)  of  the  Immigration   (EEA)   Regulations   2006
   (hereinafter "the 2006 Regulations") was satisfied.

2. The claimant appealed and his appeal was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
   ("FtT") Judge Kamara, whose decision  was  promulgated  on  16  September
   2015. The FtT allowed the appeal, finding that the claimant and  his  EEA
   national sponsor were in a durable relationship such that the clamant met
   the definition of an extended family member under Regulation 8(5).

3. The grounds of appeal argue that the FtT erred  by  allowing  the  appeal
   outright when the issue of a residence card to an extended family  member
   is a matter of discretion for the Secretary of State.

4. Before me, Ms Short conceded that  the  FtT  made  an  error  of  law  by
   failing to recognise the Secretary of State's discretion.

Consideration

5. The 2006 Regulations distinguish  between  family  members  and  extended
   family members. Under Regulation 17(1) the Secretary of State must  issue
   a residence card to a family member of a qualified person.  In  contrast,
   under Regulation 17(4) the Secretary of State may issue a residence  card
   to an extended family member. As clarified in Ihemedu (OFM's  -  meaning)
   Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC):
         Regulation 17(4)  makes  the  issue  of  a  residence  card  to  an
         OFM/extended family  member  a  matter  of  discretion.  Where  the
         Secretary of State has not yet exercised that discretion  the  most
         an Immigration Judge is entitled to do is to allow  the  appeal  as
         being not in accordance with the law leaving the matter of  whether
         to exercise this discretion in the appellant's  favour  or  not  to
         the Secretary of State.

6. The FtT correctly found that the claimant was in a  durable  relationship
   with, and an extended family member of,  an  EEA  national.  However,  it
   erred by failing to recognise the Secretary of State's  discretion  under
   Regulation 17(4).

7. Accordingly, I set aside the FtT's  decision  and  allow  the  claimant's
   appeal on the basis that the Secretary of State's  decision  was  not  in
   accordance with the law and it remains for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
   exercise its discretion having regard to  the  FtT's  findings  of  fact,
   which have not been challenged.

Decision

8. The FtT's decision contains an error on a point of law and is set aside.

9. The decision I substitute is  to  allow  the  claimant's  appeal  to  the
   extent that his application for a residence card as  an  extended  family
   member remains outstanding before the  Secretary  of  State  to  exercise
   discretion under Regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations.
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 4 April 2016                  |

