
IAC-AH-LEM-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27755/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 February 2015                  |On 25 February 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Gesiya CHIYANGWA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, Gesiya Chiyangwa, was born on 29 December 1959 and is a
    citizen of Zimbabwe.  I shall hereafter refer to the respondent as  the
    appellant and to the appellant as  the  respondent  (as  they  appeared
    respectively before the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. The appellant had appealed against the decision of the respondent dated
    17 June 2014 to refuse her leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  on
    human rights grounds in a decision of the same date under Section 10 of
    the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 for her removal to  Zimbabwe.   The
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Birkby)  in  a  determination  dated   29
    September 2014, allowed  the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds.   The
    Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.



 3. The grounds of appeal complain that the judge failed to have regard  to
    relevant jurisprudence in allowing  the  appeal,  in  particular  Nagre
    [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and Nasim [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC).

 4. The judge found that the  appellant  was  not  at  real  risk  of  ill-
    treatment in Zimbabwe but did conclude that her removal to that country
    would be disproportionate and allowed the  appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.  I do not agree with the judge who granted permission in  this
    case that the judge's findings are incomplete or inadequate.  The judge
    made detailed findings and, in my opinion, assessed the  evidence  very
    carefully as is evidenced in his determination at [59 - 64];

         All in all, I found the Appellant to be a credible witness in  what
         she stated.  Her evidence was not exaggerated or embellished,  save
         possibly with regard to what she said  about  the  availability  of
         drugs in Zimbabwe.  The Appellant  readily  conceded  matters  that
         were put to her  by  Mr  Archibald.   She  accepted  that  she  had
         remained in the UK illegally.  She accepted that  on  one  occasion
         she has used fraud in order to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.   I
         find as proved on the balance of probability the facts as stated to
         me by the Appellant.  I believe  that  she  has  looked  after  her
         daughter and sons when she has been in the United Kingdom, although
         it was stated by the Respondent that the daughter's leave to remain
         in the United Kingdom was based to an extent on the assertion  that
         the daughter at  the  time  lived  with  her  father  and  not  the
         Appellant.  The Appellant currently lives with one son and his wife
         and two children.  I am satisfied that the  sons  provide  for  the
         Appellant's financial and accommodation needs and I also find  that
         her emotional needs are inextricably linked  to  her  children  and
         grandchildren in the  United  Kingdom.   She  has  no  children  in
         Zimbabwe although she has siblings and her parents.  She  has  been
         in the United Kingdom now for in the order of fourteen years.   Her
         life in my judgment in the United Kingdom has been a life with  her
         children, and in particular her daughter.  She is  quite  proud  of
         her daughter who is now at  university  in  Leeds.  I  accept  that
         contact between Deirdre  and  the  Appellant  is  frequent  and  is
         regularly maintained.  If the Appellant were to return to  Zimbabwe
         she would lose the majority of the current direct contact that  she
         has with all her children.  All her children  are  in  my  judgment
         emotionally to a great extent dependent on the Appellant as is  the
         Appellant emotionally dependent on them.

         I have carefully considered the Appellant's appeal with  regard  to
         Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention, and in particular Section
         117B  of  the  Immigration  Act  2014  concerning  public  interest
         considerations.  It is clear that the maintenance of  an  effective
         immigration control is in the public interest.  It  is  furthermore
         in the public interest and  in  particular  the  interests  of  the
         economic wellbeing of the United Kingdom that persons such  as  the
         Appellant are able to speak  English,  which  the  Appellant  does.
         Section 117B(3) requires me to take into account that  persons  who
         seek to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
         independent because they are not a burden on  tax  payers  and  are
         better  able  to  integrate  into  society.   With  regard  to  the
         Appellant before me she is to an extent a burden to the tax  payers
         in that she avails herself  of  medical  treatment  in  the  United
         Kingdom and if she were to stay  in  the  United  Kingdom  would  I
         believe find it difficult  obtaining  sufficient  work  to  finance
         herself, although I do find that she  is  a  determined  woman  and
         would certainly make every effort to  find  employment  to  finance
         herself.  I also  believe  that  her  children  would  support  her
         financially in the United Kingdom so that she  would  not  have  to
         rely on state financial benefits.  Section 117B(4) requires  me  to
         give little weight  to  the  Appellant's  private  life  which  the
         Appellant has established when in the United Kingdom unlawfully and
         it is clear that the Appellant has been in the United  Kingdom  for
         most of the time in the UK unlawfully.  I am  required  also  under
         Section 117B(5) to give little weight to  the  Appellant's  private
         life when her  immigration  status  was  precarious.   Pursuant  to
         Section 117B(6) I do not find that the Appellant has a genuine  and
         subsisting relationship with a qualifying child,  as  none  of  her
         children are under the age of 18.  She also has no partner  in  the
         United Kingdom.

         Looking at the totality and considering the evidence  cumulatively,
         I have concluded that the  Appellant's  situation  is  exceptional,
         compelling and compassionate.  I have considered the dicta  in  the
         case of Gulshan and am satisfied that  it  is  appropriate  that  I
         consider the Appellant's appeal in the light of Article 8 generally
         and in the light of the dicta in the case of Razgar.

         I am satisfied that Article 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention  is
         engaged in the Appellant's  case.   The  Appellant  has  enjoyed  a
         private and family life in the United Kingdom  for  fourteen  years
         and has brought up children in the United  Kingdom.   Her  children
         are still in the United Kingdom.   Her  grandchildren  are  in  the
         United Kingdom.  They all  have  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  They all intend to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
         Appellant has enjoyed a private life in the United Kingdom although
         her private life and indeed her family life has been enjoyed whilst
         the Appellant did not have leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom.
         In my judgment the decisions of the Respondent interfere  with  the
         Appellant's right to respect  for  her  private  and  family  life.
         However, they are both lawful and  pursue  the  legitimate  aim  of
         immigration control.

         Nevertheless, I find that the decisions are  not  proportionate  in
         all the circumstances.  The  balancing  exercise  requires  careful
         consideration.  The  Appellant's  medical  conditions  are  serious
         although I am not satisfied that treatment would not  be  available
         in Zimbabwe.  Nevertheless she is receiving hospital  treatment  in
         the United Kingdom and if she were to remain in the United  Kingdom
         that would be an expense which would have to be borne  by  the  tax
         payer.  Whilst  it  is  the  case  that  the  Appellant  has  lived
         illegally in the United Kingdom, that the Appellant  arguably  will
         not be able to support herself in the United Kingdom without either
         the help of her children, which I believe would be forthcoming, and
         that the Appellant has used deception in order  to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom previously, in my judgment there are  factors  which
         outweigh such considerations and other considerations which do  not
         favour the Appellant in the balancing exercise..  In  essence  they
         are as follows.  The Appellant has lived in the United Kingdom  for
         fourteen years.  She has worked in the  United  Kingdom.   She  has
         been a mother in the United Kingdom.  I believe that she is the one
         and not the father who brought up her daughter, Deirdre,  prior  to
         the time that Deirdre started university.  Admittedly Deirdre is no
         longer a child and is over the age of 18.  However, there is in  my
         judgment clearly a strong bond between the  two  and  an  emotional
         dependency between the two.  The Appellant lives with her  son  and
         two grandchildren.  If she were to return to Zimbabwe  her  contact
         with her daughter, sons  and  grandchildren  would  in  essence  be
         severely curtailed.  Her sons are both in employment.  Her daughter
         is going to university and I believe that it would  not  just  have
         been her education but her upbringing by her mother which  had  led
         to her being able to go to university.  All in all, I believe  that
         the decisions of the Respondent are in  this  particular  case  not
         reasonable.

         This appeal is therefore allowed  pursuant  to  Article  8  of  the
         European Convention on Human Rights and fundamental  freedoms  (the
         Human Rights Convention).

 5. Mr Diwnycz, for the respondent, submitted that the judge had failed  to
    have regard to the new statutory provisions concerning the  application
    of Article 8 in particular, Section 117B(6).  However, the  judge  does
    refer to that subsection at [60] (see above).  I  consider  that  Judge
    Birkby was very well aware that the circumstances of the appellant  had
    to be exceptional for Article 8 to be engaged and the  appeal  allowed.
    He has given the "careful  consideration"  to  his  analysis  which  he
    stated he would give at [63].  It was open, on the particular facts, to
    the judge to identify certain aspects of the appellant's  circumstances
    as exceptional.  Further, I do not  find  that  it  can  be  said  that
    allowing this appeal  on  these  facts  was  either  unconscionable  or
    perverse; it was an outcome which was  available  to  the  judge.   The
    question, therefore, is whether the judge has justified the outcome  by
    a proper analysis of the evidence and by sustainable reasoning.  I find
    that he has done  so.   I  consider  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  should
    hesitate before interfering with the analysis of a judge  who  has  had
    the opportunity of hearing  oral  evidence  and  who  appears,  in  his
    written judgment, to have addressed not only those factors in favour of
    the appellant but also those factors  favouring  her  removal.  Another
    Tribunal may have reached a different  outcome  but  that  is  not  the
    point. In the circumstances, I dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 24 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
