

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                    Appeal
Number: IA/27526/2015
                                                               IA/27528/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 June 2017                       |On 13 June 2017                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               RAKESH SHRESTHA
                               SUNITA SHRESTHA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Jarvis Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: No appearance.


                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of
        First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain promulgated on 11 January 2017 in
        which the Judge allowed the appeal of Mr  Rakesh  Shrestha  against
        the refusal of his application for leave  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
        Student Migrant and that of Mrs Sunita Shreshta, his dependent,  in
        line.



Background


     2. Mr Rakesh Shrestha entered the United Kingdom on 4 September  2009,
        lawfully, with a Visa, the validity of which  was  extended  to  23
        January 2012. His wife entered the United Kingdom on 8 January 2010
        with a visa extended  in  line  with  that  granted  to  Mr  Rakesh
        Shrestha. The application leading  to  the  impugned  decision  was
        refused on 21 July 2015.
     3. The Reasons for Refusal decision relating  to  Mr  Rakesh  Shrestha
        refused the application by reference to paragraph  322(1A)  of  the
        Immigration Rules on the basis it was said deception had been  used
        in connection with the application. This is an ETS  case  in  which
        the decision-maker  found  that  an  ETS  certificate  provided  in
        support of an  application  as  evidence  of  an  English  language
        ability was not genuine.
     4. The Reasons for Refusal letter relating to Mrs Shrestha  noted  her
        status as a dependent partner of Mr Rakesh Shrestha and that as his
        application for leave as a Tier 4  Student  had  been  refused  she
        could not show she was the spouse or civil  partner,  unmarried  or
        same-sex partner of a person who had valid leave to enter or remain
        as a Points-based System Migrant as required by the Rules,  leading
        to a refusal by reference to paragraph 319C(b) of the Rules.
     5. The Judge noted that neither Mr Rakesh Shrestha nor his  wife  were
        represented  at  the  hearing,  either  in  person  or  through   a
        representative, although notice of the  hearing  had  been  validly
        served.
     6. The Judge was clearly dissatisfied with the evidence relied upon by
        the Secretary of State claiming at [11] that the finding  that  the
        sponsor's assessment of the appellant's linguistic skills could not
        be relied upon because the TOIEC certificate on which reliance  was
        placed was false was "nothing short  of  perverse",  on  the  basis
        there was no obligation upon the sponsor to carry out  verification
        of the certificate. In relation  to  the  certificate  itself,  the
        Judge  noted  the  existence  of  an  evidential  burden  upon  the
        Secretary of State to support an allegation of deception by the use
        of a proxy to take  an  English  language  test  and  that  if  the
        evidential burden is discharged it will be  for  the  appellant  to
        provide an explanation in rebuttal.
     7. When considering the Secretary States  evidence,  the  Judge  noted
        that the usual generic witness statements had been provided and  at
        [15] "the only evidence that appears to have been specific  to  the
        appellant is a spreadsheet which claims that on 19 October 2011 the
        appellant took a test at Elizabeth College  which  certificate  has
        been invalidated. He also took a test at the Westlink College on 18
        November 2011 that has also been invalidated". The  Judge  asserted
        there was no evidence to link  the  appellant  to  the  certificate
        numbers on the spreadsheet, that it remained  unexplained  why  the
        appellant would have taken two tests a month apart at two different
        centres, and why the result  taken  at  Elizabeth  College  is  not
        referred to in the reasons for refusal letter. The Judge  concluded
        at [17] that the evidential burden had not been discharged.



Error of law


     8. Although the above is not the specific subject of the Secretary  of
        States application for permission to appeal, had  it  been,  it  is
        clear that the finding of the Judge is infected by  arguable  legal
        error in that it is settled law that  the  generic  evidence  taken
        together  with  the  ETS  spreadsheet  providing  specific  details
        relating to the appellant is  sufficient  to  allow  the  Secretary
        State to discharge the evidential burden of the use of deception in
        the taking of an English language test.
     9. It is not relevant that the Secretary of State relied on one  false
        certificate rather than two as only one false document is  required
        to engage paragraph 322(1A) of the Rules.
    10. In relation to the spreadsheet to be found in the Secretary  States
        bundle before the Judge, at  page  E1,  this  refers  to  both  the
        Elizabeth College and Westlink College and the two test dates  both
        of which have been stated by ETS to be invalid. Information  within
        the  spreadsheet  linking  Mr  Rakesh  Shrestha  with  those  tests
        includes his name, a certificate number ending in 68 in relation to
        the test taken at Westlink College which is  also  the  certificate
        referred to in the refusal letter as having  been  provided  by  Mr
        Rakesh Shrestha in support of the application for leave as a Tier 4
        Migrant as evidence of his English language ability.
    11. The spreadsheet also contains a date of birth. There was at page D1
        of the Secretary of States bundle a further  document  headed  "ETS
        Invalid Test Analysis" containing not  only  Mr  Rakesh  Shrestha's
        Home Office reference, name, nationality, date of birth, gender and
        details  of  the  certificate  in  question  referred  to  in   the
        spreadsheet, but also Mr Rakesh Shrestha's  passport  number  which
        corresponds with the photocopy passport available in the  evidence.
        There was, arguably, more than sufficient material  made  available
        to link Mr Rakesh Shrestha to  the  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
        Secretary of State, meaning the primary finding  should  have  been
        that the evidential burden had been discharged.
    12. As neither Mr Rakesh Shrestha nor his wife  attended  the  hearing,
        meaning no evidence to rebut this finding or to provide an innocent
        explanation was provided, the only available decision  should  have
        been that the appeal is dismissed.
    13. As stated, however, this was not the thrust of the application  for
        permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  which  was  on  a  more
        fundamental point, that the Judge had no jurisdiction to  determine
        the appeal as the appeal had been abandoned.
    14. The application was  made  on  23  January  2012  even  though  not
        determined until 21 July 2015. As it was made in 2012 the Secretary
        of State submits it is an appeal governed by the provisions of  the
        Nationality, Immigration Asylum Act  2002  before  amended  by  the
        Immigration Act 2014. As such section  104  of  the  2002  Act  has
        effect.
    15. An appeal is pending under section 104 during the period  beginning
        when it is instituted and ending when  it  is  finally  determined,
        withdrawn or abandoned. Section 104 (4) provides  that  "an  appeal
        under section 82 (1) brought by a person whilst he is in the United
        Kingdom shall be treated  as  abandoned  if  the  appellant  leaves
        United Kingdom".
    16. It is said by the Secretary State that Mr Rakesh Shrestha  and  his
        wife left the United Kingdom in November 2015 after  the  date  the
        appeal was lodged but before it was determined. A screen print from
        the Secretary of State's case management system notes communication
        between Mr Rakesh Shrestha and Secretary of State  in  relation  to
        flight details in relation to the family return had been  obtained,
        a removal screen completed, and both  sets  of  passports  sent  to
        Heathrow by courier to enable Mr Rakesh Shrestha and  his  wife  to
        leave the UK. It is noted paperwork  regarding  family  return  was
        emailed to Mr Rakesh Shrestha acknowledged receipt.
    17. Although it does not appear this fact was brought to the  attention
        of the Judge, the effect of the statutory  provision  is  that  the
        First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to consider the appeal.  In
        Virk v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA  Civ
        652 it was held that although the Secretary of State had failed  to
        raise before the First-tier Tribunal the issue of  that  Tribunal's
        jurisdiction to entertain  a  family's  application  for  leave  to
        remain, the Upper Tribunal was entitled  to  dismiss  the  family's
        subsequent appeal against the First-tier Tribunal's decision on the
        basis that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  not  had  jurisdiction,
        notwithstanding that the point had not been raised below.
    18. I find the Judge erred in law and set the  decision  aside  in  its
        entirety on the basis of the statutory abandonment.
    19.  The  Upper  Tribunal  cannot  remake  the  decision  for  want  of
        jurisdiction.

Decision

    20. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  The  Upper  Tribunal  cannot
        remake the decision for want of jurisdiction.


   Anonymity.


    21. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 12 June 2017
