
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27084/2011

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 13th  August 2013                          |on 14th August 2013          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                         JOHN THOMAS GOUADJEU YARRO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms G Patel instructed by Miles Hutchinson and Lithgow.

For the Respondent: Mrs Rackstraw - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                        DETERMINATION AND DIRECTIONS


   On 11th February 2013 Upper Tribunal Judge Coker found that a panel of
   the First-tier Tribunal, composed of Judge Trotter and Miss Singer, had
   erred in law in dismissing the appellant's appeal for the reasons set out
   in her error of law finding of the same date.


   Judge Coker then gave directions, which included that the record of
   evidence set out in the determination was to stand save where the record
   is in dispute and that the parties were to notify the other of any
   challenge to that record within 14 days of receipt of the directions. It
   was further directed that if agreement to correct the record could not be
   reached between the parties the Tribunal was to be notified of the
   dispute within 28 days to enable it to give consideration to future
   directions. Judge Coker also directed that there will be no oral evidence
   and that none of the findings in paragraphs 31 to 46 of the determination
   were to stand.


   The appeal was listed for a case management review hearing before Upper
   Tribunal Judge Freeman sitting in North Shields on 5th July 2013. He
   issued further directions including a direction that the matter be listed
   on the basis of Judge Coker's ruling of 13th February, that any objection
   to the accuracy of the summary of the oral evidence of the First-tier
   decision at paragraphs 10 to 20 with details of reasons was to be filed,
   and that any application for permission to call further oral evidence
   with accompanying witness statement, or any application to put in further
   documentary evidence, was to occur within 21 days. Paragraph 3 of Judge
   Freeman's directions states "no record of First-tier proceedings will be
   ordered, unless it appears from any objections received under direction
   2a that it is required to resolve some significant issue between the
   parties.


   The appellant's representatives filed written submissions challenging the
   accuracy of the record of the evidence given to the First tier Tribunal
   and requested a copy of the First-tier Tribunal's record of proceedings.
   This was considered by the Principal Resident Judge at Field House who
   referred the matter to Judge Freemen. He 'flagged' what he considered to
   be the record of proceedings that was to be disclosed. This was sent to
   the appellant's representatives who promptly responded indicating that
   the wrong record of proceedings has been sent, as what was sent was in
   fact Judge Coker's record of proceedings for the 13th February hearing.


   A request for an adjournment was received from the appellant's solicitors
   dated 12th August 2013 stating that in light of the fact the correct
   record of proceedings is not available they request the matter be
   adjourned as it will not be possible to proceed without this information.


   At the outset of today's hearing the advocates were advised that no First-
   tier Tribunal record of proceedings has been retained on the file. This
   led to a number of options being available though it has to be borne in
   mind that the original directions provided for submissions only on the
   basis of an agreed schedule of the evidence being made available to
   assist the Upper Tribunal.


   After further discussion and consultation it was agreed that the only
   practical solution, as insufficient time had been provided for the giving
   of oral evidence which was not anticipated today as a result previous
   directions given and the representatives were unable to agree a schedule
   of the evidence upon which submissions will be based, was for the appeal
   to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. Accordingly the following
   directions shall apply to the re-hearing of this appeal:








                                 DIRECTIONS


     1. The appeal shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at
        North Shields to be heard by a panel of that Tribunal on Wednesday
        9th October 2013 at 10 AM. Time estimate four hours (Appellant +
        three witnesses).


     2. The appellant and respondent must file a consolidated indexed and
        paginated bundle containing all the written evidence they intend to
        rely upon, including witness statements that shall stand as the
        evidence in chief of the maker, no later than 4 PM 2nd October
        2013. Any party wishing to file evidence after this time must make
        a written application to the First-tier Tribunal seeking permission
        to file such evidence out of time, which must contain a detailed
        explanation for why they have failed to comply with this direction.
         It shall be at the discretion of the First-tier Tribunal as to
        whether additional evidence is admitted late.


     3. No interpreter is required.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 13th August 2013












