
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)          Appeal Number: IA/27923/2013
            IA/27926/2013
            IA/27929/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 30 April 2014       On 4 August 2014


                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                               1) Jahan Akter
                            2) Abul Kalam Manjur
                           3) Mohaiman Bin Manjur
                           (Anonymity directions not made)
                                                              Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellants:    Ms. M. Ahammed of RMS Immigration Ltd.
For the Respondent:    Ms. A. Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. These are linked appeals against the decisions of First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Gibbs promulgated on 17 March 2014, dismissing  the  Appellants'
      appeals against the Respondent's  decisions  dated  19  June  2013  to
      refuse to vary leave to remain in the UK and to remove the  Appellants
      pursuant to section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act
      2006.


Background

   2. The Appellants are nationals of Bangladesh born on 1 December 1978,  2
      January 1973, and 10 January 2004 respectively. The  Second  Appellant
      is the husband of the First Appellant; the Third  Appellant  is  their
      son. The First and Second Appellants have a further child, born in the
      UK on 1 February 2012, who is also subject to immigration control, but
      has  not  been  included  in  the  relevant  applications  and  appeal
      proceedings.


   3. The respective relevant immigration histories are a matter  of  record
      on file, and that  of  the  First  Appellant  is  also  summarised  at
      paragraph 1 of the determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  It
      is unnecessary to rehearse the histories here; suffice to say that the
      Second and Third Appellants have derived  their  immigration  statuses
      from the First Appellant and to that extent for  immigration  purposes
      have been, and continue to be, treated  as  dependants  of  the  First
      Appellant.  Otherwise,  I  make  reference  to  the  histories  as  is
      incidental for the purposes of this determination.


   4. Most recently on  30  April  2013  the  First  Appellant  applied  for
      variation of leave to remain as a Tier 4  (General)  Student  Migrant:
      the Second and Third Appellants were included in  the  application  as
      dependants. The Respondent refused the First  Appellant's  application
      for reasons set out in a combined Notice of Immigration  Decision  and
      'reasons for refusal letter' ('RFRL') dated 19 June 2013, in which the
      section 47 removal decision was  also  communicated.  The  Second  and
      Third Appellants were refused in line with the First Appellant.


   5. The Appellants appealed to the IAC. The First Appellant did not attend
      the appeal hearing because of illness: see further below.  The  Second
      Appellant was in attendance, as was the Appellants' representative. An
      application for an adjournment was refused by the Judge. Evidence  was
      then heard from the Second Appellant, followed by submissions from the
      representatives for  the  parties.  The  appeals  were  dismissed  for
      reasons set out  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  determination
      promulgated on 17 March 2014.


   6. The Appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal which
      was granted on 2 April 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew. Judge
      Andrew considered that Judge Gibbs should have adjourned  the  appeal;
      further that it was arguable that the best interests of  the  children
      had not been taken into account when  considering  Article  8  of  the
      ECHR.


   7. The Respondent has filed a  Rule  24  response  dated  14  April  2014
      resisting the challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's determination.


Consideration

   8. Judge Gibbs has set out  at  paragraph  7  the  factual  circumstances
      relied upon in support of the application for an adjournment, and  has
      also noted the existence of supporting evidence. Judge Gibbs  did  not
      doubt  these  circumstances  or  the  supporting   evidence   in   her
      determination: the adjournment request was not refused because it  was
      considered that the Appellant had not produced evidence to  show  that
      she was unfit to attend  the  hearing;  the  adjournment  was  refused
      because the Judge did not consider the First Appellant's presence  was
      necessary in circumstances where there was a  witness  statement  from
      the  First  Appellant  and  the  Second  Appellant  was  present:  see
      paragraph 8.


   9. In this context Ms Everett acknowledged that whilst  the  issue  under
      the Rules was readily amenable to resolution without the  presence  of
      the First Appellant (see further below), any  exploration  of  matters
      relevant to Article 8 might have benefited from the  presence  of  the
      First Appellant given the somewhat perfunctory nature of  her  witness
      statement - though it was not accepted that this would have ultimately
      made any difference to the outcome in light of recent  case  law  (see
      further below).


  10. Whilst this is a fairly made observation in respect of  the  potential
      additional detail that the First Appellant might have been able to add
      in oral evidence to the contents  of  her  witness  statement,  in  my
      judgement on the facts of this particular case this does  not  form  a
      sound basis for an adjournment - and far less is it indicative  of  an
      error of law in not granting an adjournment. It was incumbent upon the
      Appellants to set out their cases in their witness  statements  to  an
      extent that they should not have required amplification by calling any
      further evidence: Directions in standard form  were  issued  with  the
      Notices of Hearing on 16 October 2013 requiring the Appellants to file
      "Witness statements of the evidence to be called at the  hearing".  In
      any event, as observed by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  the  Second
      Appellant was present; I observe that there was no basis for the Judge
      to consider that he was not in  every  respect  able  to  furnish  any
      further information in relation to any factual  issues  pertaining  to
      the Appellants' cases under either the Rules or Article 8.


  11. Indeed in this latter regard I invited Ms Ahammed to identify what, if
      anything, it had not been possible to advance before the Judge because
      of the absence of the First Appellant. In  response  she  said  little
      more than that it was unfair and that the First Appellant  could  have
      addressed the impact on her older child if he were to have to quit the
      UK in the middle of a school year. I am unable to see  that  this  was
      something the Second Appellant would have been  unable  to  articulate
      before the First-tier Tribunal. There was in any event  no  indication
      of any factual  assertion  or  any  relevant  supporting  evidence  in
      respect of  the  children  in  the  witness  statement  of  the  First
      Appellant, the statutory declaration of the Second Appellant, and  the
      Appellants' Bundle filed before the First-tier Tribunal. Be that as it
      may, paragraph 10 of  the  determination  indicates  that  the  Second
      Appellant gave evidence in respect of such matters - and so there  was
      no denial of opportunity to advance the Appellants' cases. I am unable
      to see that there is any basis to impugn the Judge for concluding that
      the Appellants' cases could be advanced in all material  respects  via
      the Second Appellant and the representative.


  12. I note that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did  not  expressly  address
      herself either to rule 19 (hearing appeal in absence of  a  party)  or
      rule 21  (adjournment  of  appeals)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. However,  it  is  to  be  noted  that
      whilst rule 19(1) did not apply because there was good reason for  the
      First Appellant's absence, rule 19(2) empowers the Tribunal to hear an
      appeal in the absence of a party if satisfied in respect of one  of  a
      number of conditions, which include: the presence of a  representative
      (19(2)(a)); and the party being unable to attend  because  of  illness
      (19(2)(d)). Further in this context given that  subparagraph  19(2)(f)
      relates to consent, in my judgement this is indicative that where  the
      circumstances  in  (a)-(e)  apply  consent  of  the  party  is  not  a
      prerequisite to hearing the appeal in his or her absence.


  13. As regards rule 21, in my judgement  the  Judge  must  have  had  this
      familiar provision in mind when stating at paragraph 8 that  she  "did
      not consider that the adjournment was necessary or that it was in  the
      interests of justice": compare with the wording of rule 21(2)  -  "The
      Tribunal must not adjourn a hearing of an appeal on the application of
      a party, unless satisfied that the appeal cannot otherwise  be  justly
      determined".


  14. It follows, in my judgement, that the Tribunal had power to  hear  the
      appeal in the absence of the First Appellant; further  in  considering
      whether or not to adjourn rather than proceeding in the absence of the
      Appellant the Judge  had  due  regard  for  the  relevant  principles.
      Moreover, in my judgement the Judge adequately explained  her  reasons
      for proceeding: essentially that the presence of the  First  Appellant
      was not required in that any matters relevant to  the  factual  issues
      could be advanced through the evidence of the  Second  Appellant,  and
      otherwise dealt with in submissions from  the  representative.  In  as
      much as the First Appellant's witness statement  was  unsigned  it  is
      clear that the Judge was prepared to accept it at face value.


  15. In such circumstances, whilst at first blush it seemed to me that  the
      significance of the First Appellant being present at  the  hearing  of
      her own appeal was of such fundamental importance that it demanded  an
      adjournment (as indeed seems to have been the view of Judge Andrew  in
      granting permission  to  appeal),  closer  scrutiny  of  the  relevant
      procedure rules indicates that presence of  a  party  is  not  such  a
      paramount consideration. This  is  in  keeping  with  the  'overriding
      objective' set out in paragraph 4 of the Procedure Rules.


  16. On the facts of this particular case the Judge considered the relevant
      circumstance and reached a conclusion - that was essentially a  matter
      for her evaluation - that an adjournment for  the  attendance  of  the
      First Appellant was not necessary justly to determine the  appeal.  In
      doing so the Judge did not exceed her jurisdiction and did not  offend
      against any principle of law. Nor can it be said that her decision  to
      proceed was one that no reasonable judge could have made.


  17. Accordingly in all of the circumstances I conclude that there  was  no
      error of law in the Judge deciding to proceed with the appeal  in  the
      absence of the First Appellant.


  18. I turn then to a consideration of the  challenge  to  the  substantive
      decisions.


  19. As regards the decision in respect of the First  Appellant  under  the
      Immigration  Rules,  I  have  little  hesitation  in   rejecting   the
      challenge.  The  First  Appellant's  application  was   refused   with
      reference to paragraph 245ZX(d) and paragraphs 1A and 11 of Appendix C
      of the Rules essentially on the basis that the  requisite  maintenance
      funds were not held by the First  Appellant,  but  were  held  by  her
      husband: the Rules require that such funds be held in the name of  the
      applicant or a legal guardian. The  Appellants  have  maintained  both
      before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  before  me  that   the   First
      Appellant's husband, the Second Appellant, is her legal guardian.  The
      First-tier Tribunal Judge dealt with this at paragraphs 16 and 17.  In
      my judgement she did so adequately and made no error of law: a husband
      is not the legal guardian of his wife unless appointed to  be  so  for
      some reason of incapacity. There is no merit in the argument  repeated
      before me that a husband is in some way culturally a 'legal  guardian'
      of his wife in Bangladesh.


  20. The appropriate dismissal of the First Appellant's  appeal  under  the
      Rules necessarily means that the Judge did not err in also  dismissing
      the appeals of the other Appellants under the Rules.


  21. The Judge dealt relatively briefly with Article 8:  see  determination
      at paragraph 20. This  brevity,  necessarily,  must  be  seen  in  the
      context of the case as advanced in support of Article  8  -  which  is
      adverted to in the determination by reference to the oral testimony of
      the Second Appellant (paragraphs 10 and 11) and  the  representative's
      submissions  (paragraph  13),  wherein  reliance  was  placed  on  the
      Skeleton Argument, with emphasis on the fact that the First  Appellant
      was in the middle of her studies, and that her son was in  the  middle
      of his. Otherwise, as  noted  above,  the  First  Appellant's  witness
      statement and the Second Appellant's statutory  declaration,  and  the
      materials  in  the  Appellants'   Bundle   contained   no   meaningful
      information about the private life  of  any  of  the  Appellants,  and
      provided no supporting materials in respect of the  education  of  the
      Third Appellant.


  22. The Skeleton Argument (which is actually headed 'Grounds of Appeal' in
      the Appellants' First-tier Tribunal bundle)  places  reliance  in  the
      context of Article 8 on "The [First] Appellant ha[ving] established  a
      private life through her studies, employment and through her residence
      here with her family. The Appellant has been in the UK for a number of
      years" (paragraph 11). The case of CDS Brazil [2010]  UKUT  305  (IAC)
      was also pleaded (paragraph 19) - and indeed has been pleaded  in  the
      grounds in support of the application for permission  to  appeal;  see
      also paragraph 21 of the 'Skeleton Argument'.  It  may  be  seen  that
      nothing more than a  generalised  reference  was  made  to  the  Third
      Appellant's studies; no specific evidence was  filed  in  relation  to
      such studies; far less was any evidence  filed  as  to  the  potential
      impact of his returning to Bangladesh in the company  of  his  parents
      either generally or in  the  context  of  resuming  schooling  in  the
      country of his nationality.


  23. The reality is that beyond the fact of the First Appellant's  studies,
      the fact that the Third Appellant was also in education in the UK, and
      the period of time spent in the UK, nothing else was  advanced  before
      the First-tier Tribunal in respect of Article 8 private life. (So  far
      as family life was concerned there has at no point been any suggestion
      of any wider family connections with the UK, and at all material times
      it has been envisaged that the family would be required to quit, or be
      removed from, the UK as a family unit. Reliance has not been placed on
      the 'family' life aspect of Article 8.)


  24. As regards the pursuit of studies, and the reliance upon  CDS  Brazil,
      the substance of the Appellants' cases must be seen in the context  of
      the decisions in Patel and others [2013] UKSC 72  (see  in  particular
      per Lord Carnwath at paragraph 57) and Nasim and  others  (Article  8)
      [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC).


  25. As regards the length of time spent in the UK,  it  is  not  suggested
      that this in any way approaches the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE
      of the Rules, which is the relevant rule in respect of private life.


  26. As regards any issue of 'best interests' of the children, this must be
      seen in the context of there being no threat to the integrity  of  the
      family unit by reason of the Respondent's decisions and the absence of
      any evidence before the First-tier Tribunal of any detriment to either
      child if returning to Bangladesh with their parents.


  27. In all such circumstances, in my judgement  the  Judge's  approach  at
      paragraph 20 in reliance upon Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct
      approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) and Nagre [2013] EWHC  720  (Admin),
      was entirely in keeping with those decisions. Whilst it might  now  be
      said that pursuant to MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ 985 (see  paragraph
      128) some doubt is cast  on  the  'intermediate  step'  identified  in
      Nagre, such doubt is immaterial where the Judge herein concluded -  as
      she was entitled to do on the evidence and entirely sustainably - that
      there was no arguably good grounds  for  granting  leave  outside  the
      Rules. Inevitably this encompassed a conclusion  that  there  were  no
      'exceptional' or 'compelling circumstances' to warrant departing  from
      the express wording of the Rules on human rights grounds.


  28. Accordingly I find nothing of material substance in the  challenge  to
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination in respect of Article 8.


  29. For completeness I make the following observations.

(i) During the hearing I reserved my determination in respect  of  error  of
      law, but nonetheless invited the parties' submissions as  to  how  the
      appeal should be remade in the event that it was necessary to  do  so.
      In this context I permitted Ms Ahammed to call evidence from the First
      Appellant. I have made a note  of  that  evidence  in  the  record  of
      proceedings, which is on file. The First Appellant 'put some flesh  on
      the bones' of the case as advanced  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
      but, in my judgement, did not advance anything of  specific  substance
      such as to render the Judge's  decision  to  proceed  in  her  absence
      materially significant, or otherwise to suggest that the Judge reached
      a decision on human rights that was not in all  material  respects  an
      appropriate decision.

(ii) Lest it became necessary to re-make the  decision  I  also  invited  Ms
      Everett's submissions as to any policy justification  in  requiring  a
      student to hold funds either personally or through a legal guardian  -
      and thereby the exclusion of reliance upon funds held by a third party
      including a spouse. Ms Everett was not able to  assist  directly,  but
      indicated that she would make endeavour to make inquiries and  forward
      any information to the Tribunal (with the caveat that  the  Appellants
      would then be permitted to make a suitable response). In the event, if
      anything was forwarded it has not reached me.  I  suspect  the  answer
      lies in ensuring that the funds are directly under the control  of  an
      applicant (or their legal guardian who has a legal obligation  towards
      them) to avoid the possibly detrimental impact of  unforeseen  changes
      of circumstances - or changes of mind - of third parties. Be  that  as
      it may, in the event nothing turns on this in  circumstances  where  I
      have upheld the determination of the First-tier Tribunal.





Decisions

  30. The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  not  contain  any
      material errors of law and accordingly stand.


  31. The appeals are dismissed.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     31 July 2014

