

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: IA 27555-12

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   06.08.2013|
|on    06.08.2013                              |sent out:     06.08.2013     |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                               Yaminu SULEMANA
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:

For the appellant:  Mr Edward Akohene, solicitor, Afrifa & Partners
For the respondent: Mr Tony Melvin


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge  Robert  Crawford),  sitting  without  a  hearing  (the
    appellant ) at Manchester on 30 May, to  an EEA appeal by a citizen  of
    Ghana, born 2 July 1973. The appellant had gone through a form of proxy
    marriage with the sponsor, a citizen  of  the  Netherlands;  the  judge
    accepted that was valid, but did not accept  that  the  sponsor  was  a
    'qualified person', on the basis of the employment she said she now had
    with Heathfields Security Limited. He noted that she had produced  only
    a single pay-slip for this, dated 21 December 2012.



 2. Unfortunately, as the judge who  permission in the First-tier  Tribunal
    pointed out, three further pay-slips had been sent in on 17 April.  The
    overlooking of such evidence, sent in without any  covering  letter  or
    further information, is an inevitable risk for appellant's in  choosing
    the cheaper paper appeal option. However, it did amount to an error  of
    law which requires the decision to be re-made: the only issue  will  be
    whether the sponsor remains a 'qualified person' on the  basis  of  her
    employment at the date of disposal. On article 8, the judge was clearly
    right about the appellant and the sponsor being able to go and live  in
    the Netherlands, if they wished.

 3. I say 'disposal', because the appeal cannot be listed for an  oral  re-
    hearing, unless the appellant pays the fee for that.  So  that  he  can
    exercise his right to choose about that without any undue difficulty, I
    am directing the papers to be sent to Taylor House, his  local  hearing
    centre. If the appellant wants an oral  hearing,  then  his  solicitors
    must apply there, with the fee, by 3 September; otherwise there will be
    a fresh disposal on the papers.

Appeal : first-tier decision set aside
Decision to be re-made by First-tier Tribunal, not Judge Crawford

                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



