
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
IA/27554/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at:  Field House               |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 15 March 2019                    |       On: 19 March 2019             |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                                    [r a]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Chakmakjian, instructed by Mondair Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of Kenya born on [~] 1979. She has been  granted
permission to  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
dismissing her appeal against the refusal of  her  Article  8  human  rights
claim.

The appellant claims to have entered the UK in November  2001,  having  been
trafficked here, and to have been forced into prostitution, leading  to  her
pregnancy in 2004. She claims that her  child  was  taken  off  her  by  the
traffickers and that she managed to escape in 2011. In August 2012 she  made
an Article 8 human rights claim which was refused in November 2013  with  no
right of appeal. In January 2014  she  made  an  application  for  leave  to
remain outside the immigration rules which was refused in February 2014.

On 28 April 2014 the appellant made a further  human  rights  claim  on  the
basis of her private life in the UK. On 3 July 2014 she  was  referred  into
the National Referral Mechanism for  the  Competent  Authority  to  consider
whether she was a victim of trafficking.  On  14  July  2015  the  Competent
Authority concluded that the appellant was not a victim of  trafficking  and
on 17 July 2015 her human rights claim was refused.

The appellant's appeal against that decision was  dismissed  by  the  First-
tier Tribunal on 14 December 2016. The First-tier Tribunal  did  not  accept
that the appellant had been trafficked to the UK but  considered  that  even
if she had, she was not at risk on return to  Kenya.  It  was  not  accepted
that her mental health was such as to meet the threshold to  engage  Article
3. The Tribunal accepted that the appellant was in a genuine and  subsisting
relationship with her partner but did not  accept  that  her  removal  would
breach her Article 8 rights on that or any other basis.

The First-tier Tribunal's decision was challenged  only  in  regard  to  the
findings on Article 8 and the Upper Tribunal set aside the decision on  that
basis and remitted the case for  the  decision  to  re-made  in  respect  of
Article 8 only.

The appeal then came before First-tier  Tribunal  Murray  on  21  May  2018.
Judge Murray accepted that the appellant's  relationship  with  her  partner
was a genuine one and that family life was established for the  purposes  of
Article 8, although she concluded that the requirements of  the  immigration
rules in Appendix FM could not be met. When considering paragraph  276ADE(1)
and "very significant obstacles to integration", the  judge  considered  the
appellant's claim to be  a  victim  of  trafficking.  The  judge  found  the
appellant's account to be largely consistent and  to  be  supported  by  the
medical evidence. However she considered that, whilst she may  have  reached
a  different  conclusion  to  the  Competent  Authority   in   relation   to
trafficking,  she  did  not  consider  the  conclusion  to  be  perverse  or
irrational and she was therefore unable to go behind  the  findings  of  the
Competent Authority, following the guidance in The Secretary  of  State  for
the Home Department v MS (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 594. On that  basis  the
judge was unable to accept that the appellant had been in the UK during  the
period of 2001 to 2011 and her Article 8 assessment was therefore  based  on
residence from 2012. The judge  concluded  that  there  would  not  be  very
significant obstacles to integration in Kenya for the purposes of  paragraph
276ADE(1) and that there were  no  exceptional  circumstances  justifying  a
grant of leave  outside  the  immigration  rules.  She  concluded  that  the
appellant's removal would not be  disproportionate  and  she  dismissed  the
appeal on Article 8 grounds.

Permission was sought by the appellant and granted by  the  Upper  Tribunal,
primarily  with  respect  to  the  trafficking  decision's  requirement  for
corroboration.

At the hearing before me Mr Walker  agreed  that  the  judge  had  erred  by
restricting herself to the findings of the Competent Authority  rather  than
assessing the evidence as a whole, further to the more  recent  decision  of
ES (s82 NIA 2002, Negative NRM) [2018] UKUT 335. Mr Walker agreed that  that
was a material error of law as it  infected  the  judge's  findings  on  the
appellant's length of residence in the UK  and  her  overall  assessment  of
Article 8. He also agreed with Mr Chakmakjian's submission  that  the  judge
had erred by failing to recognise that the appellant's partner had,  by  the
time of the hearing, become a British citizen.

Both parties agreed that the appropriate course  was  for  the  case  to  be
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo and for findings  to
be made on  the  trafficking  issue  on  the  basis  of  all  the  evidence,
including but not restricted to the decision  of  the  Competent  Authority,
following the guidance in ES.  Mr Chakmakjian  also  raised  a  new  matter,
namely the birth of a British child to the appellant and her partner,  which
Mr Walker agreed could be relied  upon  in  the  appeal  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

Accordingly, and in light of Mr Walker's concession, I set aside the  First-
tier Tribunal's decision and agreed to remit the  matter  for  consideration
afresh.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with  afresh,  pursuant  to
section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Statement 7.2(b), before any judge aside from Judge Murray.


Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated:  15 March 2019
