
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27773/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 29 January 2015                            |On 26 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB


                                   Between

                            MACKAY KIMANI KANGERE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The  appellant,  a  citizen  of  Kenya,  appealed  against  a  decision
    refusing him further leave as a Tier 4 Student.  The refusal was  dated
    12 June 2014.  The appellant attended a hearing  in  Birmingham  on  20
    October 2014, at which he was not legally represented.  His appeal  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pacey, in a decision promulgated
    on 24 October 2014.

2.    Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    McWilliam, on 9 December 2014.  The appeal was concerned with the issue
    of whether the appellant had had the required level of funds for  a  28
    day period leading up to the application.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted on the basis that the appellant had had the required level  for
    a 28 day period that fell within 31 days of the  date  of  application,
    even if he had not had the required level for the 28 day period leading
    up to the closing date of the bank statement.

3.   There was no appearance on the day of the hearing by  11.40am,  and  no
    message was received.  The  appellant  had  not  provided  a  telephone
    number, and he was not represented.  From  the  file  I  saw  that  the
    notice of hearing had been sent by first class post to the appellant at
    the only known address on 29 December  2014.   Prior  to  that,  on  18
    December 2014, directions had been sent.   I  was  therefore  satisfied
    that there had  been  good  service.   As  a  result,  there  being  no
    explanation for absence, I decided to proceed with the hearing  in  the
    appellant's absence.

4.   Mr Avery, for the respondent, made brief submissions.

5.   The point at issue was a narrow  one.   The  judge  had  dismissed  the
    appeal on the basis that the bank account had fallen below the required
    level for a period in April 2014.  The point  on  which  permission  to
    appeal was granted is one that  is  clarified  in  Appendix  C  to  the
    Immigration Rules.  At Appendix C 1A(h) the end dates of the 90 day  or
    28 day periods are defined, and they are  taken  as  the  date  of  the
    closing balance on the most recent bank statement.  This is exactly  as
    was understood by the judge at paragraph 7 of her decision.

6.   The judge did not err in law in her approach to the Immigration  Rules.
     There is no basis for her decision to be disturbed.

7.   I note from the appellant's  grounds  that  his  studies  were  due  to
    finish in early January 2015.  It may  be  that  this  means  that  the
    matter is now no longer relevant in any event.

8.   There is no need for anonymity, and no question of any fee award.

Notice of Decision

9.   The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.  No error of law  having
    been  shown  the  judge's  decision  dismissing  the   appeal   remains
    undisturbed.



Signed   Date 25 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb
