
IAC-AH-SAR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27035/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd March 2015                             |On 10th March 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                              MR IMRAN SHABBIR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Doyle promulgated on 1st December 2014, following  a  hearing  at
    Richmond on 19th  November  2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal under Article 8 of the Human Rights  Act,  of  Imran
    Shabbir.  The Respondent subsequently applied  for,  and  was  granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was  born  on  17th
    July 1989.  He appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated
    16th June 2014, to refuse to vary his leave to remain in the  UK.   The
    Appellant's claim is that he is a party to a genuine marriage  who  has
    not fallen foul of paragraph E-LTRP2.2 of Appendix FM.  He  is  married
    to a British citizen present in the UK.  But more importantly, there is
    a 10 year old child of his partner, from a former marriage, who is also
    a British citizen, and this the Secretary of  State  has  not  properly
    taken into account.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge observed how the Appellant had entered  the  UK  on  5th  May
    2010, with entry clearance as a student, which leave expired after  2nd
    August 2011.  The Appellant  appealed.   He  was  successful.   Further
    leave was given.  However, the college that the Appellant was  studying
    at had its Sponsor licence revoked.  The Appellant was  on  30th  April
    2014 found working in a mortgage brokers' business in  Ilford  contrary
    to the conditions of his leave.  The Appellant  then  married  Duangjai
    Batten, who was born in Thailand, and was a  Thai  citizen,  until  she
    became naturalised as a British citizen on 13th June 2006.

 4. The marriage endures and they live  together.   The  Sponsor,  Duangjai
    Batten, was previously married to a  British  citizen.   That  marriage
    ended in divorce on 20th May 2013.  There is a  10  year  old  daughter
    from the earlier marriage.  She is a British  citizen.   The  Sponsor's
    daughter lives, however, with the Sponsor's  ex-husband.   The  Sponsor
    has contact with her daughter.  So does the Appellant himself.

 5. The judge had no doubt that the Appellant had worked in the UK contrary
    to the conditions of his leave.  The Appellant could not succeed  under
    paragraph E-LTRP2.2.   The  Appellant  was  in  the  UK  in  breach  of
    immigration laws (see  paragraph  12(c)).   However,  the  Respondent's
    refusal letter did not give any consideration to the  position  of  the
    Sponsor's child.  The judge observed that,

         "The clear evidence in this case is that the Sponsor has a 10  year
         old daughter who lives with the Sponsor's ex-husband.   It  is  not
         disputed that the  Sponsor  (and  the  Appellant)  has  residential
         contact with the Sponsor's  10  year  old  daughter  each  weekend"
         (paragraph 15(d)).

    Thereafter, the judge gave consideration to a spate of leading  Article
    8 decisions.  The judge then concluded that

         "The welfare of the Sponsor and  her  child  forms  clear  arguable
         grounds for consideration of this  case  outwith  the  Rules.   The
         rights of the Appellant, the Sponsor, and her  child  in  terms  of
         Article  8  would  be  breached  by  the  implementation   of   the
         Respondent's decision" (paragraph 15(j)).

    The appeal was allowed.



Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to explain  what
    factors weighed in his mind when deciding that there  were  exceptional
    circumstances to allowing the appeal under Article 8.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on 23rd January 2015.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 2nd March 2015, Mr Whitwell,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, relied upon the grounds of
    application.  He submitted that the judge failed to make it clear where
    the exceptional circumstances lay in this case.  The judge also did not
    consider EX.1.  There was no reason why the Appellant could not live in
    Pakistan with his sponsoring wife.  Furthermore, there was no reference
    to the Section 117B considerations in the 2014 Act.   No  consideration
    was  given  to  such  factors  as  linguistic  ability  and   financial
    independence.  Therefore, there was nothing exceptional in  this  case.
    The appeal ought not to have been allowed under Article 8.

 9. For his part, Mr Pipe relied upon the case of Oludoyi [2014] UKUT  539,
    which makes it clear that there is no threshold test to be  established
    before the application of Article  8.   Furthermore,  the  case  of  MF
    (Nigeria) makes it clear that the phrase "exceptional circumstances" is
    to be applied in the context of deportation of foreign criminals in the
    context of the weighing of competing factors.  Otherwise, if there  are
    arguably good grounds for granting leave outside the Immigration Rules,
    then the question of the  five  step  approach  in  Razgar  has  to  be
    considered.  The case of Ganesabalan [2014] EWHC 2712  makes  it  clear
    that Appendix FM and Rule 276ADE are not a "complete code"  so  far  as
    Article 8 compatibility is concerned.

10. There is  a  duty  to  consider  exercising  discretion  and  this  was
    recognised by the authorities.  That  discretion  variously  refers  to
    "exceptional  circumstances"  or  "unjustifiable  hardship",   and   it
    involves the Secretary of State applying the proportionality test,  and
    asking whether  removal  would  be  disproportionate  by  reference  to
    Article 8.  This is what  the  judge  had  done  here.   He  had  given
    consideration to the fact that the daughter of the Sponsor is a British
    citizen and that the Sponsor has residential contact  with  her.   This
    was of direct relevance  to  Section  55  BCIA  2009.   Therefore,  the
    decision was a correct decision and one that was open to the judge.

11. In reply, Mr Whitwell  submitted  that  the  Appellant's  position  was
    precarious and he was always amenable to removal.

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.

13. The judge has applied an approach  that  is  entirely  consistent  with
    Ganesabalan and Oludoyi, and I accept that the submissions made  by  Mr
    Pipe are dispositive of this appeal.   The  fact  was  that  there  was
    always a 10 year old child in this appeal.  No consideration was  given
    to the position of the 10 year old British citizen child in the refusal
    letter.  The judge so held (see paragraph 15(b)).

14. Furthermore, no consideration was given in the refusal  letter  to  the
    fact that both the Sponsor and the Appellant  had  residential  contact
    with the Sponsor's 10 year old daughter  (see  paragraph  15(b)).   The
    judge did so.  The judge also then in that context applied the  leading
    authorities on Article 8.  He was entitled to  conclude  (at  paragraph
    15(j)) that the welfare of the  Sponsor  and  her  child  "forms  clear
    arguable grounds for consideration of this case outwith the Rules".

15. The case of Ganesabalan makes it clear  that  the  use  of  the  phrase
    "exceptional circumstances" has to be interpreted in the context of the
    Secretary of State applying the proportionality test and asking whether
    removal would be disproportionate by reference to Article 8  standards.



16. The judge held that this clearly could not be the case because  the  10
    year old citizen child was resident in the UK and the Sponsor  and  the
    Appellant had residential contact with that child.  To  ask  either  to
    leave would be to rupture the family relationship with the child.   The
    conclusion reached by the judge was entirely open to him.

Notice of Decision

17. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

18. No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        10th March 2015

