

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/27715/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 26th January 2016                     |                On 4th February 2016 |
|                                         |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                                    M K P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Makol, counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant pursues this appeal against the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge James ("the FTTJ") to  refuse  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision to refuse to vary his leave to remain in  the  UK
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant and to remove him from the UK  by
    way of directions under s47 of the Immigration Asylum  and  Nationality
    Act 2006.

 2. No anonymity direction was made in the  First-tier  Tribunal.  However,
    given the erroneous  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    appellant had used deception in  support  of  his  application,  he  is
    entitled to anonymity in these proceedings.

 3. The appellant is a  citizen  of  India.   The  respondent  refused  his
    application on the ground that his CAS had been withdrawn, he  did  not
    have evidence of passing an  approved  English  language  test  to  the
    required standard and he had submitted an  education  certificate  from
    the University of Bedfordshire which had been confirmed as false by the
    issuing authority. The respondent considered  that  the  appellant  had
    used deception in his application and his application was refused under
    paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by FTTJ Grant-Hutchison on 19 November
    2015 in the following terms:

         "It is an arguable error of law that the Judge misdirected  himself
         to the burden of proof and what evidence was to  be  considered  in
         finding  that  the  Appellant  had  committed  deception   in   his
         application by making findings  on  the  B2  certificate  when  the
         Document Verification Report refers to Bedford University documents
         which arguably could have affected the withdrawal of the CAS."

 5. Thus the appeal has come before me.

 6. For the appellant, Mr Makol submitted that  the  Document  Verification
    Report (DVR) makes it clear that the appellant had been  a  student  at
    the University of Bedfordshire. Thus the DVR did not support a  finding
    of deception. Furthermore, contrary to paragraph 6 of the decision, the
    burden of proving deception was with the respondent.

 7. Ms Brocklesby-Weller, for the respondent, accepted  that  the  decision
    contained an error of law with regard to the finding of deception.  She
    submitted however that the findings with regard to  the  withdrawal  of
    the CAS were well made.  Irrespective of how the  withdrawal  occurred,
    the appellant was unable to demonstrate he fulfilled  the  criteria  in
    the points based scheme such that he  was  entitled  to  the  award  of
    points for a CAS. She relied on the guidance in both Kaur v SSHD [2105]
    EWCA Civ 13 and EK (Ivory Coast) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  1517.  In  the
    latter case, a CAS had been issued and withdrawn  before  the  date  of
    decision, as a result of an administrative  error  (paragraph  18)  and
    this was accepted  by  the  respondent.  Thus  the  circumstances  were
    similar to this appeal where the appellant states that the CAS had been
    assigned to another student. Whether as a result of the appellant's own
    actions or not, an administrative error had caused the  withdrawal.  Ms
    Brocklesby-Weller relied on paragraph 25 in particular  to  the  effect
    that the respondent was not  responsible  for  the  general  unfairness
    which the appellant  had  suffered  as  a  result  of  the  educational
    establishment's error; the  respondent's  decision  was  not  unlawful.
    There was no obligation on the respondent to adjourn  her  decision  to
    give the applicant notice of the problem and an opportunity to  rectify
    it. This approach was endorsed in  Kaur  (paragraph  41).   The  points
    based scheme is prescriptive (paragraph 41).

Discussion and Findings

 8. Ms Brocklesby-Weller's concession on the issue  of  deception  is  well
    made: the FTTJ applied the wrong burden of proof  and  his  finding  of
    deception is perverse and irrational given the content of the DVR which
    appends an email from the University of Bedfordshire to the effect that
    the appellant did study there and that the  transcript  is  "a  genuine
    interim transcript and the Challenge Certificate is genuine  as  well."
    This statement is  qualified  by  the  author  who  goes  on  to  state
    "However, it is not the student's award certificate. He  did  not  pass
    his final project so he will only qualify for a PG Cert."  Thus the two
    documents to which the author refers are genuine. There is no  evidence
    to suggest that the appellant submitted either of  these  documents  as
    being other than what they are. Particularly there is  no  evidence  to
    suggest that they were submitted as if they were award certificates.

 9. I do not agree with the grounds of appeal that the FTTJ  has  conflated
    the issue of deception in  relation  not  only  to  the  University  of
    Bedfordshire documents but also the English language certificate. It is
    clear from the decision that he FTTJ  did  not  find  the  appellant  a
    credible witness and did not accept his explanation that he had sent an
    English language certificate to the respondent prior  to  the  date  of
    decision. He gave his reasons for this.  This  was  a  finding  he  was
    entitled to reach on the basis of the oral  evidence  which  he  cites.
    There is no error of law in relation to this finding.

10. However, for the reasons given, the FTTJ's finding that  the  appellant
    had  used  deception  in  submitting  a  false   document   is   wholly
    unsustainable on the evidence, not least because the burden of  proving
    deception is with the respondent (not the appellant, as stated  by  the
    FTTJ).

11. I turn to the CAS Certificate. It is not in dispute that  it  had  been
    withdrawn by the date of decision.  The appellant says in  his  witness
    statement that this was due to the college being unable to complete the
    procedure with regard to his CAS. The appellant was told by the college
    that there was nothing they could do to rectify  this;  they  had  used
    their CAS allocation. Thus  the  appellant's  evidence  is  by  way  of
    mitigation.  The FTTJ found as a fact that the appellant, as  a  result
    of injury, he was unable to complete his course.  The  FTTJ  found,  on
    this evidence, that although the CAS was said to have  been  withdrawn,
    the appellant would not have qualified for a CAS in  any  event  having
    failed to  achieve  the  necessary  qualifications  for  entry  on  the
    proposed course. This finding is sustainable on the evidence.  Even  if
    that were not the case, the  appellant  would  not  have  been  awarded
    points, his CAS having been withdrawn. There was no obligation  on  the
    respondent to notify him of that or  to  give  him  an  opportunity  to
    rectify the situation (EK (Ivory Coast) and Kaur).

12. Both parties agreed that if I found a material error of law,  I  should
    remake the decision.  Given my findings above, the decision to  dismiss
    the appeal against the refusal under  paragraph  322(1A)  must  be  set
    aside. However, the decision to dismiss the  appeal  under  the  Points
    Based Scheme contains no error of law and stands.   The  appellant  has
    not appealed against the  dismissal  of  his  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds and that also stands.

Decision

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of a material error on a point of law.

14. The FTTJ's decision to dismiss the appeal under  paragraph  322(1A)  of
    the Immigration Rules is set aside. I remake the decision and allow  it
    under that paragraph.

15. The FTTJ's decision to dismiss the appeal under the Points Based Scheme
    in the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds does  not  contain
    an error of law and I do not set it aside. It is confirmed.

Signed           A M Black                         Date 1 February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black



Direction  Regarding  Anonymity  -  Rule  14,  Tribunal   Procedure   (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed      A M Black                        Date        1 February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black



