
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/27680/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |  Decision and Reasons          |
|                                         |Promulgated                     |
|On 13 April 2018                         |  On 11 May 2018                |
|                                             |                            |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                    M W N
                         (Anonymity DIRECTion made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Ahmed (of A1 Immigration Services)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and relevant history

1.    The appellant ("claimant") is a national of Pakistan.  He was born  on
6 March 1990.  On 20 May 2011 he entered the United Kingdom ("UK") having
obtained entry clearance as a tier 4 student migrant and was given leave  to
enter until 30 May 2012.  In order to successfully make an application  to
extend that leave as a student it was necessary for him to demonstrate  that
he possessed an ability to impart and receive  information  in  the  English
language to a specified standard.  It was also necessary  for  that  ability
to be evidenced in a prescribed manner.  He says that,  for  those  reasons,
he  went  to  the  Premier  Language  Training  Centre  in  London  on  both
15 May 2012 and 18 May 2012 in order to be examined as to his ability to
read, write, listen to the spoken word and speak in  the  English  language.
The Secretary of State does not,  however,  accept  that  he  did  that  and
believes that the tests, on both days, were taken  by  a  proxy  test-taker.
The claimant, those tests having taken place, was subsequently  issued  with
a Test of English as a Foreign  Language  ("TOEFL")  certificate  indicating
the necessary standard as required under  the  Immigration  Rules  had  been
attained.  He  used  that  certificate  when  he  subsequently  applied,  on
29 May 2012, for further leave as a student.   That  application  was,  in
fact, granted because at that  stage  no  issue  was  taken  concerning  the
validity of the test results.   Indeed,  further  leave  as  a  student  was
granted until 30 June 2013.

2.    On 23 February 2013 the claimant married a  female  British  citizen
who, for reasons of confidentiality, I  shall  simply  refer  to  as  K.  On
30 May 2013 the claimant applied for leave to remain as a  spouse  on  the
basis of his marriage.  On 10 February 2014 the BBC  screened  a  Panorama
programme which made  allegations  regarding  the  fraudulent  obtaining  of
English Language certificates for immigration purposes.  On 15 May 2014  K
gave birth to the couple's first child who I shall simply refer to as A.   A
is a British citizen.  On 17 June 2014 the Secretary of State refused  the
claimant's application for leave to remain as a spouse.    In  a  letter  of
17 June 2014 it was explained on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State  that
Educational Testing Services ("ETS"), the  international  entity  which  has
provided the Home Office with services relating to English Language Testing
in the UK, had advised that the claimant's test results  had  been  obtained
through the use of deception.  It was said "an anomaly  with  your  speaking
test indicated the presence of a proxy test taker".   So  the  Secretary  of
State concluded that the claimant did not meet the Suitability  requirements
of the Immigration Rules for consideration of limited leave  to  remain  in
the UK as a partner.  On 23 June 2014 the claimant appealed but the appeal
was subsequently withdrawn because the Secretary  of  State  had  agreed  to
reconsider her decision given the birth of A.   But  on  23 July 2015  the
Secretary of State again refused the application deciding,  in  a  nutshell,
that there had indeed been  deception  such  that  the  claimant  could  not
satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules and  that  requiring  him
and his family (at that stage his wife and one  child)  to  go  to  live  in
Pakistan would be reasonable such that reliance could  not  be  successfully
placed upon Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights  (ECHR).
The claimant appealed once again.  On 26 May 2016  K gave  birth  to  the
couple's second child who I shall simply  refer  to  as  B.   B is  also  a
British citizen.

3.    The claimant's appeal was  heard  by  the  First-tier Tribunal  ("the
tribunal") on 2 May 2017.  The tribunal dismissed the appeal and sent  its
written reasons for doing so to the parties on 22 May 2017.  In short  the
tribunal accepted that the claimant had deployed  deception  such  that  the
requirements of the Immigration Rules  were  not  met.   As  to  Article 8
outside the rules, it said that it thought it would be  reasonable  for  the
family to go to live in Pakistan  and,  in  particular,  that  it  would  be
reasonable for both of the British citizen children to  leave  the  UK.   It
also made findings, as part of its overall  Article 8  assessment,  to  the
effect that K had been born in Pakistan,  had  spent  her  formative  years
there and so would herself be  able  to  successfully  resettle  there.   It
added that because of the ability of both parents to  successfully  relocate
to Pakistan there would be no significant difficulty in either A or B  doing
so as well.

4.    The claimant obtained permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and,
after a hearing of 2 February 2018, I decided to set aside the  tribunal's
decision.  I  did  so  because  I  took  the  view  that  the  tribunal  had
misunderstood  the  evidence  as  to  K's  immigration   history   and,   in
particular, had wrongly thought that she was from  Pakistan  and  had  spent
her formative years in Pakistan in  circumstances  where  the  evidence,  in
fact, pointed to her having been born and brought up in the UK.   I  decided
to set aside the tribunal's decision in  whole  so  that  matters  could  be
reconsidered entirely  afresh  and  I  decided  that  the  remaking  of  the
decision should be undertaken in the Upper Tribunal.




Anonymity

5.    The tribunal granted the claimant anonymity because it  was  concerned
that the identity of the two children ought to be protected.   The  question
of anonymity was not revisited by me by either party.  I am not wholly  sure
that there will be  any  detrimental  impact  upon  the  children  if  their
identities become known but on reflection I have decided it would be  proper
to maintain the status quo.  So I have myself directed anonymity.

The issues.

6.    In remaking the decision I must decide, first of all, whether  it  has
been shown that the claimant  did  use  deception  in  obtaining  his  TOEFL
Certificate.  If he did do that it follows (and such is not  disputed)  that
he fails to meet what are referred  to  as  the  "Suitability"  requirements
within the Immigration Rules and that, in consequence,  his  appeal  cannot
succeed under the Rules.   In considering that issue I  bear  in  mind  what
has been said about the "generic evidence" relied upon by the  Secretary  of
State in cases such as this and  indeed  in  this  particular  case  by  the
Upper Tribunal in SM and Qadir v Secretary of State for the Home Department
(ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC) and by the Court
of Appeal hearing an  appeal  from  the  Upper Tribunal  (Neutral  Citation
Number [2016] EWCA Civ 1167).

7.     If  I  decide  that  the  claimant  does  satisfy   the   suitability
requirements (in other words that  he  did  not  employ  deception)  then  I
should allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules because it has not been
asserted by the Secretary of State either before me  or  elsewhere  that  he
fails to meet the  relevant  requirements  of  any  of  the  other  relevant
Immigration Rules.  Indeed it  was  expressly  said  in  the  Secretary  of
State's "reasons for decision" of 23 July 2015 that  had  the  suitability
requirements been met "the Eligibility requirements would be met as you  are
married to a British citizen, and the criteria of  Appendix FM EX.1  would
have been met because you and your spouse have a British child".

8.    But if I am with the Secretary of State with respect to the  deception
allegation it will then be necessary, in order to  dispose  of  the  appeal,
for me to consider whether notwithstanding that deception  the  claimant  is
able to succeed under Article 8 outside the Rules.

The evidence

9.    I had before me the  various  documents  which  had  been  before  the
tribunal when it heard the appeal.  There were  additional  documents  which
had come into being as a result of the application and appeal to  the  Upper
Tribunal.  In particular, the claimant,  through  his  representatives,  had
filed a further bundle of documents which included his witness statement  of
29 May 2018 and K's witness statement of the same date.  I confirm that  I
have considered, with care, all of the documentation before me.

10.   I also held a hearing of the appeal, for the purposes of the  remaking
of the decision, and I heard oral evidence from the claimant and from K.   I
then heard oral submissions from each representative.  What was said at  the
hearing has been recorded by me in a Record of Proceedings and  I  have  had
careful regard to what was said when deciding this appeal.

My remaking of the decision

11.   The first and potentially only question is  that  of  whether  or  not
deception was deployed by the claimant as alleged.   As  was  explained  and
clarified in SM cited above, the Secretary of State  is  initially  required
to discharge an evidential burden  although  this  represents  quite  a  low
hurdle to surmount.  Put simply, there must be  on  the  face  of  it,  some
evidence of deception.  If the Secretary of State clears  this  hurdle  then
the claimant is required to offer what is on the  face  of  it  an  innocent
explanation.  That too represents a low hurdle to surmount.  If all of  that
is done then the Secretary of State  is  fixed  with  the  legal  burden  of
disproving the innocent explanation and establishing fraud  based  upon  all
of the evidence and that has to be done to a  balance  of  probabilities  (a
somewhat higher hurdle).

12.   I start with what the "generic evidence".  That  is  really  comprised
of two witness statements of Senior Home Employees one Rebecca Collings and
one Peter Millington.  The evidence concerns issues surrounding proxy test-
taking and how it is said such has been detected.  On the  face  of  it  the
evidence might seem, at least on a superficial consideration,  to  be  quite
persuasive with respect to the ways in which ETS has identified fraud.   But
the Upper Tribunal pointed to a number of difficulties with  the  evidence.
That included the lack of  expertise  or  qualifications  of  the  witnesses
regarding voice recognition  issues.   Further,  the  Upper Tribunal  heard
expert evidence from one Dr Harrison who is an acknowledged expert  in  the
science of voice recognition.  His evidence  was  critical  of  that  relied
upon by the Secretary of State in a number of material respects.  It is  not
necessary for me to go into particular  detail  for  the  purposes  of  this
appeal but the overall view of the Upper Tribunal was clearly to the effect
that the Secretary of State's generic evidence was very  frail.   The  Court
of Appeal, in dealing with the appeal from the Upper Tribunal  in  SM,  did
not say anything different.  But it has not  been  said  that  that  generic
evidence is entirely and utterly valueless and indeed with  respect  to  the
two appellants before it the Upper Tribunal concluded, albeit it  seemingly
with some hesitation, that it had been sufficient to  enable  the  Secretary
of State to discharge the evidential burden.  It is  also  worth  noting  at
this stage that both the  Upper Tribunal  and  the  Court  of  Appeal  were
essentially of the view that with respect to every case there would have  to
be a fact sensitive analysis.

13.   Turning then  to  the  explanation  proffered  by  the  claimant,  his
position is simply that he attended at the specified  test  centre  on  both
days, that he undertook the tests himself, and  that  the  results  achieved
are his  results.   He  did  not  use  a  proxy  or  employ  any  dishonesty
whatsoever.

14.   There are, as I say, significant frailties in the generic evidence  of
the Secretary of State and had the claimant, for example, been able to  give
clear and entirely consistent evidence as to the  circumstances  surrounding
his taking of the tests and had he been  able  to  otherwise  demonstrate  a
sufficiently significant command of English as at the time he had taken  the
test (such that it could be shown that he would  not  really  need  to  even
contemplate using a proxy) my task would  have  been  significantly  easier.
But I do have some concerns about the claimant's evidence which I  will  now
address.

15.   The claimant attended at a test centre in London.   He  accepts  that,
at the time he says he took his tests, he was living  in  Bradford.   It  is
not immediately obvious why if living in Bradford he would undertake  travel
to London to take the tests.  The Secretary of State has (although  it  does
not seem to me to be clearly evidenced) always  maintained  that  there  are
appropriate test centres in Bradford and the claimant  has  never  asserted,
either himself or through his representatives, to the contrary.

16.   The claimant told me that when he decided to book his test there  was,
as he put it "no space in Bradford".  He said that he  had  applied  on-line
to take the test and he had been offered test space in London.  That is  why
he had  taken  the  test  in  London.   The  difficulty  I  have  with  that
particular aspect of his evidence is that that does not appear to have  been
quite what he said to the  tribunal  at  the  hearing  of  2 May 2017.   I
appreciate that I have set aside the tribunal's  decision  but  nevertheless
the written reasons produced by the tribunal stand  as  a  record  (although
clearly not a complete record) of what was  said.   The  tribunal  noted  at
paragraph 35 that he had simply given  evidence  to  the  effect  that  the
centre he attended to  take  the  tests  "was  one  that  he  found  on  the
internet".  That seems to me to be a much more generalised explanation  than
the particular one he offered me to the effect that there was  no  space  at
the local test centre in Bradford.  So there  is  reason  to  conclude  that
there is something of an inconsistency in his evidence.

17.   Further, the claimant said  in  evidence  in  chief  to  me  that  his
speaking test had taken 20 minutes, his writing test had taken 60 minutes,
his listening test had taken 45 minutes and  his  reading  test  had  taken
75 minutes.  He was presenting that as his recollection based on  what  had
happened on the days when the testing had taken place in 2012.  By the  time
he was giving evidence before me almost five years had passed. I doubt  that
he would have remembered those timings so precisely.  His memory was not  so
precise about other matters.  I rather suspect he has checked  the  standard
times for such tests and regurgitated them before me.

18.   But there are also some matters which weigh in his  favour.   He  said
he had travelled from Bradford to London by train,  that  he  had  travelled
into Victoria Station in London and that he had then taken a taxi, on  both
days, from Victoria Station to the test centre.   He  might  of  course  be
simply making all of that up but his evidence to me as  to  that  was  clear
and was given with a lack of any hesitation.  Mrs Pettersen did  point  out
that it is her understanding (and indeed mine  too)  that  the  normal  rail
route from Bradford  to  London  would  take  a  traveller  to  Kings Cross
Station.  However, there was no evidence before me as  to  the  availability
of other possibly cheaper routes which might  take  a  traveller  elsewhere.
So I do not take a point against the claimant in that regard and I give  him
a limited amount of credit for his answers as to his mode of travel.

19.   The claimant has provided some evidence which tends to suggest he  had
some command of the English language as at the time  he  says  he  took  the
tests.  There are some educational certificates from Pakistan  demonstrating
that, although he does not appear to have excelled in  this  by  any  means,
English was a subject taught to him  prior  to  his  moving  on  to  further
education.  He has provided a certificate issued by an  organisation  called
the British Learning Centre which is based in Pakistan and  which  is  dated
10 April 2011.  On the face of it that certificate suggests a certain level
of competence with respect  to  listening,  reading,  writing  and  speaking
English.  The reliability of that document was  not  challenged  before  me.
The claimant has supplied an  ESOL  Level 1  Certificate  in  speaking  and
listening in the English language which is said to have been issued  to  him
in January 2012.  Again the validity  or  reliability  of  that  particular
document has not been challenged before me.  I do not think  the  documents,
of themselves, demonstrate any great capacity in  the  use  of  the  English
language but they do suggest a certain level of competence around  the  time
the tests  were  taken.   So,  it  might  be  thought  that  the  claimant's
prospects of success in the test might not be  so  hopeless  that  he  would
seek to use the desperate ploy of using a proxy in the  knowledge  that,  if
such were discovered, it might have  significant  adverse  implications  for
him.

20.   The claimant gave evidence without an interpreter before the  tribunal
and again before me.   Mr Ahmed  suggested  that  that  was  a  significant
material factor which went to the question of whether or not he  would  have
needed to use a proxy.  Mrs Pattersen argued that the significant time  gap
between his taking the tests and his giving  evidence  before  the  tribunal
and before me meant that the standard of English he  demonstrated  at  those
hearings was not relevant.  I think the truth  lies  somewhere  between  the
two.  There was an extensive time gap between the taking of  the  tests  and
the giving of oral evidence before the tribunal but it does appear that  the
claimant was able to give his oral evidence previously,  as  he  did  before
me, without any real  difficulty.   Answering  questions  and  being  cross-
examined in a formal setting  is  probably  quite  a  demanding  test  of  a
person's ability to understand and speak English.  In  the  circumstances  I
attach some but only a limited amount of weight to his ability to give  oral
evidence in English.

21.   So, this is quite difficult because I  am  faced  with  weak  evidence
relied upon by the Secretary of State and an attempt to rebut that  evidence
by other evidence which is also relatively weak.  Given the low hurdles  set
by the first two stages I am satisfied  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has
discharged the evidential burden and I am satisfied that  the  claimant  has
offered what might be regarded if true as an innocent explanation.  The  key
question then is whether the Secretary  of  State  has  discharged  what  is
called the legal burden or, put more simply, whether  she  has  demonstrated
to a balance of  probabilities  that  there  was  fraud.   The  position  is
marginal.  It is not anything like as clear cut as  Mr Ahmed  urged  me  to
conclude.  But I have concluded that the Secretary of State has, in all  the
circumstances, failed to discharge the burden which does after all lie  upon
her.  Her generic evidence has weaknesses and the claimant has, despite  the
weaknesses in his own evidence,  offered  something  of  some  substance  to
support the proposition that he took the tests himself.

22.    Accordingly  I  have  concluded  that  the  claimant  does  meet  the
suitability requirements within the Immigration Rules and that  his  appeal
succeeds under those Rules.

23.   I have, however, albeit briefly, gone on to explain what I would  have
decided had  I  concluded  that  there  had  been  deception  and  that  the
requirements of the Immigration Rules were, in consequence, not met.

24.   The genuineness of the relationship between the  claimant  and  K was
not doubted.  The evidence each of them gave about  their  relationship  and
how it had developed was consistent.  I accept K's evidence to the  effect,
and it seems to me she has always been consistent about this, that  she  was
born in the UK and was brought up in the UK.  Although it  is  difficult  to
read because the photocopied document provided  is  quite  unclear  and  has
unhelpful dark shading, her birth certificate does appear to  indicate  that
she was in fact born in Bradford.   But  irrespective  of  that  documentary
evidence I would accept her straightforward oral evidence anyway.

25.   Paternity of A and B has never been placed in issue.  It has not  been
suggested that the claimant, K, A and B are not living together as a  single
family unit.  These are all matters which  would  weigh  in  favour  of  the
claimant with respect to an outside the rules Article 8 assessment.

26.   But the real issue as to Article 8 it seems to me is the question  of
reasonableness concerning any relocation of the children.  I  have  in  mind
sections 117A and 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
but  in  particular  117B(6).   Section 117A  requires  a  tribunal   when
considering appeals brought under Article 8 to have regard to  the  matters
set  out  in  section 117B.   Section 117B  then  lists  a   number   of
considerations whilst making it clear  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
immigration controls is in the public  interest.   But  117B  (6)  reads  as
follows:

      "     (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable  to  deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

                        (a)    the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
                       parental relationship with a qualifying child,

                       (b)   it would not be reasonable to expect the  child
                       to leave the United Kingdom."

27.   Section 117D makes it clear that a British citizen is  a  "qualifying
child".

28.   In MA (Pakistan) and  Others v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705, it was said that the reasonableness test as
contained within that section will include  an  assessment  of  all  of  the
other considerations specified including those not relevant  to  the  child.
It was also stressed that it will not necessarily follow that if  it  is  in
the "best interests" of a child to remain in the UK it will be  unreasonable
to expect that child to follow a parent elsewhere.

29.   As I say I have resolved this appeal on other grounds.  But if  I  had
not done that and if I had reached adverse conclusions from  the  claimant's
perspective with respect to  the  allegation  of  deception,  I  would  have
regarded that  as  a  matter  of  real  significance  with  respect  to  the
reasonableness question.  The maintenance of effective immigration  controls
is particularly in the public interest in the context of  persons  who  seek
to deliberately deceive  immigration  decision makers.   But  as  to  other
considerations the claimant even if guilty of deception is clearly  able  to
speak English as things stand to the extent that he is  able  to  understand
and deal with questions in the context  of  a  court  hearing.   He  is  not
financially independent but there is evidence that  he  has  been  supported
financially  by  his  wife  who  is  in  employment.   But  to  focus   upon
regulation 117B(6) there are now two children to consider.  Those  children
have rights as British citizens and if remaining  in  the  UK,  rather  than
leaving it, will have access to facilities (if needed) such as the  National
Health Service and Social Services.  Those  are  significant  considerations
in the context of the alternative which would be having to live in  Pakistan
where, I think it is fair to say, services of that quality would not  be  so
readily available.  There is some  reason  to  think  that  those  sorts  of
considerations might be  a  factor  with  respect  to  A  who  according  to
documentary evidence before me is awaiting  assessment  in  connection  with
speech and language difficulties although the evidence is not  clear  as  to
whether any sort of therapy will actually be required.  Both A and B are  of
course very young and it  is  often  said  in  the  context  of  very  young
children that the most important consideration  is  that  they  remain  with
their parents wherever those  parents  are.   But  access  to  good  quality
health care and if needed social care and  access  to  future  good  qualify
educational facilities are important  considerations  with  respect  to  the
reasonableness of expecting British citizen children to leave  the  UK.   On
the circumstances of this case I am narrowly persuaded that it would not  be
reasonable, as the word is used in its wide sense following MA(Pakistan)  to
expect the children to leave the UK.  So, even if I had resolved  the  fraud
issue against the  claimant  I  would  have  still  allowed  his  appeal  on
Article 8 grounds outside the Immigration Rules.

Conclusion

30.   This appeal then, in light of all of the  above,  succeeds  under  the
Immigration Rules.  Had it not succeeded under  the  Immigration Rules  it
would nevertheless have succeeded under Article 8 of the ECHR  outside  the
Rules.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has already  been  set  aside.   In
remaking the decision I allow the claimant's appeal from  the  Secretary  of
State's decision of 23 July 2015.

Anonymity

The claimant was previously granted anonymity by  the  First-tier Tribunal.
That  is  continued  pursuant  to  rule 14  of  the   Tribunal   Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 so unless and until a tribunal or court directs
otherwise the claimant continues to have  anonymity.   No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family.  This  direction  applies  to  all  parties  of  these  proceedings.
Failure to comply may lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                           Date: 8 May 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



TO THE REPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.

Signed:                           Date: 8 May 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

