
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/27056/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 24 August 2015                    |On 27 August 2015                     |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                    Mrs ELANINE GERALDA DE MENDONCA SOUZA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal, Counsel (instructed by Samuel Ross
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Ransley on 28 May 2015 against the determination  of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Cameron who had dismissed the Appellant's
         appeal under Appendix FM as the spouse of British  Citizen  and  on
         human rights (Article 8  ECHR  family  life)  grounds  against  her
         removal in a decision and reasons promulgated on 25 March 2015.

    2.     The Appellant is a national of Brazil, born on  12  March  1987.
         The Appellant had entered the United Kingdom on  28  November  2010
         claiming to be the spouse of man she had divorced on  16  September
         2010.  She had admitted to a previous overstay in  2006.   She  did
         not meet  the  suitability  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
         Immigration Rules. She retained her  ties  to  Brazil.   The  judge
         found that family life could reasonably be enjoyed  in  Brazil  and
         that the Appellant's removal was proportionate.  Alternatively  she
         could return to Brazil and seek entry clearance from there.

    3.     Permission to appeal was granted because it was considered  that
         it was arguable that the judge had erred (a) by  failing  to  apply
         the doctrine of "issue estoppels" when considering the Respondent's
         grant of leave to enter to the Appellant  in  2010  notwithstanding
         her overstay in 2006 and (b) in his assessment  of  the  Article  8
         ECHR claim when  finding  that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the
         suitability requirements yet had been treated as "suitable" by  the
         Entry Clearance Officer.

    4.     Standard directions were made by the tribunal.  A rule 24 notice
         dated 12 June 2015 had  been  filed  on  the  Respondent's  behalf,
         opposing the onwards appeal.

    Submissions

    5.     Mr Iqbal for the Appellant relied  on  the  grounds  of  onwards
         appeal (which had not been settled by him).  He submitted that even
         if there were no application of "issue estoppel" in this public law
         context, the judge should have examined the  inconsistency  in  the
         Secretary of State's reasoning  when  considering  the  Appellant's
         conduct against the suitability criteria.  There  was  no  material
         difference between the formulation used  for  entry  clearance  and
         that used for leave to remain.  Whether a  person's  behaviour  was
         not conducive to the public good was a fact sensitive analysis  and
         the judge  had  not  adopted  the  right  approach.   It  was  also
         questionable  that  the   judge's   understanding   of   the   term
         "precarious" was right:  SS  (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387.   The
         Appellant had had leave to enter the United Kingdom.

    6.     Ms Fijwala for the Respondent relied  on  the  rule  24  notice.
         "Issue estoppel" did not exist in immigration law.  There had  been
         persistent disregard of the Immigration Rules by the Appellant. Her
         immigration status was  correctly  described  as  "precarious",  as
         explained in AM  (S  117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  0260  (IAC).  The
         Appellant was simply expressing  disagreement  with  the  decision.
         The decision and reasons should stand.

    7.     Mr Iqbal in reply submitted that the Appellant had been  treated
         in a heavy handed way.  Overstaying up to 28  days  was  no  longer
         considered significant by the Respondent.  There had been  no  real
         criminality  and  the  Home  Office's  own  guidance  (IDI   Family
         Migration Appendix FM Section 1.0a stated that the  applicant  "can
         meet  the  suitability  requirements  even  where  there  is   some
         criminality".

    No material error of law finding

    8.     In the tribunal's judgment the grant of permission to appeal was
         ill considered,  far  beyond  being  merely  excessively  generous.
         There was  no  arguable  error  of  law  in  the  determination  as
         described by the grant.  The references to "issue estoppels" in the
         grounds of onwards appeal were  unarguably  wrong:  see  Devaseelan
         (Second Appeals - ECHR -  Extra-Territorial  Effect)  Sri  Lanka  *
         [2002] UKIAT 00702.  The fact that the Respondent  chose  to  grant
         entry clearance to the Appellant as a spouse in  2010  despite  her
         overstay in 2006 was well within the Respondent's discretion:  see,
         e.g., paragraph 320 of the Immigration Rules.  There was,  however,
         no binding effect as a result,  absent  some  accompanying  promise
         which it was never suggested had  been  made  in  this  case.   Any
         similarity in the wording of "suitability" for entry clearance  and
         leave to remain has no impact on the underlying principle.

    9.     The judge's determination  was  appropriately  detailed  and  he
         explained his conclusions with clarity at [55] to  [62].   He  took
         into  account  the  Appellant's  particular   circumstances.    His
         analysis was indeed fact sensitive.

    10.    A person's immigration status is "precarious" if their continued
         presence in the UK will be dependent upon their obtaining a further
         grant of leave: see  AM  (S  117B)  Malawi  (above).   The  judge's
         finding at [76] of his determination that  the  Appellant's  status
         was precarious was undoubtedly correct.

    11.    The Appellant's attempts  to  challenge  the  determination  are
         merely  an  expression  of  disagreement   with   a   careful   and
         comprehensive decision, in the hope of avoiding having to leave the
         United Kingdom to make a fresh  entry  clearance  application  from
         Brazil, which was the securely reasoned substance  of  the  judge's
         findings: [61], [67] and [68] of the determination.   The  tribunal
         finds that there was no error of law and  there  is  no  basis  for
         interfering with the judge's decision.

    DECISION

    The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law and stands unchanged




    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
