
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/27416/2014
                                                               IA/27417/2014
                                                               IA/27420/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 20 April 2015                     |On 28 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                              MS FATIMA ATTIQUE
                           Mr SYED MOOZ UR REHMAN
                           Mr SYED ATTIQ UR REHMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Ell, Counsel, Middlesex Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants' appeals against  decisions  to  refuse  to  vary  their
    leave were dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nightingale  ("the
    judge") in a decision promulgated on 28 November 2014.   The  Secretary
    of State contended that the appellants had no right of appeal following
    decisions to refuse to grant them leave to remain.  The judge  decided,
    as a preliminary matter, that she had before her valid appeals  against
    decisions to refuse to vary leave, having taken into  account  guidance
    given in Syed (Curtailment of leave - notice) [2013] UKUT 00144 (IAC).

2.   The appellants' cases were advanced in reliance upon Article 8  of  the
    Human Rights Convention.  In this context, they relied on private  life
    ties only and, in particular, on health matters relating to  the  first
    appellant, Ms Fatima Attique.

3.   The  judge  made  an  assessment  under  the  immigration  rules  ("the
    rules"), took into account section 117A-D of the 2002 Act and concluded
    that the adverse decisions amounted to  a  proportionate  response  and
    were lawful.  The appellants could not succeed on Article 8 grounds.

4.   In an application for permission to appeal, it was contended  that  the
    judge erred, particularly in relation to the first  appellant  and  her
    pregnancy.  At  paragraphs  52  and  53  of  the  decision,  the  judge
    concluded that, taking into account the date of birth of  the  youngest
    child of the family on 8 November 2013, the first appellant  would  not
    have been pregnant on 18 February 2013, as claimed.  As a  result,  the
    reason given by Ms Fatima Attique for failing to  study  in  accordance
    with the limited leave she had was lacking in credibility.   The  judge
    erred here as medical evidence before the Tribunal showed that she was,
    in fact, pregnant in February 2013.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was unclear  what
    impact  the  adverse  credibility  findings,  including   the   finding
    regarding the pregnancy, may have had on the outcome of the case.

6.   In a rule 24 response (prepared by Mr Tufan), the appeal  was  opposed.
     The judge made sustainable findings in a well-reasoned decision.

Submissions on Error of Law

7.   Mr Ell said that permission was granted on two bases,  in  relation  to
    Article 8 and the uncertain impact of the adverse credibility findings.
     Medical evidence before the First-tier Tribunal showed that the  first
    appellant was, as claimed, pregnant on 18  February  2013.   The  judge
    found that this aspect was not credible and  this  coloured  the  other
    findings she went on to make.  She concluded that the  first  appellant
    was not a genuine student and that  the  appellants  overall  were  not
    credible but the factual error infected the decision.  The judge found,
    in effect, that the first appellant had never intended to  study.   The
    conclusions which followed from  the  factual  error  showed  that  the
    decision was unsafe. The appellants advanced a case  based  on  private
    life ties, built on the medical position of Ms Fatima Attique.

8.   Mr Tufan said that he had little  to  add  to  the  rule  24  response.
    Nazim and Others and Patel and  Others  [2013]  UKSC  72  were  clearly
    relevant authorities.  Even if the judge did err  in  relation  to  the
    pregnancy, this did not take the appellants very far in their Article 8
    private life case.

Conclusion on Error of Law

9.   I am grateful to Mr Ell  for  his  careful  submissions.   I  conclude,
    nonetheless, that no material error of law has been shown.

10.  It may be accepted that the judge  erred  in  finding  that  the  first
    appellant, Ms Attique, was not pregnant on 18  February  2013.  Medical
    evidence in the appellants' bundle before the Tribunal showed that  she
    was. What is clear, however, is that the decision is, overall, thorough
    and cogently reasoned, as one might expect from the  experienced  judge
    who wrote it.  In making her findings of fact, the judge  painstakingly
    took into account the medical evidence regarding the extent of the ill-
    health suffered by the first appellant.  She had clearly  in  mind  the
    circumstances of the third  appellant,  now  at  nursery  school.   The
    family members (save for the child born in November 2013) arrived  here
    relatively recently in January 2013.  She considered carefully and made
    findings about the availability of medical treatment  in  Pakistan  and
    the circumstances the family would be  likely  to  find  themselves  in
    following their return there.

11.  The judge was entitled to find that the requirements of  the  rules  in
    paragraph 276ADE were not met.   In weighing the  competing  interests,
    she properly took into account section  117B  of  the  2002  Act.   She
    concluded  that  the  factors  set  out  there  weighed   against   the
    appellants, overall.  That was a conclusion she was entitled  to  reach
    notwithstanding  a  factual  error  regarding  the  first   appellant's
    pregnancy.  She was also entitled to conclude that the  health  aspects
    of the case were relatively weak,  as  she  did  at  the  very  end  of
    paragraph 59 of the decision where she  mentioned  the  Upper  Tribunal
    decision in Akhalu (and the health aspects of Article 8 cases have been
    considered more recently by the Court of Appeal in GS and Others [2015]
    EWCA Civ 40, the judgments in that case tending  to  confirm  that  the
    judge did not err in the present appeal).

12.  Overall, the Article 8 case  advanced  by  the  appellants  was  not  a
    strong one and the private life ties established here since arrival  in
    early 2013 are very modest.  Even though the judge erred in finding  as
    a fact that Ms Attique was not pregnant in February 2013, she  did  not
    overlook the pregnancy itself or the birth of  the  child  in  November
    2013.  On the contrary, she took these matters into  account  and  gave
    them due weight.  Even removing the adverse credibility  findings  made
    by the judge regarding the genuineness of  Ms  Attique's  intention  to
    study, and taking the case at its highest, what remains  is,  again,  a
    relatively weak Article 8 case.  The judge's  overall  conclusion  that
    the public interest expressed in the adverse immigration decisions (and
    in the family's removal to Pakistan in consequence) was not  outweighed
    was one which was open to her, notwithstanding the factual error.   The
    proper focus in an Article 8 assessment is on the substance of the ties
    claimed to have been established: Patel and Others [2013] UKSC 72.  The
    decision shows that the judge did not err in this regard.

13.  No material error of law has been shown and  so  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Notice of Decision

14.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Anonymity

15.  There has been no application for anonymity and I make no direction  on
    this occasion.



Signed        Date 28 April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

