
                                                                   [pic]
Upper Tribunal    IA/ 27072/2011
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                          |Notice sent                  |
|Date heard: 22 August 2013                    |23 August 2013               |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                      ABDURRAZAGH BANDAGU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     in person
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety senior presenting officer
                          NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL AND
                   REASONS FOR THE TRIBUNAL GIVING CONSENT

 1. The appellant is a national of Libya born 10  March  1958.  He  made  an
    appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision of the 8 September 2011 refusing to revoke a deportation  order
    made 21 November 2005 made after his conviction for grievous bodily harm
    on 10 October 2002 for which he was sentenced to 6 years imprisonment.

 2. The appellant's appeal to the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  against
    the deportation order was dismissed on the human rights grounds that had
    been relied on in a determination dated 14 July 2005.

 3. His appeal on asylum  and  human  rights  grounds  against  the  further
    decision refusing to revoke that deportation order was dismissed by  the
    First-tier Tribunal for  reasons  given  in  a  determination  dated  12
    January 2012.

 4. At a hearing in the Upper Tribunal on 14 May 2013 following the grant of
    permission to appeal on 1 February 2012, the Secretary of State accepted
    that there had been error of law in that determination of the FtT  which
    had been challenged as to its findings on Art 8 grounds.

 5. The matter then came before us on the 22 August 2013 in  order  for  the
    decision to be remade.  By that stage the  appellant  was  unrepresented
    however he was accompanied by his wife and three children  all  of  whom
    intended to give evidence along with two other witnesses.

 6. The statement prepared by the appellant to stand as his evidence at  the
    hearing included reference to his name having been put  on  an  Interpol
    list by the Libyan Authorities in 2006 and this was still posted.  Prior
    to the hearing we had checked this aspect and  noted  an  entry  on  the
    Interpol website of a person with the appellant's details and photograph
    with the indication that he was wanted on charges of importing drugs.

 7. Although aware of the Interpol entry, Mr McVeety was unaware that it was
    going to be  an  issue  in  the  remaking  of  the  decision.  This  was
    understandable in the light of a previous concession by the  appellant's
    advisers on Art 3. We reminded him however of  an  operational  guidance
    note issued by the then UKBA on 7 September 2012 which had relevance  to
    the issue of the warrant.

 8. Although the appellant had not been believed as  to  the  basis  of  his
    asylum claim it is incontrovertible that  there  is  an  arrest  warrant
    pending which brought into focus paragraph 3.9.11 of the above  guidance
    indicating  that  where  applicants  can  demonstrate  a  real  risk  of
    imprisonment on return to Libya a grant of  Humanitarian  Protection  is
    likely to appropriate.   There would need to  be  consideration  whether
    the appellant should be excluded from such  protection  because  of  his
    conduct but also whether in any event removal  would  amount  to  Art  3
    breach. A further issue that needed to be addressed is  whether  in  the
    light of the proposal to remove the appellant's family to Thailand,  the
    appellant himself may be removed to this destination although  that  too
    would involve consideration of the Thai Authorities extraditing  him  to
    Libya.

 9. After taking instructions at  senior  level,  Mr  McVeety  withdrew  the
    decision  refusing  to  revoke  the  deportation  order  so   that   the
    application for  revocation  remains  pending  although  the  underlying
    deportation  order  remains  in  force.   We  were  satisfied  that  the
    appellant understand the effect of this decision and he was  content  to
    withdraw his appeal.

10. A party requires permission  to  withdraw  its  case  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal; see rule 17(2) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 ['2008  Rules'].  When  considering  whether  to  grant  such
    permission regard must be had to the overriding  objective  set  out  in
    rule 2 of the 2008 Rules. The Secretary of State does  not  require  the
    permission of the Upper Tribunal to withdraw a decision  she  has  made,
    even if such decision is the subject of the appeal before the  Tribunal.
    However, whilst an appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  treated  as
    having been withdrawn if the decision it challenges is  withdrawn  (rule
    17(2) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005), an
    appeal before the Upper Tribunal is not  so  treated.  It  is  for  this
    reason that we gave permission to the appellant to withdraw his case  in
    the Upper Tribunal.

11. This is a Notice pursuant to rule 17(5) of the 2008 Rules to inform  the
    parties that the appellant's case  is  withdrawn.   The  effect  of  the
    appellant's case being withdrawn from the Upper  Tribunal  is  that  the
    proceedings before the Upper Tribunal are at an end. There is no  appeal
    before the Upper Tribunal.


Signed:






Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

Date: 22 August 2013
