
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27437/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 30th April 2015                   |On 29th May 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                adnan rasool
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Hussain, Counsel instructed by RKS Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Bagral made following a hearing at Bradford on 23rd October 2014.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 19th December  1992.   He
    entered the UK as a student on 27th March 2011 with  leave  until  30th
    November 2012 which was curtailed on 17th June 2012.  On  31st  October
    2012 he applied for indefinite leave to  remain  as  the  spouse  of  a
    settled person and his application was refused.  He  subsequently  made
    an application to remain  on  human  rights  grounds  which  was  again
    refused.

 3. On 14th October 2013 he made further representations to remain on human
    rights grounds as the partner of a British citizen, and refused on 16th
    June 2014. The appeal against that decision  was  the  subject  of  the
    hearing before the Immigration Judge.

 4. The judge was not satisfied that the claimant had been entirely  candid
    about his reasons for ceasing his studies in the UK.  She rejected  his
    explanation that he did not inform the Secretary of State of his change
    of circumstances because he did not know how to locate the Home Office.
     On the other hand she accepted, and indeed it was not  disputed,  that
    he had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife and that  he
    was clearly a loving and devoted father and shared full  responsibility
    with her in respect of their son.

 5. The sponsor does not work and she and the claimant are supported by her
    mother who is in receipt of disability  living  allowance.   The  judge
    rejected the claim that the sponsor was the sole carer  of  her  ailing
    mother  and  that  she  could  not  therefore  relocate  to   Pakistan,
    particularly as she had said that she was prepared to  go  to  Pakistan
    with him if required to do so and she did not accept  that  the  mother
    required a full-time carer or that the sponsor adopted that role.

 6. So far as the Rules were concerned, it was conceded that  the  claimant
    could not meet  paragraph  276ADE  and  there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles so far as the partner was concerned to family life continuing
    in Pakistan.  She was however satisfied that the claimant qualified for
    leave to remain under Appendix FM as a parent and, in the  alternative,
    that he succeeded on Article 8 grounds outside the Rules.

The Grounds of application

 7. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had failed to provide adequate reasons for her  findings  and
    that, given that the claimant and his partner stated  that  they  would
    relocate if removed, it would be reasonable for the child to leave  the
    UK.  The circumstances identified by  the  Tribunal  cannot  amount  to
    being either very compelling or exceptional and, had  the  judge  taken
    into account the submission from the Secretary of State that the family
    could choose whether to relocate or  not,  she  would  have  found  the
    decision to remove was proportionate.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  Cruthers  on  10th  February
    2015 for the reasons stated in the grounds.

Submissions

 9. Mrs Pettersen relied on her grounds and submitted that the  parents  in
    this case had taken an informed decision to  start  their  relationship
    and to have a child in circumstances where they were  aware  that  they
    could not meet the requirements of the Rules.

10. Mr Hussain submitted that this was in essence a  rationality  challenge
    and the conclusions of the judge were open to her for the reasons which
    she gave.

Findings and conclusions

11. This is a meticulous determination.  The judge carefully considered all
    of  the  relevant  evidence  in  relation  to  the  history   of   this
    relationship and made clear findings which are not  challenged  in  the
    grounds.

12. She set out the relevant case law including Sanade and others  (British
    children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048, MF  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, Omutunde (best interests  -  Zambrano  applied  -
    Razgar) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00427 and SSHD v  Hayat  (Pakistan)  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1054, none of which are referred to in the grounds.

13. She took into account the claimant's immigration history which involved
    him overstaying his leave which expired on 17th June  2012.   She  also
    held against him the fact that he was not financially  independent  and
    supported by others.  Moreover, the relationship was formed at  a  time
    whilst he was here unlawfully.  She said that if  he  did  not  have  a
    child the results of the appeal would be  clear-cut  and  he  would  be
    removed to Pakistan and the sponsor could go with him.

14. The basis of the judge's decision is that, either  the  claimant  would
    have to return to Pakistan alone, which would involve the family  being
    separated, or his partner and child would be forced to join him  there.
    As the child was a British citizen she said  that  this  could  not  be
    regarded as reasonable.  She noted that on the facts of  ZH  (Tanzania)
    UKSC 4 [2011] the appellant in that case had an  appalling  immigration
    history but that did not outweigh the best interests of the children.

15. The Secretary of State has formulated her challenge on the  basis  that
    there is nothing exceptional about  the  claimant's  circumstances  and
    that the Tribunal have failed to identify any compelling  circumstances
    which would lead to an unjustifiably harsh outcome.

16. First, the grounds fail to engage with the point that the judge allowed
    the appeal under Appendix FM because one  of  the  exceptions  in  EX.1
    applies to him.

17. Second, they fail to address the fact that the  judge  applied  Section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act which states that the public interest does  not
    require removal if a person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with a UK citizen child and it would not be reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK.

18. If the Secretary of State is  to  be  in  a  position  to  successfully
    challenge appeals allowed on the basis that the judge  did  here,  then
    she has to make those arguments  to the judge at the hearing and in any
    subsequent grounds of challenge and/or  in  submissions  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. The grounds as drafted amount either to a re-argument of  the
    case, and not an error  of  law,  or  as  a  challenge  on  rationality
    grounds, which is not made out.

Notice of Decision

19. The judge's decision shall stand.  The claimant's appeal is allowed and
    the Secretary of State's challenge dismissed.

20. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


