
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/27210/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower           |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29th June 2015                    |On 16th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                          KINGDOM MAXWELL MCHIKOMA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Lawrence (Counsel, instructed by The Law
                    Partnership Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant's application for leave to remain (LTR)  in  the  UK  was
    made on the 27th of May 2010. There followed a series of  decisions  to
    refuse the application made by  the  Secretary  of  State  but  without
    making a decision to issue removal directions. Accordingly none of  the
    earlier decisions carried a right of appeal  and  at  different  stages
    each was withdrawn.

 2. The decision against which the Appellant appealed was made on the  13th
    of June 2014. The appeal was herd by First-tier Tribunal Judge Crawford
    at Stoke on the 25th of September 2014  and  dismissed  in  a  decision
    promulgated on the 1st of October 2014.

 3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on a number of grounds  which
    were concisely drafted. Firstly it was argued  that  the  Judge  should
    have granted an adjournment to allow the Appellant to  obtain  evidence
    of the family proceedings that had been launched. The Judge  was  wrong
    to find that the Appellant did not have family life with his  son.  The
    pre July 2012 law had not been properly considered  and  there  was  no
    reference to the long residence of the Appellant. As the case  involved
    a child it should have been treated more delicately.

 4. The application was granted by Judge Froom on the 14th of November 2014
    who observed that at the date of the hearing the Appellant had been  in
    the UK for more than 10 years and that the Judge, having been  referred
    to Edgehill had not considered paragraph 276B of the rules,  there  was
    an arguable misdirection at paragraph  7.  Additionally  there  was  no
    legal burden on the Appellant to show that the decision  would  not  be
    proportionate and there was no reference to  the  Respondent's  4  year
    delay in making a decision.

 5.  At  the  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal   both   parties   made
    representations which are set out in the Record  of  Proceedings.  Both
    maintained their respective positions with regard to  the  approach  of
    the Judge and the correctness of the decision.

 6. In relation to the application for an adjournment I  indicated  at  the
    hearing that I was satisfied that there was no  error  in  the  Judge's
    approach. The application dated back, at the date of the hearing,  over
    4 years and there had been ample time for  the  case  to  be  prepared.
    Whilst there is no legal requirement to provide corroboration  a  Judge
    is entitled to  have  regard  to  supporting  evidence  that  might  be
    expected and he noted that there was almost nothing to support what the
    Appellant said.

 7. Given that the Appellant maintained that he had  regular  contact  with
    his son the lack of evidence in support was  something  the  Judge  was
    bound to have regard to and it was too late on the day of  the  hearing
    to address that absence. There was not even a copy of  the  application
    that the Appellant had made to the family court. Fairness is  obtained,
    in part at least, by giving a party  the  opportunity  to  prepare  and
    present their case, the Appellant had had that  opportunity  and  there
    was nothing wrong in the Judge's decision to continue with the hearing.

 8. The delay point is not as important as it might at first appear.  Delay
    does not, by itself, give rise to any substantive right. It might  give
    an Appellant more time  in  which  their  family  or  private  life  is
    strengthened and foster in them a belief that their  position  is  more
    durable than might at first have appeared. The private and family  life
    that is thereby established falls to be assessed as part of the article
    8 exercise if that is reached.

 9. As the application had been made  before  the  9th  of  July  2012  the
    Appellant's case was to be considered under the  Immigration  Rules  as
    they stood on the 8th of July 2012, subject to the observations in  the
    case of Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74, which  post-dates  the  decision  but
    clarifies the law.

10. The Judge noted in the decision that having referred  to  Edgehill  the
    Appellant's representative  moved  on  to  article  8,  the  Record  of
    Proceedings shows that is a correct summary of what was said as it  was
    accepted that the Appellant did not have 20 years continuous  residence
    in the UK. There appears to have been no submissions made  with  regard
    to paragraph 276B and the Judge did not consider  that  aspect  of  the
    case.

11. In the Upper Tribunal it was submitted on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
    State that if the  Appellant's  representative  had  thought  that  the
    Appellant could  succeed  under  paragraph  276B  he  would  have  made
    submissions on the point. It was plain he would struggle with the  rule
    and in any event the Appellant's circumstances were fully  analysed  in
    paragraph 17 of the decision.

12. The Appellant's application was made in May 2010 and so  pre-dated  the
    introduction of Appendix FM and the other reforms  to  the  Immigration
    Rules on the  9th  of  July  2012.  The  appealable  decision  for  the
    Appellant was made on the 17th of June 2014 and was a removal  decision
    under 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

13. The effect of the various rule changes and the ability of the Secretary
    of State to consider a pre 9th of July 2012 application under the  post
    8th of July 2012  rules  relating  to  private  and  family  life  were
    considered in the case of Singh. In the judgment of Underhill LJ it was
    decided that after the 6th of September 2012 the Secretary of State was
    entitled to apply the new rules to pre 9th of July 2012 applications.

14. To have succeeded under paragraph 276B the Appellant would need to show
    10 years lawful residence and to meet the  other  requirements  of  the
    rule. It was not argued that he could meet the requirements set out  in
    the Immigration Rules  and  having  regard  to  the  lack  of  evidence
    provided at the hearing concerning the Appellant's connections  to  the
    UK  and  his  previous  convictions  that  was  an  approach  that  the
    Appellant's representative was entitled  to  take  and  the  Judge  was
    entitled to rely on it.

15. Whilst it may have been helpful if there had been a  further  reference
    to paragraph 276B the  findings  made  by  the  Judge,  which  are  not
    challenged, show that the Appellant would not have met the requirements
    and accordingly any error in that regard cannot be  regarded  as  being
    material.

16. In any event article 8 has to be assessed against the background of the
    Immigration Rules and the factors set out therein. The inability of the
    Appellant to meet the requirements  of  the  rules  was  a  significant
    factor and there were  no  compelling  circumstances  that  would  have
    justified allowing the appeal under article 8.

17. The decision was open to the Judge for the reasons given  and  contains
    no error of law.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  make  no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.



Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 16 July 2015

