
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27906/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 June 2013                               |On 21 June 2013              |
|Prepared 13 June 2013                         |                             |


                                   Before

                              LORD DAVID BURNS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                           MR MIKAIL KEMI OYEKUNLE

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not Represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent appeals with permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Crawford promulgated on 8 March 2013 allowing
    the claimant's appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 12
    November 2012 in which she refused the  claimant's  application  for  a
    registration card as confirmation of his  right  of  residence  as  the
    family member of an EU national.

 2. The claimant's case is that on 21 January 2012 he was married to Carina
    Rodrigues Pinto, a Portuguese  national,  by  proxy  and  according  to
    customary and native law in the Mushin  local  government  area,  Lagos
    State, Nigeria.

 3. The respondent refused the subsequent application for a residence  card
    confirming his right of residence as the spouse of an EEA  National  on
    the basis that to be valid in the  Federal  Republic  of  Nigeria  both
    parties must be present at the marriage and whilst proxy marriages  are
    permissible under traditional laws, these had ceased to be valid.   The
    respondent also refused the application as she was not satisfied either
    that Ms Pinto was exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

 4. The claimant appealed against that  decision  on  the  basis  that  the
    respondent's assertion that proxy marriages  are  no  longer  valid  in
    Nigeria was incorrect; that the appellant  is  lawfully  married;  and,
    that Ms Pinto is employed.  The  notice  of  appeal  also  requested  a
    hearing on the papers.

 5. Subsequent to that, the First-tier Tribunal issued  a  notice  to  both
    parties indicating that the appeal was to be decided without a  hearing
    and stating that the Tribunal may determine the appeal on the basis  of
    the appeal documents together with  any  further  written  evidence  or
    submissions that either  party  may  wish  to  make.   That  notice  is
    contained within the respondent's bundle.

 6. The appellant adduced a further bundle of material in  support  of  his
    appeal which was taken into  account  by  the  judge  in  reaching  his
    decision.  There is no  indication  from  the  file  that  any  further
    submissions or documents were adduced by the respondent.

 7. The judge concluded, on the basis of the material before him first that
    the marriage was  valid  [12,  13]  and  that  Ms  Pinto  was  employed
    therefore exercising treaty rights  [11].   He  therefore  allowed  the
    appeal.

 8. The respondent sought permission to appeal against this decision on the
    basis that the judge had misdirected himself  in  law  given  that  for
    proxy marriages to be valid under Nigerian law, the  matter  is  to  be
    registered with the Nigerian authorities within 60 days of the marriage
    taking place [3]; that the marriage and the certificate  had  not  been
    registered until substantially after this period [4] and  that  as  the
    appellant had failed to  register  the  marriage  within  the  relevant
    period, the marriage was not valid [5].

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated  Judge  J  M  Lewis  who
    noted that he could not  see  the  authority  for  the  assertion  that
    Nigerian proxy marriages are to be registered within 60  days  [2]  but
    considered the error of law is arguable and depends on the citation  of
    evidence [3].

10. In his response to the grant pursuant to Rule 24, the claimant  submits
    there is no provision that a proxy marriage must be  registered  within
    60 days; that the Secretary of State has not provided any  evidence  to
    that effect; that the issue is one of Nigerian  law  and  therefore  an
    issue of fact under English  law;  and,  an  assertion  for  which  the
    respondent has provided no evidence.  This letter was  followed  on  13
    June 2013 by a letter from the claimant's solicitor stating that he was
    unable to attend and submitting that the matter should proceed  in  any
    event.

Does the determination of the First-tier Tribunal involve the making  of  an
error of law?

11. Mr Melvin asked us to note that the issue  of  the  validity  of  proxy
    marriages was under consideration by the Upper Tribunal.  We  did  not,
    however, consider that was a sufficient reason to adjourn  the  appeal.
    He was, however, unable to direct us to any material submitted  to  the
    Tribunal indicating that there was a 60 day  time  limit  within  which
    proxy marriages must be registered.

12. Mr Melvin sought to expand the grounds of appeal on the basis that this
    was, apparently a  marriage  of  convenience  and  submitted  that  the
    respondent had not been given  the  opportunity  to  adduce  additional
    material.

13. As the claimant correctly submits, the validity of the marriage  is  an
    issue of Nigerian law and thus a question of fact to be decided by  the
    Tribunal.  Mr Melvin was unable to point us  to  any  evidence  in  the
    material before the judge that indicated that a proxy marriage must  be
    registered within 60 days.

14. Whilst we accept that this information may now be available,  no  prior
    application  has  been  made  as   to   why   this   material   should,
    exceptionally, be adduced at the error  of  law  stage.   There  is  no
    proper explanation put forward as  to  why  the  respondent  could  not
    adduce this additional material given  that  she  was  aware  that  the
    matter was to be decided on the papers and that she had an  opportunity
    to adduce additional material.  There is no indication  that  this  was
    done.

15. The respondent could, had she so wished, have refused  the  application
    in the alternative that if the marriage  were  valid,  it  was  one  of
    convenience.  She did not do so.  It is not now open to the  respondent
    to raise this issue.   The judge cannot be faulted for not taking  into
    account evidence which was not before him in reaching a finding of fact
    and accordingly, the determination does not involve the  making  of  an
    error of law. We therefore uphold it.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

1    The determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error of law and we uphold it.


Signed                                  Date:  21 June 2013

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
