
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27842/2014
                                                               IA/27844/2014
                                                             & IA/27847/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th October 2015                 |On 3rd February 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Ms, aK & LK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Claimants


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimants:     Mr S Harding counsel instructed by G Singh
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Claimants, the Appellants in the original  proceedings  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, are the parents [MS & AK] and a minor  child  [LK]
    in a single family unit. All are citizens of India.

 2. There is a further member of the family NS, who is an  adult,  although
    still living within the family unit. NS  is  not  the  subject  of  the
    present proceedings as he has been granted leave to remain in  the  UK,
    as set out below.

 3. I have considered whether any of the parties to the present proceedings
    require the protection of an anonymity direction.  As these proceedings
    involve  the  rights  and  status  of  a  minor  child  I  consider  it
    appropriate to make an anonymity direction.

 4. By decisions taken in June 2014 the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [SSHD] refused the  claimants'  applications  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom and thereupon made  Immigration  Decisions
    to remove each of the claimants from the United Kingdom. The  claimants
    appealed against the decisions.

 5. The appeals were  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Blake  on  24
    February 2015. By decision promulgated on 25  March  2015  Judge  Blake
    allowed the claimants' appeals on Immigration Rules Grounds  and  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

 6. By Decision promulgated on the 18th September 2015 I found  that  there
    was a material error of law and  directed  that  the  appeal  be  heard
    afresh. Thus the appeal now  appears  before  me  to  re-determine  the
    appeal afresh.

 7. As this continues to be an  appeal  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  avoid
    confusion I refer to the MS, AK and LK as  the  claimants  and  to  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department as SSHD.

 8. At the resumed hearing there was no interpreter available to deal  with
    the case. Counsel for the claimants did not want the hearing  adjourned
    but preferred that the statements and evidence already given before the
    First-tier Tribunal should be taken account of and that  otherwise  the
    son of the family, NS, should give evidence to deal with  a  number  of
    issues. I note in the previous hearing that the appeals  had  similarly
    been dealt with on the basis of the submissions. The representative for
    the SSHD agreed to the suggested course.

    Factual Background

 9. In assessing the facts of the case I have taken account of the evidence
    presented before the previous judge and the  summary  contained  in  my
    decision on the error of law.  I also heard evidence from  NS.  I  have
    taken account of all the evidence submitted.

10. The two adult claimants, MS and AK, came to the UK  as  visitors.  They
    entered the UK on the 24th November 2003. At the  time  of  entry  they
    were accompanied by their son, NS, who at the time was  six  years  old
    having been born on the 28th April 1996.

11. According to their joint statement the circumstances of  the  claimants
    in India had been extremely dire; they had had financial  difficulties;
    and they were living on the poverty line. They claim that they came  to
    the United Kingdom for economic reasons and so  to  ensure  that  their
    family could prosper and survive [see paragraph 6 of the  statement  in
    the bundle]. Clearly, according to their  statement,  MS  and  AK  were
    coming to stay and were coming for economic betterment. They  were  not
    visitors and did  not  intend  to  return  to  India.  Given  that  the
    claimants were allegedly in dire circumstances no explanation was given
    for how the claimants could afford the costs of  visit  visas  and  air
    travel to the UK. None of the documents relating to the original  visit
    visas have been  submitted,  which  may  be  understandable  given  the
    passage of time.

12. MS and AK were allegedly living with family members in a  village  some
    78 miles  outside  Jalandhar  [Jhalandar]  in  the  Punjab.  [Jalandhar
    appears to be in the Northern 1/3 of  Punjab  about  75-100  kilometres
    South-East of Amritsar]. They were living  with  MS'  parents  together
    with a brother [brother A] and his family. Brother A  had  married  the
    sister of AK.  MS' father owned a house in which he and  his  wife  and
    brother A and his wife with their four children lived.

13. It is alleged that the MS' father has died;  that  brother  A  died  in
    2014; that another elder brother is seeking to claim the land  and  the
    house; that the house was damaged by the severe rains last year and the
    roof collapsed; and the house is not habitable.

14. It is alleged that the wife of brother A is now living with a neighbour
    with her four children. She, it is alleged, has no means of support and
    is dependent upon MS and the family in the UK  to  send  her  money  to
    support herself and her children. No evidence was given as to any other
    family members in the UK lawfully save NS. As stated NS has been  given
    leave and has been  working  but  consistent  with  other  evidence  it
    appears that MS and AK have been working at times, albeit unlawfully.

15. The claimants' son, NS in evidence stated that about �100-150 was  sent
    on a monthly basis to support the family,  MS'  brother  A's  wife  and
    children of brother A. However it appears that there are  other  family
    members in India. There was certainly reference to an elder brother and
    to at least one brother of AK,  the  mother  of  this  family.  It  was
    suggested that with regard to MS' family there had been a  falling  out
    and the claimants would receive no help or assistance  from  family  in
    India. I note otherwise the details of the family set out in  paragraph
    12 of the statement.

16. The adult claimants entered on visit visas. On arrival in the  UK  they
    were helped by a relative, who took them in and helped MS find  a  job.
    According to the evidence given by the son that relative was in the  UK
    illegally. The relative, it is  alleged,  left  the  UK  in  2007.  The
    circumstances of the relative  leaving  are  not  clear.  There  is  no
    identification of the relative and no  substantive  details  about  his
    situation.

17. Having entered the United Kingdom the family remained here. On 1  April
    2005 the minor child of the family, the third claimant LK, was born  in
    the United Kingdom. It appears that the family remained in the UK  with
    MS and AS working illegally. At paragraph 13 of the statement indicates
    that MS is a builder working as and when he can find work and  that  AS
    works to some extent as a caterer at Asian weddings and homes.

18. On 25 April 2012 the claimant family  made  application  for  leave  to
    remain in respect of all the family including NS.

19. It appears that originally decisions were made in or  about  June  2013
    refusing the  applications  without  an  in-country  right  of  appeal.
    However after judicial review proceedings there was an  agreement  that
    the SSHD would reconsider the applications, make  fresh  decisions  and
    give an in-country right of appeal.

20. On review of the decisions by the SSHD the son of the family,  NS,  was
    granted leave under paragraph 276ADE(v) on 23 June 2014. At the date of
    decision NS was over 18 and would have spent 12 years or more than half
    his life in the United Kingdom. In granting the son's application there
    is reference in the paperwork from the SSHD to the fact  that  the  son
    has a choice as to whether he wants to return to India with  the  other
    family members.

21. The claimants were refused leave to remain in the UK and decisions were
    made to remove them from the UK on the 23rd June  2014.  The  claimants
    appealed against the decisions.

22. The evidence disclosed that all the claimants and NS live together in a
    single family unit  and  that  they  provide  each  other  with  mutual
    emotional and financial support. It is claimed that  if  the  claimants
    are removed to India NS would be left alone in the  UK.  The  claimants
    took no steps to regularise their status until 2012 at which  point  NS
    would be seeking to go to college to study "A" levels and may not  have
    been able to do so without lawful status. NS whilst being in  education
    also appears to be in employment and was directing his income  in  part
    to support the family and assist the running of the  household.  It  is
    alleged that there was a close relationship between NS and LK.

23. The position of the MS and AK is clear they of themselves have  entered
    illegally and have no basis for remaining in their own  right  but  are
    dependent upon their relationship with NS and LK. They continue to have
    family ties in India both in MS and AK's families. They have  not  lost
    their ties to India

24. LK is a minor who has been in the UK for 10 years now, although at  the
    time of the application she had been in the UK for just over  7  years.
    Consideration has to be given to the best interests  of  the  child  in
    accordance with section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration
    Act 2009 and the duty to safeguard and promote the welfare of  children
    that are in the United Kingdom.

25. Clearly LK has never left the United Kingdom and has no  experience  of
    the education system in India or  experience  of  life  there.  LK  was
    attending school and had made friends and was fully integrated into the
    UK and the UK way of life and  its  educational  system.  LK  level  of
    achievement in school error pages 57 and  58  of  the  bundle.  I  know
    whilst there are reports as to her progress  in  school  there  was  no
    indication as to any specific impact of taking  her  from  the  current
    school setting to a different one in India. I also note that the family
    are registered with general practitioners but there is no  evidence  of
    any specific medical problems.

26. I note that there is a letter from  the  local  Gurdwara/temple.  Again
    other than suggesting that the family attends the temple  there  is  no
    indication of specific involvement of the family in  the  functions  of
    the temple.

27. I note that the evidence as to the impact on LK comes from the  MS  and
    AK. There is no comment from the school. There is no comment by  school
    teachers or the medical professionals. There is no evidence to  support
    the assertions made by MS and AK

28. With regard to LK it is asserted that she has now been in  the  UK  for
    over 10 years and it would be unreasonable to remove her from  the  UK.
    Otherwise it is asserted that MS and AK have family life with LK and NS
    and that it would be a breach of the rights under article 8  to  remove
    MS and AK.

    Law

29. I draw attention to the skeleton  argument  of  the  claimants.  It  is
    accepted  that  the  first  two  claimants  cannot  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules in their own right.

30. I would note that the assessment of the law applicable to  these  cases
    is made difficult by the many changes to the law and immigration  rules
    made over the last few years.  The  position  has  been  clarified  for
    decisions made post September 2012 as set out in the case of Singh 2015
    EWCA Civ 74.

31. The applications were made in 2012.  The  original  decisions  made  in
    2013. After judicial review fresh  decisions  were  made  in  2014.  In
    accordance with Singh the immigration rules as amended in July 2012 are
    to be considered.

32. The skeleton argument commences by  considering  the  position  of  LK.
    Clearly LK is a child and has been in the UK at least 10 years  at  the
    time of the hearing before me. First and foremost an assessment has  to
    be made of the best interests of the child in accordance  with  section
    55 of the 2009 Act.

33. In assessing the best interests of the child I  draw  attention  to  EV
    (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874.  The judgment in the case  of
    EV (Philippines) & Ors Lord Justice Christopher Clarke at paragraph  33
    states:-

         "33  More important  for  present  purposes  is  to  know  how  the
         tribunal should approach the proportionality  exercise  if  it  has
         determined that the best interests of the  child  or  children  are
         that they should continue with their education in England.  Whether
         or not it is in the interests of a child to  continue  his  or  her
         education in England may depend on what assumptions one makes as to
         what happens to the parents. There can be cases where it is in  the
         child's best interests to remain  in  education  in  the  UK,  even
         though one or both parents did not  remain  here.  In  the  present
         case, however, I take the FTT's finding to be that it  was  in  the
         best interests of the  children  to  continue  their  education  in
         England with both parents  living  here.  That  assumes  that  both
         parents are here. But the best interests of the  child  are  to  be
         determined by reference to the child alone without reference to the
         immigration history or status of either parent."

34. It is the last line that may be considered to be the most  material  in
    respect of this appeal. The judgment continues by setting out  criteria
    to assess the best  interests  of  the  child.  Paragraphs  34  and  35
    provide:-

         "34. In determining whether or not, in a case such as the  present,
         the need for immigration control outweighs the  best  interests  of
         the children, it is necessary to determine the relative strength of
         the factors which make it in their best interests to  remain  here;
         and also to take account of any factors that point the other way.

      1. A decision as to what is in the best  interests  of  children  will
         depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b) the length
         of time that they have been here; (c) how long they  have  been  in
         education; (c) what stage their education has reached; (d) to  what
         extent they have become distanced from the country to which  it  is
         proposed that they return; (e) how renewable their connection  with
         it may be; (f) to what extent they will have linguistic, medical or
         other difficulties in adapting to life in that country; and (g) the
         extent to which the  course  proposed  will  interfere  with  their
         family  life  or  their  rights  (if  they  have  any)  as  British
         citizens."

35. Lord Justice Lewison puts a gloss on the approach to be adopted in  the
    same case. He  states :-

         "58   In  my  judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
         interests of the children must be made on the basis that the  facts
         are as they are in the real world. If one parent has  no  right  to
         remain, but the other parent does, that is the  background  against
         which the assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the  right
         to remain, then that is the background against which the assessment
         is conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be: is it  reasonable
         to expect the child to follow the parent with no right to remain to
         the country of origin?

         59   On the facts of  ZH  it  was  not  reasonable  to  expect  the
         children to follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because  the
         family would be separated and the children would be deprived of the
         right to grow up in the country of which they were citizens.

         60   That is a long way from the facts of our  case.  In  our  case
         none of the family is a British citizen.  None  has  the  right  to
         remain in this country. If the mother is removed, the father has no
         independent right to remain. If the parents are removed, then it is
         entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with them. As  the
         immigration judge found it is obviously in their best interests  to
         remain with their parents. Although it is, of course a question  of
         fact for the tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of  being
         educated at public expense in the UK can outweigh  the  benefit  to
         the children of remaining with their parents.  Just  as  we  cannot
         provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate  the
         world."

36. In respect of the immigration rules it is for the Appellants  to  prove
    that they meet the requirements of any rule relied upon on the  balance
    of probabilities.

37. In respect of the minor Appellant, LK, consideration has to be given to
    paragraph  276ADE  and  the   Immigration   Directorate   Instructions,
    specifically Family Migration Appendix FM Section 1.0b and Appendix  FM
    family life (as a partner or parent) and private life: 10 year Routes.

38. The relevant provisions of paragraph 276 ADE provide: --

         'Private life

         Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain  on  the
         grounds of private life

         276 ADE (1) The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the
         date of the application, the applicant:

             i)   does not fall for refusal under any  of  the  grounds  in
             Section S-LTR.1.2 to S-LTR.2.3 and S-LTR.3.1 in  Appendix  FM;
             and

             ii)  has made a valid application for leave to remain  on  the
             grounds of private life in the UK; and ...

             iv)  is under the age of 18 years and has  lived  continuously
             in the UK for at least seven years (discounting any period  of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK.'

39. The provisions stipulate that the relevant date  is  the  date  of  the
    application.  The  second  factor,  which  requires  consideration,  is
    whether or not it would be reasonable to expect LK to leave the  United
    Kingdom. In assessing that I have to take account  of  the  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions.

40. The relevant provisions of  the  Immigration  Directorate  Instructions
    provides as follows:-

         '11 Best Interests of any Child.

         ...

         11.2.4 that would  it  be  unreasonable  to  expect  a  non-British
         Citizen child to leave the UK?

         The requirement that a non-British Citizen child has lived  in  the
         UK for a continuous period of at  least  the  7  years  immediately
         preceding the date of the application, recognises  that  over  time
         children start to put down roots and integrate into the life in the
         UK, to the extent that being  required  to  leave  the  UK  may  be
         unreasonable. The longer the child has resided in the UK  the  more
         the balance will begin to swing in terms of being  unreasonable  to
         expect the child to leave the UK,  and  stronger  reasons  will  be
         required in order to refuse the case with continuous  UK  residence
         of more than seven years.'

41. Examples thereafter given of issues to be considered. Such factors as

         'a)  Would it be reasonable to expect the child to live in  another
         country?

         b)   Would there be a significant risk to the child's health?

         c)   Would the child be leaving with the parents?

         d)   The extent of wider a family ties in the UK or in the  country
         of return.

         e)   Was a child  be  able  to  reintegrate  into  the  country  of
         destination?'

42. In item c) it is pointed out that the best interests  of  a  child  are
    generally to remain with  their  parents  and  that  unless  there  are
    special factors applying, it would generally be reasonable to expect  a
    child to leave with their parents, particularly if the parents have  no
    right to remain in the UK.

43. I would also note that under section 117A-B of the 2002 Act as amended.
    The relevant provisions of Section 117B provide:-

         '117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in  all
             cases

          1. The maintenance of effective immigration  control  is  in  the
             public interest

          2. ....

          3. ....

          4. Little weight should be given to

               a) a private life, or

               b) a relationship formed at the qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully

          5. Little weight should be given to a private  lives  established
             by a person at a time when the person's immigration status  is
             precarious.

          6. In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the persons removal of where

               a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
                  relationship with the qualifying child, and

               b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom.'

44. The claimants', MS and AK, only had leave under a visit visa  but  even
    that was open to challenge as MS and AK were never genuinely  visitors.
    LK has never had any leave, although it  cannot  be  said  that  it  is
    through her will or volition that she has been in the UK.  The  conduct
    of the parents should not be held against  the  child  LK.  I  must  be
    careful not to penalise LK for their conduct. However the  position  of
    the child has to be assessed in light of  the  fact  that  the  parents
    would in the normal course of events be returned to India.

45. Subparagraph 6 is material in respect of MS and AK, in that  if  it  is
    not reasonable for LK to return to India there is no public interest in
    removing MS and AK.

46. As a final matter in  respect  of  the  child  I  would  note  that  in
    accordance with the 1981 British Nationality Act the child may  now  be
    entitled to be registered as a British citizen having been born in  the
    United Kingdom and having been residence here for 10 years [see section
    1(4) 1981 British Nationality Act].

47. The claimants seek to rely upon the Immigration Rules and article 8. In
    respect of the immigration rules the burden is upon  the  claimants  to
    prove on the balance  of  probabilities  that  they  meet  all  of  the
    requirements of any rule upon which they are seeking to rely.

48. In respect of all the claimants Article 8 is raised. All claim to  have
    established a family and private life in the UK. In respect thereof the
    burden is on the claimants to establish they have a family and  private
    life in  the  UK  and  that  the  decision  sufficiently  significantly
    interferes with the family and/or private life. Thereafter the decision
    has to be in accordance with the law and for a purpose set out  in  the
    article itself, in this case the maintenance of immigration control  as
    an aspect of the economic well-being of the country. Finally  the  SSHD
    has to prove that the decision is proportionately justified. In respect
    of Article 8 I follow the approach set down in the case of Razgar  2004
    UKHL27.

    Consideration

49. I have as a primary consideration to assess the best interests  of  LK.
    Such has to be considered in context in accordance with  the  judgments
    in EV above.

50. It has been conceded that MS and AK cannot themselves succeed under the
    rules. They have not been  in  the  UK  for  periods  stipulated  under
    paragraph 276ADE and otherwise continue to have ties to  India  in  the
    form of family ties, cultural  ties  and  ties  with  friends.  If  the
    claimants are to be believed at the least the person that  helped  them
    in the UK, when they initially arrived, has returned to India.  I  find
    that they have not lost all ties to India.

51. I also find that whilst, if they were returned as a couple,  it may  be
    require them to make adjustments there are no significant obstacles  to
    their reintegration into their home country.

52. In the normal course of events they would be returned to India.  Whilst
    LK has been in the UK a significant amount of time and whilst  she  has
    been educated here in the normal course of events the best interests of
    LK would be to remain with her parents. However consideration has to be
    given to the  circumstances  that  would  face  the  family  were  they
    returned to India.

53. There is in respect of this case a lack  of  supporting  evidence  from
    other sources. In respect of the circumstances, which  caused  them  to
    leave India, there is no evidence from any source to support any of the
    claims of the claimants.

54. There are none of the documents used by the claimants  to  substantiate
    that they were genuine visitors. There must have been documentation  to
    show that they had commitments in India to  which  they  would  return.
    Equally the claimants say that they were in dire circumstances but they
    had sufficient funds to pay the costs of the visas and  travel  and  an
    Entry Clearance Officer  must  have  been  satisfied  that  they  could
    maintain themselves.

55. In order to obtain the visas MS and AK must have lied about their  true
    intentions. Their intention then was to come to  the  UK  for  economic
    betterment and they were willing to  lie  in  order  to  achieve  their
    purpose.  They  were  then  assisted  when  they  were  in  the  UK  by
    individuals  already  unlawfully  here  to   find   work,   to   obtain
    accommodation, to stay here  without  attempting  to  regularise  their
    status. They knew that they had no right to be here but they worked and
    lived illegally flouting the laws of the UK.

56. It was only after 9 years in the UK  that  they  sought  to  regularise
    their presence in the UK. They have given  no  reason  for  seeking  to
    regularise their status at that time.

57. Their current purpose is to remain in the UK. Given the extent to which
    MS and AK were willing to go to bring  about  their  original  purpose,
    without evidence to support the  claims  of  the  claimants  I  am  not
    satisfied that I can place  any  reliance  upon  the  evidence  of  the
    claimants. Whilst NS may be considered to be in a different position in
    that his right to remain in the UK has been established, I am also  not
    satisfied that any reliance can be placed on NS, as he is  desirous  of
    supporting his parent's attempt to remain in the UK.

58. I would also note that once in the UK they were assisted by people that
    they knew that were here and here illegally. Yet they suggest  that  at
    least one, who has returned to India, and other friends that they would
    have in India in any event would not be able to assist them. I  do  not
    find such claims credible. I am satisfied that MS  and  AK  would  have
    friends and family in  India  on  whom  they  can  rely  for  help  and
    assistance.

59. In the circumstances I am not satisfied that the  claimants  have  told
    the truth with regard to the circumstances that caused  them  to  leave
    India. Whilst I am willing to accept that  they  came  to  the  UK  for
    economic betterment,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  they  were  in  dire
    circumstances in India. Further I am not  satisfied  that  the  alleged
    circumstances that would face them on return  are  as  claimed.  Whilst
    again I accept that MS and AK have family in India I am  not  satisfied
    the circumstances of the family are as claimed.  I  am  satisfied  that
    there would be family members and friends on whom MS and AK could  rely
    for assistance, help and support.

60. With regard to the circumstances in the UK,  whilst  there  are  claims
    that both MS and AK work, there is again only their claims and there is
    no evidence as to the level of their income, no evidence of  tax  being
    paid.  Whether  LK  can  be  properly  or  adequately   supported   and
    accommodated by the MS and AK in the UK are  highly  material  factors.
    There is a lack of evidence as to the circumstances in which  they  are
    living and how they are supporting themselves.

61. The evidence otherwise does not identify any medical need  of  LK  that
    justifies her remaining in the UK. There is no evidence of any  medical
    need in any member of the family.

62. While there is a letter from the Gurdwara such does  not  identify  any
    significant involvement or  religious  commitment  that  could  not  be
    satisfied by membership of a Gurdwara in India.

63. There are assertions that LK has friends in the UK; is immersed in  the
    culture of the UK; and is in education in the  UK.  LK  is  in  primary
    school. She has had the benefit of five years at school. Whilst clearly
    she will have friends at school, no evidence has been put forward  from
    such friends. Soon she would be changing  to  a  secondary  school  and
    adjusting to a totally different school regime. There is no  statements
    or evidence from the teachers or friends either  in  the  community  or
    from the school or Gurdwara.

64. Whilst it has to be accepted that LK will have friends  at  school,  it
    has to be acknowledged at her age her  main  focus  of  life  would  be
    family. In the normal course of events her  parents  who  have  entered
    illegally would be returned to India. It is in that  context  that  the
    IDI Guidance has to be considered the guidance specifically  identifies
    that where the parents are to be returned a child can  be  expected  to
    return with them.

65. In respect of NS he is in education. He has leave  to  remain  but  the
    main commitment of LK is to her parents. There is nothing  to  stop  NS
    returning with his family to India and seeking  to  take  up  education
    there or find employment. There are, as I have found people  in  India,
    who would be able to assist the family.

66. I must take care not to penalise the  child  for  the  actions  of  the
    parents. However LK's parents have no right  to  be  here  and  in  the
    normal course of events would be returned to India. The best  interests
    of LK are to be considered in light of that in accordance with the case
    of EV and the judgment of LJ Lewison. The best interests of  LK  are  I
    find to remain with her parents. In the circumstances I find that  even
    though the child had been in the UK for 7 years  at  the  time  of  the
    application and at the date of the hearing 10 years  I  find  that  the
    best interests of this child are to remain with her  parents  including
    returning to India with them.

67. I also find taking account of all the circumstances that  it  would  be
    reasonable for LK and her parents to return to India.  I  am  satisfied
    that they would have friends and family in India, who would be able  to
    assist the family in finding work, accommodation and means of  support.
    I find that it would be reasonable for LK to return to India  with  her
    parents.

68. In the circumstances I do not find that the claimants succeed under the
    Immigration Rules.

69. In considering Article 8 clearly the claimants have established  family
    and private lives in the UK and the  decision  will  clearly  interfere
    with such. I am satisfied that the decision is in accordance  with  the
    law and for the purpose of maintaining immigration control as an aspect
    of the economic well-being of the UK. Finally for the reasons  set  out
    above and taking account of all the evidence and the best interests  of
    the child, I find that the decision is proportionately justified.

    Notice of Decision

70. I set the decision of the First-tier Tribunal aside.   I  substitute  a
    decision dismissing the appeals on grounds.

71. An anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
