

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
IA/27363/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |       Decision and Reasons         |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 5 April 2016                          |       On 29 April 2016             |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES

                                   Between

                               RAYMOND IHUNDA
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the appeal of Raymond Ihunda, a citizen  of  Nigeria  born  24
      October 1971, against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  of  18
      September 2015 dismissing his appeal against the decision  of  4  June
      2014 to refuse his application for a  residence  card  confirming  his
      asserted right to reside as the spouse of Margarida Domingas Sanha,  a
      German national.


   2. The application was refused partly due to doubts as to the  provenance
      of documents said to corroborate their cohabitation,  but  principally
      on account of a visit to the address given for the matrimonial home, [
                       ], on 28 May 2014, details of which were set out in a
      dated report by a named immigration officer, whereby  the  absence  of
      the Appellant and his wife gave rise to concerns,  particularly  given
      that a male living at that address said that the Appellant  had  moved
      out in the latter part of 2013 or early  2014  and  only  occasionally
      returned, to collect his mail. He said that the Appellant's  room  had
      been a ground floor one which he had shared with another  male,  which
      had always contained two single beds. So far as he was aware  (and  he
      had been in residence at the date that the Appellant  had  claimed  to
      have been living at the same address with Ms  Sanha),  no  female  had
      ever lived there and he was not aware that the Appellant had ever been
      married or had a girlfriend.


   3.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  effectively   adopted   the   Respondent's
      reasoning, adding that "Based  on  the  information  detailed  in  the
      immigration reports which I have  seen,  the  Respondent  I  note  had
      sufficient evidence to  believe  that  the  marriage  ...  is  one  of
      convenience for the sole purpose of the  appellant  remaining  in  the
      UK". Additionally the First-tier Tribunal  was  concerned  as  to  the
      authenticity of the letters with which the  Home  Office  had  already
      taken issue, as their headers and signatures  were  very  blurred  and
      bore marks which gave cause for concern as to whether they were  truly
      copies of original documents or had been somehow tampered  with.   The
      unsigned witness statement provided by the  Appellant  asserting  that
      his marriage was genuine (and stating his belief that the case did not
      require his physical presence) did not dispel these doubts; on balance
      of probabilities the First-tier Tribunal rejected their claim to be in
      a genuine marriage.


   4. Grounds of appeal contended that the credibility of the witness  whose
      hearsay evidence bore so heavily on his  case  had  been  untested  by
      cross examination, and asserted that in reality that evidence had been
      of vindictive authorship; additionally  the  mere  appearance  of  the
      Croydon letters should not have  counted  against  their  reliability.
      Additionally the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law by  placing  the
      burden of proof on the Appellant to show that the marriage was genuine
      once the matter had been raised. The failure to  produce  the  earlier
      decision was a matter that could equally well have been  held  against
      the Secretary of State.


   5. Permission to appeal was granted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  15
      February  2016  on  the  basis  that  there  was  indeed  an  arguable
      misdirection as the burden of proof and as to the appropriate approach
      following Papajorgi. A Rule 24 Response from the Secretary of State of
      3 March 2016 set out  that  the  statement  that  the  Respondent  had
      sufficient evidence to believe the marriage  was  one  of  convenience
      dealt sufficiently with the burden of proof.


Findings and reasons


   6. Papajorgji [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC) explains that at the outset  of  an
      application, there is no burden on a claimant to  demonstrate  that  a
      marriage to an EEA national is not one of convenience: there is merely
      an evidential burden on the claimant to address evidence justifying  a
      reasonable suspicion that  the  marriage  was  entered  into  for  the
      predominant purpose of securing residence rights. At  [27]  Papajorgji
      sets out that "there is no burden on the claimant  in  an  application
      for a family permit to establish that she was not party to a  marriage
      of convenience unless the circumstances known to  the  decision  maker
      give reasonable ground for suspecting that this was the case."


   7. In  Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ 14 the Court of Appeal examined the  question
      of the burden of proof in EEA marriage of convenience cases, upholding
      the reasoning in  Papajorgi and finding that


   a) The legal burden lies on the Secretary  of  State  to  prove  that  an
      otherwise valid marriage is a marriage of convenience  [24]  -  whilst
      the legal  burden  remains  on  the  national  authorities  throughout
      proceedings, the evidential burden may nevertheless shift [29];


   b) It is for the national court to verify  the  existence  of  any  abuse
      relied upon by the authorities of a Member State,  evidence  of  which
      must be adduced in accordance with rules of national law [26];


   c) Cases will only rarely turn on questions of the burden of  proof  [39]
      although where there is an error as to burden  the  court  should  not
      lightly conclude that the outcome would inevitably have been the  same
      with had a correct direction been made [38].


   8. I do not consider that the  concerns  as  to  the  appearance  of  the
      letters alone could have justified any suspicions as to the bona fides
      of the marriage: the link between that evidence and the  substance  of
      the relationship is too remote.  However, the information gained  from
      the Appellant's former housemate during the Respondent's visit to  the
      Appellant's claimed matrimonial home did give real cause  for  concern
      over the genuine nature of the  marriage,  sufficient  to  permit  the
      Respondent to raise the matter as one requiring determination in these
      appeal proceedings: to put it another way, it shifted  the  evidential
      burden onto the Appellant. Although the grounds of appeal contend that
      the hearsay evidence of the immigration officer's interlocutor at  the
      Appellant's  address  should  not  have  been  accepted  absent  cross
      examination, the more remarkable absence at the hearing below was that
      of the Appellant, who had he attended that hearing would have had  the
      opportunity to answer in person any doubts raised by that visit.


   9. He might additionally  have  sought  a  witness  summons  against  the
      individual who  he  claims  passed  on  malicious  falsehoods  to  the
      authorities so that the latter's  evidence  might  have  been  tested;
      alternatively the Appellant might have put forward character witnesses
      of his own. As noted by Stanley Burnton LJ in the very context of  EEA
      appeals in  Amos  [2011]  EWCA  Civ  552,  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
      Procedure Rules authorise the Tribunal to allow oral,  documentary  or
      other evidence to be given of any fact which appears to be relevant to
      an appeal even if that evidence would be inadmissible in  a  court  of
      law. So there is no doubt that evidence emanating from the  visit  was
      admissible, though the weight to be given to it was a matter  for  the
      Judge below. Absent any cogent evidence being provided  to  contradict
      it,  the  resolution  of  the  appeal   against   the   Appellant   is
      unremarkable.


  10. Furthermore, it is clear from reading the decision below that this was
      not an appeal in which the Judge was left in any doubt as to where the
      truth lay, and thus as to which the question of burden of proof  might
      have been determinative: because, as it was put in Rosa at  [39],  the
      answer to the question was clear-cut.


  11. For these reasons I consider that there is no  error  of  law  in  the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

          Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  upheld  as  there  is  no
    material error of law within it.  The appeal is dismissed.





Signed:                                            Date: 27 April 2016


[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes
