
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/27344/2014
                                                               IA/27350/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Upper Tribunal            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th March 2016                            |On 14th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                    [J U]
                               [J C] (A MINOR)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr C Timpson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss C Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The  Appellants  are  respectively  mother  and  daughter.   The  First
    Appellant had applied for a residence card as confirmation of  a  right
    to reside in the United Kingdom.  That application was refused  by  the
    Secretary of State by Notice of Refusal  dated  10th  June  2014.   The
    Appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen sitting at Manchester on  28th
    January 2015.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on  18th  February
    2015 the judge concluded that the only issue before  him  for  decision
    was whether the Appellants have a current right to  reside  in  the  UK
    under the 2006 Regulations.  They accepted  that  they  did  not.   The
    judge did not consider that he needed under the present law to go on to
    consider any appeal pursuant to Article 8 of the European Convention on
    Human Rights.

 2.  On  27th  April  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bartlett   granted
    permission to appeal on the basis that the Appellant's contention  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge should have followed the approach  in  JM
    (Liberia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1402 and considered the appeal under  Article
    8 raised an arguable error of law.

 3. On that basis the appeal came before me to determine whether there  was
    a material error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  The Appellants appeared by their instructed Counsel Mr Timpson.
     The Secretary of State appeared by her Home Office Presenting  Officer
    Miss Johnstone.

 4. Mr Timpson acknowledged the facts of this case and Judge Burns' finding
    that the Notice of Refusal did not contain a  Section  120  notice  and
    that the Respondent had positively intended that Article 8 would not be
    considered in the proceedings.  He also acknowledged the finding of the
    Upper Tribunal in Amirteymour and Others (EEA  Appeals;  Human  Rights)
    [2015] UKUT 466 (IAC) which is authority  for  stating  that  where  no
    notice under Section 120 of the 2002 Act has been served  and  when  no
    EEA decision to remove has been made, an Appellant cannot bring a human
    rights challenge to remove in an appeal under the EEA  Regulations  and
    that neither the factual matrix nor the reasoning in JM  (Liberia)  has
    any application to appeals of this nature.

 5. In the light of such findings Mr Timpson  invited  me  to  adjourn  the
    appeal bearing  in  mind  that  there  was  a  pending  application  in
    Amirteymour to the Court of Appeal.  I advised that in accordance  with
    practice handed down to Upper Tribunal Judges it was not appropriate to
    stay the proceedings.

 6. In such circumstances Mr  Timpson  indicated  his  instruction  was  to
    withdraw the appeal subject to the provisions of paragraph  17  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and  subject  to  the
    approval of the Tribunal and the consent of  the  Secretary  of  State.
    Miss Johnstone on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  provided  such
    consent and I provided the same on behalf of the Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The Appellants' appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  withdrawn  pursuant  to
paragraph 17 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  and  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal is consequently maintained.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

