
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27200/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 5 September 2016                        |On 17 October 2016               |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                            ARULAMMAH THEVARAJAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:  Miss J Heybroek, Counsel, instructed Kothala & Co
                    (Harrow Road)

For the Respondent: Mr S Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    The  Appellant,  a  national  of  Sri  Lanka,  appeals   against   the
    Respondent's decision to refuse a residence  card,  dated  15  February
    2015, with reference to Regulation 7(1)(c)  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations").  The basis  of  refusal  was
    that the Secretary of State  concluded  the  Appellant  had  failed  to
    demonstrate that she was genuinely dependent upon an EEA family member.

2.   Her appeal against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Hetherington ("the judge") who  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  EEA
    Regulations  on  22  February  2016.   The  grounds  of  challenge  are
    essentially that the judge had  taken  an  incorrect  approach  to  the
    extent of financial circumstances and the extent to which  the  Sponsor
    in fact met  by  both  money  and  accommodation  for  the  Appellant's
    essential needs.  The point was taken that the  permission  granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Deans,  sitting  as  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, on 3 August  2016  makes  reference  to  previous  dependency
    before the Appellant entered the United Kingdom but it is common ground
    that that was not a requirement for she is, if at all,  eligible  as  a
    family member under Regulation 7.

3.   The position is that the grounds of appeal  do  not  challenge  in  any
    particular the adverse credibility findings which the  judge  made.  He
    rejected the  credibility  of  the  Appellant,  her  daughter  and  the
    Sponsor, taking the view that they were merely saying in evidence  what
    they thought would best suit their case and as he put it, on a  balance
    of probability  "...  I  did  not  find  either  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant, her daughter and the sponsor to  be  persuasive."   He  then
    concluded that he found the evidence  in  support  of  the  Appellant's
    application lacked credibility.  Accordingly the appeal failed.

4.   Mr Kotas argues that the assessment of credibility was critical  to  an
    assessment as to whether there was present dependency by the  Appellant
    upon an EEA national bearing in mind of course that dependency can come
    from a variety of sources.  He  says,  seemingly  correctly,  that  the
    judge made no direct finding  on  whether  or  not  the  Appellant  was
    resident with her daughter, a co-Sponsor with the son-in-law.  In  that
    respect it would appear he did not make  an  express  finding  on  that
    issue but rather he concentrated upon the evidence in relation to other
    aspects of dependency and reached the view, as I have  set  out  above,
    that she did not.   He  evidently  received  evidence  from  which  the
    inference could be drawn that the  Appellant  felt  at  home  with  the
    Sponsors and that certainly the Sponsor, Mr Rock, was  not  essentially
    disbelieved.

5.   It seems to me therefore that as a  fact  the  absence  of  an  express
    finding of cohabitation in that  sense  with  these  co-Sponsors  makes
    really no difference. The key to it was not so much where she is living
    there but the extent to which she was truly financially dependent.   In
    this respect the judge was entitled to take the view for good or ill so
    far as I am concerned, that he did and  rejected  that  the  Sponsor(s)
    were meeting the essential needs of the Appellant even if the Appellant
    was being accommodated,  which is obviously  part  of  those  essential
    needs.

6.   In  the  circumstances  whilst  I  might  not  have  reached  the  same
    decision, it seems to me that those points which are being appealed are
    to a degree confounded by the adverse  findings  on  credibility.   The
    obvious course to resolve this is to better present the evidence  which
    is material to the issue. I am not suggesting for one moment that  Miss
    Bhachu, who represented the Appellant before the judge, made any  error
    in terms of her practice and presentation of the case but if there were
    shortcomings it appears those were sufficient for the judge to form the
    view that the appeal on the evidence before him should fail.

7.   No anonymity order was made and none is sought today.

Notice of Decision
8.   For  these  reasons  the  appeal  fails  and  the  Original  Tribunal's
    decision stands.

Signed                                  Date 12 October2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
