
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27525/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 7 April 2017                     |On 10 May 2017                          |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                                MR aqdus ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma, Counsel instructed by Sky Solicitors
Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 20 September 1989.   He
    has been granted  permission  to  appeal  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Juss dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse his application for leave to  remain  as  a  student
    with reference to paragraphs 245ZX and 322(1A) of the Rules.


2.   The respondent's refusal notice said that the appellant had claimed  30
    points under Appendix A of  the  Immigration  Rules  for  a  valid  CAS
    assigned  by  the  Birmingham  Institute  of  Education  Training   and
    Technology.   However,  the  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant had a valid CAS because  the  Tier  4  Sponsor  Register  was
    checked on 21 July 2015  and  the  Birmingham  Institute  of  Education
    Training and Technology was not listed as of this date.  Therefore, the
    appellant had not met the requirements to be awarded  30  points  under
    Appendix A.

3.   Furthermore, the appellant had for  the  purposes  of  his  application
    dated  11  January  2014,  submitted  a  TOEIC  certificate  from   the
    Educational Testing Service (ETS) to the Home Office and his sponsor in
    order for them to provide him with a  Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for
    Studies.  According to the information provided to the Home  Office  by
    ETS, the appellant obtained the TOEIC certificate 004420518201.3013  as
    a result of a test that he took at the College of Skills  and  Learning
    on 27 November 2013.  According to ETS, the appellant's test was  taken
    by a proxy.   Accordingly,  he  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 245ZX(a) of the Immigration Rules.

4.   The judge noted that despite the fact  that  a  serious  allegation  of
    impersonation had been levied against the appellant, and the  appellant
    had set out to contest the serious allegation, no witness statement was
    filed before him or served upon the respondent.  It  was  only  at  the
    hearing  that  the  appellant's  representative  submitted  a   witness
    statement which she herself had signed  and  dated  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.

5.   The judge said it was agreed that there were  two  issues  before  him.
    First, that the appellant had previously been refused entry in 2007 and
    that there was an issue of non-disclosure  by  him  when  he  made  his
    online application.  Second, whether he took the  TOEIC  test  himself.
    The judge said however that there was a third issue  and  that  was  in
    relation to the appellant claiming  30  points  on  the  basis  of  his
    studying  at  the  Birmingham  Institute  of  Education  Training   and
    Technology, for which he had no CAS, and whereby the register had  been
    checked on 21 July 2015, only to  find  that  the  institution  was  no
    longer registered there.

6.   The judge said at paragraph 2 that "in immigration appeals, the  burden
    of proof is upon the Appellant and  the  standard  of  proof  is  on  a
    balance of probabilities."

7.   The judge found as follows:

         "17. I find that the Appellant does not  discharge  the  burden  of
             proof for the reasons given in the refusal letter.  First, the
             Appellant had been refused in 2007 and the issue was raised of
             material non-disclosure.  When expressly asked about this, the
             Appellant was adamant that he had disclosed everything on  his
             form.  When it was put to him that  this  could  not  be  true
             because A4 directly showed him answering 'No' in  relation  to
             whether he had been denied entry, he had  to  accept,  in  the
             face of the evidence, that he had not disclosed this fact.   I
             find that there is  an  element  of  dishonesty  here  and  of
             material non-disclosure.


         18.  Second, as far as the TOEIC  certificate  is  taken  from  the
             Educational Testing Service, I find  that  the  Appellant  has
             indeed submitted a false document in that I am  not  satisfied
             that he himself undertook the test, when he was not  attending
             college, but claims to have been at home  engaging  in  'self-
             study' which I  find  very  difficult  to  believe  given  the
             overall circumstances of this case.  It  is  significant  that
             his witness statement only arrives on the day of  the  hearing
             and then purports to reject everything that has  been  alleged
             against him.


         19.  Third, and no less importantly, the Appellant could  not  have
             been granted 30 points because upon a check being made of  the
             register on 21st  July  2015  it  transpired  that  Birmingham
             Institute of Education Training and Technology  had  not  been
             listed as of this date.  Even more  significantly  than  that,
             the Appellant knew as long as a year before then in July  2014
             that the college had actually closed down and he  so  admitted
             in evidence before this Tribunal, and yet he took no steps  to
             rectify his position in a timeous and efficient manner.


         20.  Finally, there is the issue  of  article  8,  and  although  I
             accept that the Appellant maintains  that  his  parents  would
             expect him to return back with a qualification from the UK, it
             is clear that  he  himself  has  done  nothing  whatsoever  to
             prosecute his intentions in any realistic  or  committed  way,
             letting six months to pass him  by,  then  providing  a  TOEIC
             certificate which I have found  to  be  fraudulent,  and  then
             enlisting at a college that itself has  been  closed  down  in
             2014, and  his  taking  no  steps  whatsoever  to  inform  the
             authorities of this.


         21.  The case for Patel makes it  quite  clear  that  there  is  no
             Article  8  right  to  education   and   in   the   particular
             circumstances of this case this is all the more so and Article
             8 cannot be treated as a general dispensing power for such  an
             Applicant."


8.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson granted the  appellant  permission
    to appeal.  He said that the grounds argued that the judge erred first,
    in paragraph 2 of his decision, in applying the wrong burden of  proof,
    the burden being upon the respondent to establish deception; second, in
    paragraph 18 of his decision, in relying upon general evidence,  rather
    than evidence particular to  the  appellant,  in  concluding  that  the
    appellant had used a proxy test taker in relation  to  an  ETS  English
    test; third, at paragraph 19 of his decision, by failing to  take  into
    account the fact that the respondent had acted unfairly in  failing  to
    provide the appellant with 60 days in order to  obtain  an  alternative
    Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies (CAS).

9.   FtTJ Hodgkinson said:

         "It is trite law that the burden of proving deception lies upon the
         respondent.  Nowhere in the decision does the Judge indicate  this;
         rather, he clearly states that the burden of proof  lies  upon  the
         appellant and he appears to have applied that burden throughout his
         decision.  That in itself amounts to an arguable error of  law  and
         it cannot be said that it has not arguably tainted the entirety  of
         his findings."


10.  In respect of the first ground, I find that the judge did  not  err  in
    law when he said that "In immigration appeals, the burden of  proof  is
    upon the appellant and the  standard  of  proof  is  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities".  I find that  this  is  generally  the  case.   I  find
    however that the judge was wrong at paragraph 17 to place the burden of
    proof on the appellant when considering the  issue  of  dishonesty  and
    material non-disclosure. As stated by FtTJ Hodgkinson,  the  burden  of
    proving deception lies upon the respondent.  Nevertheless, I find  that
    the error was not material to the judge's findings at paragraph  17  in
    light of the evidence that was before the judge and his analysis of the
    evidence.  The appellant's representative below said she would have  to
    accept  that  non-disclosure  does,  however,  require  an  element  of
    "dishonesty", but this had not been proven on the facts of  this  case.
    Her argument was that all that  the  appellant  was  guilty  of  was  a
    mistake.  I find that if that was indeed the case, the appellant  would
    have come up with that explanation rather  than  claiming  in  evidence
    that he had disclosed everything on the form. I find  on  the  evidence
    that the judge's decision that there was an element of  dishonesty  and
    of  material  non-disclosure  did  not  disclose  an  error   of   law.
    Consequently, I find that the respondent discharged the burden of proof
    upon her.

11.  The next issue was in respect of the ETS test taken  by  the  appellant
    which was said to have been taken by a proxy test taker.

12.  Mr Sharma submitted that at paragraph 13  of  the  decision  the  judge
    conflated the closure of the sponsor, namely the  Birmingham  Institute
    of  Education  Training  and  Technology  and  the  college  where  the
    appellant  took  the  ETS  test.   I  disagree.   Paragraph  13  was  a
    continuation of the judge's recording of the closing speech by Mr Swaby
    who was the Home Office Presenting Officer before the judge.  It was Mr
    Swaby who conflated the two colleges, not the  judge.   The  judge  had
    correctly recorded at paragraph 5  that  in  the  respondent's  refusal
    notice, it was stated, "according to the information  provided  to  the
    Home Office by the ETS, the appellant obtained  the  TOEIC  certificate
    004420518201.3013 as the result of a test that he took at  the  College
    of Skills and Learning on 27 November 2013".   It  is  therefore  right
    that the  appellant  could  not  have  taken  the  TOEIC  test  at  the
    Birmingham Institute  of  Education  Training  and  Technology  as  the
    college had been closed down.

13.  Mr Sharma submitted that in relation  to  the  ETS  test  results,  the
    judge had reversed the burden of proof.   I  accept  this  argument  in
    light  of  what  the  judge  said  at  paragraph  2  of  the  decision.
    Nevertheless, in SM & Qadir (ETS - evidence - burden of  proof)  [2016]
    UKUT 229 (IAC), it was held that the  respondent  bore  the  evidential
    burden of proof; that in the light of the information provided by  ETS,
    the respondent had discharged the  evidential  burden  on  her  as  per
    Shehzad v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    615.

14.  The next stage according to  SM  &  Qadir  was  for  the  appellant  to
    provide an innocent explanation; the third stage was for the matters to
    be considered in the round in order to assess  whether  the  respondent
    had discharged the legal burden.

15.  I accepted Mr. Sharma's  argument  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in
    failing to apply the three stages as per SM & Qadir.

16.  I therefore proceed to apply  the  three  stages  to  this  appellant's
    appeal.

17.  As already stated above, the first stage has  been  discharged  by  the
    respondent.

18.  In respect of the second stage, Mr Sharma submitted that the  appellant
    has done through his witness  statement.   Mr  Sharma  relied  on  Shen
    (paper appeals; proving dishonesty) [2014] UKUT 00236  (IAC)  to  argue
    that the explanation needs only meet a basic level of plausibility.  He
    submitted that notwithstanding that the appellant's evidence  was  bad,
    his account  was  plausible.  I  was  not  persuaded  by  Mr.  Sharma's
    argument. The judge at paragraph  6  said  that  what  the  appellant's
    witness statement does is to simply contest  the  allegation  that  the
    appellant did not use another person to undertake  his  voice  speaking
    test.  I agree with the judge that it  is  unsatisfactory,  that  on  a
    matter of such central and crucial importance,  the  allegation  levied
    against the person in question is not immediately dealt  with,  with  a
    clear-cut response.  Consequently, I do not accept that the appellant's
    explanation meets the basic minimum level of plausibility.

19.  Mr Armstrong referred to Appendix C1 and C2  which  had  the  ETS  Selt
    Source Data and the Mida  Matched  Data.   The  data  showed  that  the
    appellant's test certificate was invalid.  Mr Sharma argued  that  this
    was not the  ETS  Look-up  Tool  Document  which  was  referred  to  in
    paragraph 26 of Shehzad.  I find that while the evidence at C1  and  C2
    was  not  the  ETS  Look-Up  Tool  Document,  it  contained  sufficient
    information to lead me to find that the appellant's test  results  were
    invalidated by ETS.  Consequently,  I  find  that  the  respondent  has
    discharged the legal burden in establishing that the  appellant's  test
    results were fraudulently obtained.

20.  I now come to the issue of the CAS.  The evidence from  the  respondent
    is that when she checked the register on  21  July  2015,  the  Tier  4
    sponsor,  namely  Birmingham  Institute  of  Education   Training   and
    Technology was not listed as of this date.  Mr Sharma argued  that  the
    appellant's application should have been stayed for 60 days and for the
    respondent to issue him notice to vary his application within  60  days
    with a new CAS from a different Tier  4  Sponsor.   He  relied  on  the
    argument in the  grounds  that  the  respondent  failed  to  adopt  the
    fairness policy.

21.  I note that the appellant's application for leave to remain in  the  UK
    as a Tier 4 Student was made on 11 January 2014.  He submitted a  TOEIC
    certificate from ETS to the Home Office and his  sponsor  in  order  to
    provide them with a Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies.   According
    to information provided to the Home Office by  ETS  the  appellant  had
    obtained  the  TOEIC  certificate  by  use  of  a  proxy  test   taker.
    Accordingly, the respondent refused  his  application  because  he  had
    applied deception.  In view of my finding  that  the  appellant's  test
    certificate was invalid, I find  that  the  respondent's  decision  was
    sustainable.

22.  From the evidence that was before the judge,  the  appellant  had  been
    aware since July  2014  that  the  Birmingham  Institute  of  Education
    Training and Technology had actually closed down.   As  stated  by  the
    judge he took no steps to  rectify  his  position  in  a  tireless  and
    efficient manner.  At paragraph 9 of the determination it  is  recorded
    that in cross-examination the appellant said he had come to the  UK  in
    2011 to study for a year at Cambridge Western Academy but  the  college
    closed in mid 2012 and he had not studied since then, save to  do  some
    work at home.  He confirmed, however, that he had leave in this country
    up until 2014.  I find on this evidence that the appellant  had  ceased
    to  be  a  student  from  mid  2012.   He  had  not  communicated  this
    information to the Secretary of State.  Therefore, when he put  in  his
    application for further leave to remain as  a  student  on  11  January
    2014, the appellant was, in my  view,  deceiving  the  Home  Office  by
    pretending to be a student when he was not.  Accordingly, I  find  that
    the respondent was under no obligation to apply the policy of  fairness
    and grant him 60 days to find a new college.

23.  Having applied the three  stages  in  SM  &  Qadir,  I  find  that  the
    respondent has discharged the burden of proof on her.

Notice of Decision

24.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.







Signed                                  Date: 4 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun


