
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
IA/27824/2015

                                                 IA/27825/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 2 May 2017                         |       On 16 May 2017                 |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                Bhavnabahen Mitulbhai patel (first appellant)
                Mitulbhai Ramanbhia patel (second appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    The appellants did not appear and were not
represented
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are citizens of India.  The first appellant was born  on
    23 February 1976 and her husband, the second appellant, was born on  27
    November 1975.  The second appellant is  the  dependant  of  the  first
    appellant in this case  and  accordingly  the  outcome  of  his  appeal
    depends on the outcome of his wife's appeal.

2.   The First-tier Judge records that the appellants  originally  requested
    an oral hearing for their appeals and the matter was duly listed on  22
    June  2016.   However,  in  a  letter   from   the   appellants'   then
    representatives it was stated that the appellants no longer  wished  to
    have an oral hearing and accordingly the matter was dealt with  on  the
    papers at their request.
3.   The position was similar in the Upper Tribunal.  The appeal was  listed
    for an oral hearing on 2 May 2017, but  on  25  April  2017  the  Upper
    Tribunal was requested to decide the  appeal  in  the  absence  of  the
    appellants.

4.   I deem it appropriate to proceed with the matter in the absence of  the
    appellants at their request, bearing in mind the provisions of Rule 38.
     It is in the interests of justice to proceed.

5.   The principal appellant had made an application on 15 August  2014  for
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  On  24  July  2015  the
    application was refused  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  had  not
    provided a valid Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies (CAS).

6.   The First-tier Judge referred to EK (Ivory Coast) [2014] EWCA Civ  1517
    and concluded his determination as follows:

         "13. EK Ivory Coast makes it clear that there is  no  duty  on  the
             respondent to follow up an application and  the  circumstances
             surrounding when a CAS is  either  invalid  or  has  not  been
             issued.   The  first  appellant's  case  involved  a   similar
             circumstance whereby it was up to her to provide evidence that
             she was in possession of a valid CAS and she clearly failed to
             do this despite  being  granted  60  days  by  the  respondent
             through a letter to her dated 16 March 2015 (Pg 19AB), to show
             that she had obtained a valid CAS.  It did not follow that the
             respondent was therefore required to  either  grant  leave  or
             follow up why the appellant did not provide a valid CAS.   The
             first appellant clearly could not meet the requirements of the
             Immigration Rules by not providing a valid CAS  in  her  name,
             therefore it followed that her application fell to be refused.


         14.  The facts in the first appellant's case are very  clear.   She
             was  granted  60  days  to  arrange  another   CAS   following
             difficulties with the  sponsorship  licence  of  her  original
             educational institution so in all, the  respondent  has  acted
             properly and fairly at all times and it is the appellant's own
             doing that she has not managed to secure a  valid  CAS  during
             the extensive 60 day period granted to her for  this  purpose.
             In other words,  the  respondent  has  already  exercised  the
             discretion vested  in  her  under  her  existing  policies  by
             granting the appellant a grace of 60 days and she is under  no
             obligation to do more in this instance.


         15.  I noted a letter from the appellants' bundle  index  that  she
             has apparently made an application for a Derivative  Right  of
             Residence.  The Certificate of  Application  was  provided  at
             pages 21 to 24 of the appellants' bundle.   I  have  no  other
             details about this application and whether the respondent  has
             made a decision in this as  yet.   This  of  course  does  not
             prevent the current matters I am considering in this  decision
             being decided, and there was no application for these  matters
             to be adjourned until a later date whilst the outcome  of  the
             outstanding  Derivative  Right  of  Residence  application  is
             awaited.  That is a different matter and it  does  not  affect
             the decisions I have made in these appeals, and  is  something
             that those representing the appellants' must pursue separately
             outside the scope of these appeals."


7.   The judge noted that Article 8 had not been raised  and  dismissed  the
    appeals.  In the grounds of appeal from the  decision  it  was  claimed
    that the appellant had not been given a fair opportunity of 60 days  to
    vary her application in compliance with Patel  (revocation  of  sponsor
    licence - fairness) India [2011] UKUT 00211 (IAC).  The  appellant  had
    not been provided with a certified copy of her passport and accordingly
    could not obtain sponsorship from another licenced Tier 4 sponsor.

8.   Permission to appeal was refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  28
    October 2016 on the ground that the 60 day policy had been applied  and
    the appellant did not seek an extension of time to vary her application
    or suggest to the respondent that she had any difficulties in obtaining
    a  CAS  in  that  time.   Instead  she  had  made  a  wholly  different
    application under the EEA Regulations, which at the date of the hearing
    had not been the subject of a decision.  Article 8 had not been  raised
    in the grounds of appeal.  The application was renewed on  18  November
    2016 and permission to appeal was granted on 13 March 2017, although it
    was acknowledged that it was not apparent that the argument  now  being
    relied upon had been put to the First-tier Tribunal.

9.   The respondent filed a response on 23 March 2017.  It  was  noted  that
    the appellants had initially sought an oral hearing, but in the end had
    decided to have the case proceed on the papers:

         "They had every opportunity to put their case to the  tribunal  but
         now rely on evidence and an argument not advanced before the judge.
          The Secretary of State considers that this is a cynical  abuse  of
         the appeals process by the appellant[s]."

10.  The respondent did not accept there  was  any  failure  to  follow  the
    policy correctly, or if there was, that it was  in  any  way  material.
    There was no evidence that the appellants were in any way disadvantaged
    by any such failure  or  took  any  action  to  resolve  the  situation
    themselves.  An oral hearing was requested.

11.  Mr Tufan submitted that the letter issued  to  the  appellants  was  in
    accordance with the law.  There was no dispute that the first appellant
    had been given 60 days to seek another sponsor.  The grounds of  appeal
    before the First-tier Judge had not referred  to  the  issue.   At  the
    eleventh hour it was argued that the letter  did  not  conform  to  the
    Secretary of State's guidance.  It was said there was no certified copy
    of the first appellant's passport and therefore she could not apply  to
    another sponsor.

12.  There was no evidence that  the  first  appellant  had  approached  any
    other sponsor and she could have requested a copy of her passport if it
    was missing from the decision letter.
13.  Mr Tufan referred to an archived copy of the  letter  sent  which  said
    that  certified  copies  of  the  documents  had  been  sent   to   the
    representative with "Patel letter".  The documents had been  sent.   If
    for any reason they were missing the appellants could have requested  a
    certified copy.  The appeals should be dismissed.

14.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Judge if it was materially flawed in law.

15.  The point now taken was not argued before the  First-tier  Judge.   The
    grounds of appeal filed by the first appellant make no reference to any
    complaint about the 60 day  letter.   The  argument  then  put  forward
    appears to have been that the application made on 15 August 2014 should
    not have been  decided  at  all  and  it  had  been  overtaken  by  the
    derivative residence card  application.   The  judge  dealt  with  this
    aspect in paragraph 15 of his decision and I have set this  out  above.
    No complaint about this aspect of the decision of the First-tier  Judge
    was advanced in the grounds of appeal from that  decision.   The  point
    now taken was not  advanced  at  any  stage  until  after  the  judge's
    decision.

16.  There are circumstances in which a judge will be  bound  to  deal  with
    points notwithstanding they have not been  raised  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  However, I am not  satisfied  that  there  was  any  "Robinson
    obvious" error in this case - see R  v  Secretary  of  State  ex  parte
    Robinson [1997] Imm. A.R. 568.

17.  In any event, as Mr Tufan submitted, the Secretary of State's  evidence
    is that the proper material was sent out.   If  by  any  mischance  the
    certified copy of the passport had not been enclosed it was open to the
    first appellant to request it.

18.  The appellants have chosen not  to  attend  the  Tribunal  hearings  at
    either level.  The points made in the  response  by  the  Secretary  of
    State are entirely apposite.

19.  For the reasons I  have  given,  the  appeals  of  the  appellants  are
    dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Judge is confirmed.

Anonymity Direction

20.  The First-tier Judge made no anonymity order and I make none.

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.

Signed                                  Date 15 May 2017

G Warr,
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
