
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/27719/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Thursday 20 August 2015           |On Thursday 3 September 2015         |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        MISS KASOPE KELECHI OLUKOGBON
                          (No Anonymity Order Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Bexson, Counsel


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I  find  that  no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case  that  give  rise  to  the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.


                            DECISION AND REASONS



   Background

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home  Department.
       For ease of reference, I refer below to the parties as they  were  in
       the First-Tier  Tribunal  albeit  that  the  Secretary  of  State  is
       technically the Appellant in this particular appeal.

    2. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria.  She arrived  in  the  UK  in
       2005 aged 16 as a visitor and overstayed  her  leave.   On  12  April
       2010, she made an application for an EEA  residence  card  which  was
       refused and her appeal was dismissed.  On 15 April 2011, she made  an
       application on human rights grounds.  That application  was  refused.
       A request for reconsideration was rejected on  2  May  2013.   On  24
       April 2013, she made an application for leave  to  remain  which  was
       refused on 31 May 2013.

    3. Following service of  a  notice  of  removal  on  22  May  2014,  the
       Appellant made a human rights claim on the basis of her  relationship
       with a British citizen partner, Mr Alan Wolffs.  That was refused  on
       24 June 2014.   It is this decision which is under challenge in  this
       appeal.  The Respondent considered the  Appellant's  case  under  the
       Immigration Rules but rejected it on that account because  she  could
       not show that she had co-habited with Mr  Wolffs  for  at  least  two
       years prior to the date of the application.  She could not  meet  the
       requirements of EX.1 of Appendix FM because it  had  not  been  shown
       that there were insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  continuing
       outside the UK.   The  Respondent  also  considered  the  Appellant's
       private life but found that she could not  meet  the  Rules  in  that
       regard because she had been in the UK for nine years and it  had  not
       been shown that the Appellant had no ties to Nigeria.

    4. The Respondent  went  on  to  consider  Article  8  of  the  European
       Convention of Human Rights ("ECHR") outside the Rules,  applying  the
       test  in  Razgar.   She  decided  that  there  were  no   exceptional
       circumstances rendering the decision to remove disproportionate.

    5. The Appellant appealed the  Respondent's  decision.   In  a  decision
       promulgated on 25 February 2015 ("the Decision"), First Tier Tribunal
       Judge Lal allowed the Appellant's appeal.  He did  so  ostensibly  on
       the basis that removal would be disproportionate on Article 8 grounds
       but the appeal was allowed both under the Rules and on  human  rights
       grounds.  Permission to appeal the Decision was granted by First-Tier
       Tribunal Judge Lever on 6 May 2015 on the basis that it was not  open
       to the Judge to allow the appeal  under  the  Rules.   The  grant  of
       permission was not however restricted and the Respondent's grounds of
       appeal challenged not only the allowing of the appeal under the Rules
       but also the approach to Article 8 ECHR, the failure to  have  proper
       regard to section 117B and  the  Judge's  reasoning  in  relation  to
       insurmountable  obstacles.     The  matter  comes  before  the  Upper
       Tribunal to determine whether the Decision involved the making of  an
       error of law.




   Submissions

    6. Mr Walker referred to [3] of the Respondent's grounds.   He  referred
       to [11] and [12] of the Decision.  The Judge relied on  the  case  of
       Hayat in both the Tribunal and  Court  of  Appeal.   Based  on  those
       judgments, the Judge went on to find that it was disproportionate  to
       require the Appellant to return to obtain entry clearance.  Mr Walker
       referred to the case of Chen.  He submitted that the  Judge  had  not
       identified  any  factor  which  would  render   return   to   Nigeria
       disproportionate.  In relation to  [2]  of  the  grounds,  there  was
       nothing in this case which  required  the  Judge  to  go  beyond  the
       provisions of the Rules in any event.   There  are  no  unjustifiably
       harsh  consequences  of  removal.   There  are  in   any   event   no
       insurmountable obstacles to  relocation  to  Nigeria  -  [4]  of  the
       grounds.

    7. Ms Bexson submitted that the Decision was comprehensive and that  the
       Judge had adopted a belt  and  braces  approach  to  the  Appellant's
       situation.  This did not mean there was a material error of law.  The
       Judge approached the Rules and Article 8 properly.  The  grounds  are
       no more than a disagreement with the findings.  The Judge had  regard
       to the relationship.  There is corroborative  evidence  showing  that
       the relationship is genuine and subsisting.  This is  a  very  strong
       case.  The only issue is whether it  is  reasonable  to  require  the
       Appellant to return to Nigeria to obtain entry clearance.  The  Judge
       gave clear reasons at [13] why that would be disproportionate even if
       the separation would be a short one.  There was  no  sensible  reason
       for the Appellant to be expected to make that application.  She is in
       the final months of her degree course and shortly to be married.

    8. In response to questions from me concerning the Judge's treatment  of
       "insurmountable obstacles" at [10] of the Decision and what were  the
       insurmountable obstacles to the  couple  relocating  permanently,  Ms
       Bexson submitted that  there  is  evidence  of  close  links  to  the
       partner's family in the UK.  She submitted that because it was  clear
       that the relationship was genuine and subsisting and that, other than
       the Appellant's status, the couple could meet the  Rules,  the  Judge
       was only required to consider the case on the basis  that  they  were
       being forced to get proper entry clearance  and  that  was  the  only
       obstacle.  The Judge at [13] also  considered  that  the  Appellant's
       studies and forthcoming marriage was an obstacle and he was  entitled
       to do so.

    9. I also asked Ms Bexson where the Judge had considered section 117B as
       he was required to do when assessing proportionality  and  where  the
       unlawfulness of the Appellant's status was taken  into  account.   Ms
       Bexson referred to [14] and submitted that the Judge  had  considered
       proportionality in the context of returning to get  entry  clearance.
       The public interest in removal was  reduced  by  the  fact  that  the
       couple can meet the Rules other than in relation to  the  Appellant's
       status.  Ms Bexson conceded that  the  Decision  was  brief  but  she
       submitted that did not make it wrong in law and there was no material
       error even if there were a gap in the reasoning.  The  outcome  would
       be the same.

   10. The parties' representatives agreed that if I found a material  error
       of law, I could go on to re-make the decision on  the  basis  of  the
       documentary evidence before the First-Tier Tribunal and including the
       oral evidence as recorded in the Decision  without the need  for  any
       further oral or written submissions.

   Error of law decision and reasons

   11. I am satisfied that the Decision contains a material  error  of  law.
       It is not clear whether the Judge at [3] intended  to  indicate  that
       the appeal was confined to the issue of whether the  Appellant  could
       succeed only in relation to Article 8 outside the  Rules  or  whether
       this was shorthand  for  Article  8  under  and  outside  the  Rules.
       However, it is clear from  the  Judge's  reliance  on  the  Court  of
       Appeal's judgment Hayat, that it would  only  be  if  an  application
       could not succeed under the Rules that the issue of  whether  it  was
       disproportionate to require entry clearance to be obtained  could  be
       relevant.

   12.  Further,  there  is  no  indication  that  the  Judge  has  properly
       considered the issue of insurmountable obstacles at [10].  The  Judge
       appears to have thought that  the  issue  of  whether  the  Appellant
       should be required to return to Nigeria to obtain entry clearance was
       one  which  was  pertinent  to  whether  there  were   insurmountable
       obstacles.  Whilst I do not completely discount the possibility  that
       there might be cases where insurmountable obstacles  may  be  only  a
       temporary obstacle which  is  nonetheless  insurmountable  -  perhaps
       where a person to be removed is  suffering  from  a  serious  medical
       condition which will be overcome by a forthcoming operation or a late
       stage pregnancy - that is not this case.  What the Judge was required
       to consider was whether there were insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
       couple relocating to Nigeria.  That is simply not considered.

   13. The factors set out  at  [13]  were  considered  in  the  context  of
       proportionality and then only in the context of whether there was any
       sensible reason to require the Appellant to return  to  obtain  entry
       clearance.   There  is  no  consideration  of  whether   there   were
       insurmountable obstacles to permanent relocation or whether it  would
       be disproportionate to expect the couple to relocate to Nigeria.

   14. I have considered whether it could be said that the errors  were  not
       material to the overall outcome.  I am satisfied that the errors  are
       material because the appeal could not on that basis have been allowed
       under the Rules.  I have also considered whether there is  any  error
       of law in the Article 8 assessment such that I should set aside  only
       the allowing of the appeal under  the  Rules  and  leave  intact  the
       allowing of the appeal under Article 8  ECHR.   However,  I  consider
       that there is an additional material error of law in the allowing  of
       the appeal under Article 8 ECHR as the  Judge  when  considering  the
       proportionality of removal - whether  on  a  temporary  or  permanent
       basis - has made no mention of the Appellant's unlawful status in the
       UK.   It  is  not   apparent   that   the   Judge,   in   considering
       proportionality  had  any  regard  to  the  public  interest  in  the
       maintenance of immigration control.

   15. I am therefore satisfied that the First-Tier  Tribunal  Decision  did
       involve the making of material errors of law in allowing  the  appeal
       under the Rules and on human rights  grounds  and  I  set  aside  the
       Decision.

   Decision and reasons

   16. I now turn to re-make the decision.  I proceed on the basis that  the
       Appellant pursues a case that she can succeed under the Rules as well
       as outside them.

   17. I have read all the evidence submitted by the Appellant in support of
       her case.  I have also seen and read the decision of  the  First-Tier
       Tribunal in 2011 dismissing her appeal (and that of her  sisters)  at
       the time of their EEA application.

   18. I  have  absolutely  no  doubt  that  the  relationship  between  the
       Appellant and Mr Wolffs is  a  genuine  one.   Their  statements  are
       detailed and make clear the very genuine affection  which  they  have
       for each other.  They are to get married on 28  August.   Mr  Wolffs'
       family and the couple's friends attest to the genuine nature  of  the
       relationship and also to the regard they have for the  Appellant.   I
       accept also that there is  evidence  in  the  bundle  which  strongly
       suggests that Mr Wolffs earns a sufficient income to meet  the  Rules
       (although this has not been confirmed by the Secretary of  State  and
       it is not  clear  whether  the  evidence  submitted  would  meet  the
       evidential requirements of the Rules).   However,  in  light  of  the
       Appellant's unlawful immigration status, she cannot  meet  the  Rules
       for leave to remain as a partner unless she can meet the requirements
       of EX.1.(b).  She can only meet that Rule if there are insurmountable
       obstacles to family life with Mr Wolffs continuing  outside  the  UK.
       The phrase "insurmountable obstacles" is  neatly  summarised  by  the
       Court of Appeal in Agyarko and others v Secretary of  State  for  the
       Home Department  [2015] EWCA Civ 440 in the following terms:-

          "21.   The phrase  "insurmountable  obstacles"  as  used  in  this
             paragraph of the Rules clearly imposes a  high  hurdle  to  be
             overcome by an applicant for leave to remain under the  Rules.
             The test is significantly more demanding than a mere  test  of
             whether it would be reasonable to expect a couple to  continue
             their family life outside the United Kingdom.

          22.    This interpretation is in line with the relevant Strasbourg
             jurisprudence. The phrase "insurmountable obstacles"  has  its
             origin  in  the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence  in   relation   to
             immigration cases in a family context, where it  is  mentioned
             as one factor  among  others  to  be  taken  into  account  in
             determining whether any  right  under  Article  8  exists  for
             family members to be granted leave to remain or leave to enter
             a Contracting State: see e.g. Rodrigues da Silva and Hoogkamer
             v Netherlands (2007) 44 EHRR  34,  para.  [39]  ("...  whether
             there are insurmountable obstacles in the way  of  the  family
             living together in the country of origin of  one  or  more  of
             them ..."). The phrase as used in the  Rules  is  intended  to
             have the same meaning as in the Strasbourg  jurisprudence.  It
             is clear that the ECtHR regards it as a formulation imposing a
             stringent test in respect of that factor, as is illustrated by
             Jeunesse  v  Netherlands  (see  para.  [117]:  there  were  no
             insurmountable obstacles to the family settling  in  Suriname,
             even though the applicant  and  her  family  would  experience
             hardship if forced to do so).

          23.     For  clarity,  two  points  should  be  made   about   the
             "insurmountable  obstacles"  criterion.  First,  although   it
             involves a stringent test, it is obviously  intended  in  both
             the case-law and the Rules to be interpreted in a sensible and
             practical rather than a purely literal way: see, e.g., the way
             in which  the  Grand  Chamber  approached  that  criterion  in
             Jeunesse v Netherlands at para. [117]; also the observation by
             this court in MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
             Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192; [2014] 1  WLR  544,  at  [49]
             (although it should be noted that the passage in the  judgment
             of the Upper Tribunal in Izuazu v Secretary of State  for  the
             Home Department [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC); [2013] Imm AR 453  there
             referred  to,  at  paras.  [53]-[59],  was  making  a   rather
             different point, namely that explained  in  para.  [24]  below
             regarding the significance of the criterion in the context  of
             an Article 8 assessment).

          24.    Secondly, the "insurmountable obstacles" criterion is  used
             in the Rules to define one of the  preconditions  set  out  in
             section EX.1(b) which need to be satisfied before an applicant
             can claim to be entitled to be granted leave to  remain  under
             the Rules. In that context, it is not simply a  factor  to  be
             taken into account. However, in the context of making a  wider
             Article 8 assessment outside the Rules, it is a factor  to  be
             taken into account, not an absolute requirement which  has  to
             be satisfied in every single case across the  whole  range  of
             cases covered by Article 8: see paras. [29]-[30] below."

   19. The insurmountable obstacles relied on in this case can be summarised
       as follows.  The Appellant has an asthmatic condition (although there
       is no medical evidence to that effect).  She  says  that  this  would
       deteriorate in Nigeria.  She is also studying at  Cardiff  University
       for a degree although Ms Bexson confirmed that her studies will  soon
       be complete.  She and Mr Wolffs are to be married on 28 August  2015.
       She has family in the UK in the form of  two  sisters  (who  have  no
       right to remain) and an aunt with whom she lived when she came to the
       UK.  Mr Wolffs is a British citizen.  He is in full  time  employment
       in the UK.  All his family are in the UK as are all his friends.   He
       has never been to Nigeria.  He has a medical condition which requires
       intermittent treatment in the form of  operations  to  remove  benign
       tumours although again there is no medical  evidence  supporting  the
       extent of the condition or the frequency and nature of the  treatment
       required to deal with it.  I note also Mr Wolffs  statement  that  if
       the Appellant were to be removed to Nigeria he would go with her even
       though it would mean giving up his life here (letter of 28 May 2014).
        Although I do not underestimate the  difficulties  which  Mr  Wolffs
       would face in relocating to Nigeria and I  recognise  also  that  the
       Appellant has been in the UK for nine years and has built a life  for
       herself here, I find it quite impossible  to  say  that  the  factors
       relied on amount to insurmountable obstacles.  For that  reason,  the
       Appellant's appeal under the Rules fails.

   20. I then turn to consider whether  removal  would  be  disproportionate
       under Article 8 ECHR.  Article 8 protects the right  to  private  and
       family life.  However, it is not an absolute  right.   The  State  is
       lawfully entitled to interfere with an appellant's private and family
       life as long as it is pursuing a legitimate aim and the  interference
       is necessary and proportionate in all the circumstances of the  case.
       As explained in the case law emanating from  Strasbourg,  "Article  8
       does  not  entail  a  general  obligation  for  a  state  to  respect
       immigrants' choice of their country of  residence  and  to  authorise
       family reunion in its territory" (see citation  at [39] of Nagre).

   21. The issue in this case is one of proportionality of removal in  light
       of the Appellant's unlawful status in the UK.  I do not need  to  set
       out the first four questions in  Razgar  .   It  is  clear  from  the
       foregoing that I accept that the Appellant has a family life  in  the
       UK with Mr Wolffs.  There is  no  evidence  as  to  the  family  life
       between the Appellant and her sisters and aunt. I accept however that
       her relationships with her family in the UK form part of her  private
       life in any event. I also accept that the  Appellant  has  a  private
       life based on her friendships, academic  achievements  and  community
       involvement.  It is  clear  that  removal  will  interfere  with  her
       Article 8 ECHR rights and indeed with Mr Wolffs' Article 8 rights.  I
       have set out the closeness of the relationship between the  Appellant
       and Mr Wolffs and between them and, in particular, Mr Wolffs'  family
       and their friends and removal would obviously  interfere  with  those
       relationships.  I also have regard to the disruption which  would  be
       caused by the  Appellant's  removal  to  her  continued  studies  and
       employment in the area  which  she  has  chosen  and  to  Mr  Wolffs'
       employment in a job which he clearly enjoys (if he chooses to go with
       her).  I have regard  to  the  Appellant's  and  Mr  Wolffs'  medical
       conditions.  However, as I have noted  above,  there  is  no  medical
       evidence in support of the nature and extent of those conditions  and
       whether they can be treated in Nigeria.

   22. Against those factors, I am required to have  regard  to  the  public
       interest, in particular the factors set out in section 117B and  more
       generally.  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
       the public interest.  The Appellant speaks English and, although  she
       is accessing education in the UK, I assume she is  doing  so  without
       financial assistance from the  State.   However,  those  factors  are
       neutral (see AM  (s117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  0260  (IAC)).   I  am
       required to give little weight to the Appellant's family and  private
       life formed, as it was, when she was in the UK unlawfully.

   23.  I  have  considered  Ms  Bexson's  submission  that  it   would   be
       disproportionate to remove the Appellant because she would be able to
       meet all the requirements of the Rules except in relation  to  status
       and, relying on Chikwamba, there was no sensible  reason  to  require
       her to return to Nigeria on this basis.  Removal on a temporary basis
       for this purpose would therefore  be  disproportionate.  Mr  Walker's
       reliance on the case of Chen is reinforced by the Court  of  Appeal's
       judgment in Agyarko where the Court addressed a similar submission in
       the following terms [31]:--

          "In Chikwamba, the House of Lords found  that  there  would  be  a
          violation of Article 8 if the applicant for  leave  to  remain  in
          that case were removed from the United Kingdom and forced to  make
          an out-of-country application  for  leave  to  enter  which  would
          clearly be successful, in  circumstances  where  the  interference
          with her family life with her husband associated with the  removal
          could not be said to serve any good purpose.  It  is  possible  to
          envisage a Chikwamba type case arising in which  Article  8  might
          require that leave to remain be granted outside  the  Rules,  even
          though it  could  not  be  said  that  there  were  insurmountable
          obstacles to the applicant and their spouse or partner  continuing
          their family life overseas. But in  a  case  involving  precarious
          family life, it would be necessary to establish  that  there  were
          exceptional circumstances to warrant such a conclusion."

   24. I recognise  that  the  finding  that  there  are  no  insurmountable
       obstacles to the Appellant and her partner  continuing  their  family
       life in Nigeria for the purposes of the Rules is not determinative of
       the issue of proportionality.  However,  it  is  an  indication  that
       removal of the Appellant would not be disproportionate if  there  are
       no other circumstances which point in the Appellant's favour  in  the
       balance.  In this case, the factors on which the Appellant relies  in
       her favour under Article 8 ECHR are mainly those on which she  relies
       in relation to her application under the Rules.

   25. I have considered the additional factors here which might be said  to
       alter the balance when considering the Appellant's case  outside  the
       Rules.  In particular,  I  have  regard  to  the  background  to  the
       Appellant's unlawful presence in the UK.  She was effectively sent by
       her parents to live in the UK with her aunt when she was only sixteen
       years old.  She completed her A levels  in  the  UK.   She  has  been
       studying at Cardiff University for a degree  in  Biomedical  Sciences
       and has shown a particular interest in the  respiratory  field.   She
       has been  leading  a  research  project  looking  at  a  particularly
       devastating lung disease and the result of  her  research  is  to  be
       published this year.  The Appellant says that the way  in  which  she
       has developed her private life and now her family life in the UK make
       her situation different from others. She has been in limbo through no
       fault of her own since being sent to the UK  when  she  was  still  a
       minor.

   26. Against that, though, I note  that  the  Appellant  and  her  sisters
       previously sought to remain on the basis of an EU right of  residence
       as extended family members of  their  aunt  which  culminated  in  an
       appeal in 2011 which was dismissed.  It appears that the  application
       for a residence permit was made at that stage because  the  Appellant
       was keen to continue her studies in the UK.  As the  Judge  noted  in
       the decision in that appeal, if the Appellant wanted to study she had
       the option of returning to Nigeria to obtain the necessary  leave  to
       return as a foreign student.  She was by that date, twenty-two  years
       old and able  to  make  decisions  for  herself  as  to  her  future.
       Nonetheless, she remained in the UK and continued to build a life for
       herself in the full knowledge that she had no  right  to  remain  and
       that at some point in the future she might be removed.  The fact that
       she is in the position in which she now finds  herself  is  in  large
       part due to her own failure to regularise her status  in  the  proper
       way in the past.

   27. I have taken into account all the factors in the  Appellant's  favour
       (as set out  above).   However,  when  balanced  against  the  public
       interest in removal due to the Appellant's unlawful status throughout
       the majority of her time in the UK and the fact that she  has  formed
       her private and family life whilst here unlawfully, I  conclude  that
       removal of the Appellant  would  not  amount  to  a  disproportionate
       interference with her Article 8 ECHR rights.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did involve the making of  an  error  on  a
point of law.

I set aside the decision

I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing the  Secretary  of  State's
appeal and therefore dismissing the Appellant's appeal under the  Rules  and
on human rights grounds.


Signed      [pic]      Date 1 September 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

