

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/27183/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 14th March 2017 & 2nd May 2017     |On 4th May 2017                     |
|                                      |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                               MR AMIR HUSSAIN
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara, Counsel, instructed by JJ Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



    1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 9th December 1989. He
       arrived in the UK on 13th August 2010 with leave to enter as a  Tier
       4 student  migrant.  He  had  leave  in  this  capacity  until  13th
       September 2014. On 12th September 2014 he made a further application
       to remain as a Tier  4  student  migrant.  This  was  refused  in  a
       decision dated 16th July 2015. His appeal against this decision  was
       dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge I Malcolm in a  determination
       promulgated on the 8th July 2016.

    2. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Deans
       sitting as a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal on 30th  January  2017
       on the basis that it was arguable  that  the  First-tier  judge  had
       erred in law in failing to properly determine the issue  of  whether
       the appellant had used deception by failing to refer to SM  &  Qadir
       (ETS - Evidence-Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 and by failing to
       give adequate reasoning.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law on 14th March 2017 and was  adjourned  for
       the appellant to amend his grounds of appeal by 21st March  2017  to
       include reasoning as to why an error of law was  material  if  there
       was no possibility of the appellant winning the appeal.  No  amended
       grounds of appeal were received until the day of the next hearing on
       2nd May 2017: at the hearing Mr Bellara  presented  amended  grounds
       and a witness  statement  he  understood  had  been  served  by  his
       instructing solicitors on the Tribunal  and  Home  Office  in  March
       2017. Mr Norton was happy to  deal  with  the  amended  grounds  and
       accept the witness statement despite their late arrival, and in this
       context I made the decision to admit them.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. The amended grounds of appeal accept that the  appellant  could  not
       succeed in his appeal because he had no CAS. It  is  argued  however
       that the error with  respect  to  the  finding  on  deception  is  a
       material matter because the appellant would like, in the future,  to
       return to the UK as a student with entry clearance, as  set  out  in
       his witness statement, and believes that  he  will  not  be  granted
       entry clearance as a Tier 4 student migrant under the  points  based
       system if he is found to have used deception in the past.

    5. With respect to the finding of the First-tier Tribunal it is  argued
       that the appellant was entitled to a fair and  lawful  determination
       of the issue of whether he used deception under paragraph 322(2)  of
       the Immigration Rules. There is no reference to SM &  Qadir  in  the
       decision or to the threshold to be met by the respondent in  showing
       deception. The generic evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  for
       the respondent was only the  statements  of  Mr  Millington  and  Ms
       Collins which were found to be severely lacking in SM &  Qadir.  The
       defects in this evidence  were  not  considered  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal. Further the reasoning  at  paragraphs  49  to  52  of  the
       decision regarding deception is very poor, and no  adequate  reasons
       are given as why the appellant  was  not  found  to  be  a  credible
       witness given his consistent testimony at paragraphs 23 to 26 of the
       decision on his taking of the tests.

    6. In a Rule 24 notice the respondent argues that SM & Qadir found that
       the generic evidence of the respondent was sufficient  to  meet  the
       evidential burden.  The  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  makes
       findings that were open to him on the issue  of  deception  and  the
       appeal is in any case immaterial given  that  the  appellant  cannot
       succeed as he had no CAS.   However,  Mr  Norton  accepted  in  oral
       submissions that the errors  the  appellant  had  put  forward  were
       capable of being material given the  appellant's  proposed  plan  to
       apply for entry clearance in the future.

    7. At the end of the hearing on error of law on 2nd May 2017 I informed
       the parties that I was satisfied that there was a material error  of
       law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal
       under the Immigration Rules for the reasons set out below, and  that
       I would therefore remake the decision.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    8. I accept that a finding of use of deception is a material matter for
       this appellant given his desire to return to  the  UK  to  study  to
       complete his ACCA in this country due to his  belief  that  an  ACCA
       qualification from a British college will be more likely  to  enable
       him to access employment in Pakistan. As  set  out  in  the  refusal
       letter of the respondent, due to a finding of deception  any  future
       student application will be refused for a period of between one  and
       ten years under paragraph 320(7B) of the Immigration Rules. In these
       circumstances I find that the argued for errors are material despite
       the fact that the outcome of the appeal will inevitably be for it to
       be dismissed again due to the lack of a current CAS.

    9. Following SM &  Qadir  the  First-tier  Tribunal  could  have  found
       without any further reasoning that the appellant had been  correctly
       refused for deception if the appellant had made  no  submissions  on
       the issue. The spreadsheet evidence from ETS stating the appellant's
       2011 TOEIC test was invalid  combined  with  the  statements  of  Mr
       Millington and Ms Collins satisfies the evidential burden  and  thus
       suffices to fulfil the burden of proof on  the  respondent  to  show
       deception  absent  any  other  evidence  on  this  issue  from   the
       appellant.

   10. In this appeal, however, there was evidence from the appellant  that
       he had attended the test,  which  included  a  description  of  that
       attendance with some details, and evidence that he had  obtained  an
       IELTS certificate in July 2014. I find that the First-tier  Tribunal
       erred in law in failing to give reasons why the appellant's evidence
       was not credible or why that evidence did not outweigh that  of  the
       respondent at paragraphs 47, 50 and 52 of the decision.

   11.  I  also  find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal   ignored   material
       documentary evidence before it that the University  of  Reading  and
       the University of the West of Scotland were not  prepared  to  admit
       students with a ETS/ TOEIC English language test "history"  when  at
       paragraph 53 it concluded that the appellant's history that  he  had
       been refused by other educational institutions for this  reason  was
       not credible.





Evidence and Submissions - Remaking

   12. The appellant attended the  Upper  Tribunal  and  gave  evidence  in
       English without an interpreter.  He  was  able  to  communicate  and
       answer questions in English in a reasonable fashion before the Upper
       Tribunal.

   13. In his written statement and oral evidence in  summary  he  says  as
       follows. He is a citizen of Pakistan who came to the  UK  in  August
       2010 with entry clearance as a Tier 4 student migrant. He applied to
       extend his leave in September 2014 and was refused on 16th July 2015
       in the decision under challenge for reasons which  he  finds  unfair
       and unreasonable.  He has obtained  a  business  management  diploma
       since coming to the UK and 3 components of the ACCA.  He  wishes  to
       finish his ACCA in the UK as he believes it will  have  more  weight
       when he seeks work in Pakistan than the same qualification  obtained
       in Pakistan.

   14. He maintains that he attended Elizabeth  and  Westlink  Colleges  in
       2011 to take his TOEIC tests in person. He arranged to attend  these
       tests at the same time  through  an  agent  and  registered  online,
       paying a fee and booking the test. He relied  upon  the  TOEIC  test
       from these colleges as they  had  spaces  to  take  the  tests  more
       quickly than the ESOL and IELTS alternatives. He had no associations
       with these colleges where he took the tests other than to  go  there
       to take these tests. He did not take the test with anyone  he  knew,
       and went to the test alone. He took the tests over two days in  east
       London: on the first day he did  reading  and  writing  and  on  the
       second day writing and speaking. He got his certificate one  or  two
       weeks after taking the test. He did try to  contact  the  agent  who
       arranged the tests after the allegations of deception arose but  the
       agent did not answer his calls. He had no contact to pursue with the
       actual colleges where he took the tests.  He confirmed that his name
       and date of birth and passport number are correctly recorded on  the
       extract from the ETS spreadsheet that shows his tests as invalid.

   15. In 2014 he took the equivalent IELTS English test and passed it, and
       provided the certificate to show he got this  qualification  to  the
       respondent. He had also taken the Pearson test. He has tried to  get
       a CAS to attend another college but cannot get  one.  He  has  asked
       about 8 to 10 colleges but none are prepared to offer him a place as
       his leave to remain has been curtailed on the basis he had  obtained
       his TOEIC ETS English certificate by deception. He has letters  from
       the University of Reading dated 20th August 2014 and  University  of
       West Scotland dated 2nd September 2014 which confirm this.

   16. Mr Norton relied upon the respondent's  refusal  letter  dated  16th
       July 2015. The application is refused due  to  the  lack  of  a  CAS
       (which meant that the appellant was not awarded the relevant  points
       under Appendix A and Appendix C of the Immigration Rules), and  thus
       fell to be refused under paragraph 245ZX of the  Immigration  Rules.
       However,  in  addition  the  appellant  fell  to  be  refused  under
       paragraph 322(2) of the Immigration Rules as he had  used  deception
       in a previous  application,  namely  by  submitting  a  false  TOEIC
       English language certificate issued by ETS which had  been  obtained
       by the use  of  a  proxy  test  taker.  ETS  had  confirmed  to  the
       respondent that the appellant's tests were invalid on this basis.

   17. Mr Norton submitted that the respondent had not  made  an  error  in
       relying upon the ETS spreadsheet with this appellant as his  details
       were correctly listed on the  entry  which  showed  his  tests  were
       invalid. The evidence of the Secretary of State, which was therefore
       specific to this appellant and generic, was therefore sufficient  to
       say that the legal burden was met notwithstanding  the  evidence  of
       the appellant.

   18. Mr Bellara submitted that the  respondent  had  not  discharged  the
       legal burden. He accepted that  the  spreadsheet  evidence  and  the
       generic evidence met the evidential  burden  which  meant  that  the
       appellant  had  to  answer  the  respondent's  allegation.  But  the
       description  of  taking  the  test,  the  IELTS  results  which  the
       appellant in 2014 and his ability to give evidence in English before
       the First-tier and Upper Tribunals  answered  this  allegation,  and
       given the quality of the respondent's evidence (which  was  poor  as
       was highlighted in SM & Qadir) she could not  show  that  the  legal
       burden was met. In all the circumstances the appellant should not be
       found to have used deception in the decision of the Upper  Tribunal.



Conclusions - Remaking

   19. The key decisions relevant to determining whether the appellant  has
       used deception in this context are  SM  &  Qadir  (ETS  -Evidence  -
       Burden of Proof) [2016 UKUT 229 and Sharif Ahmed Majumder and  Ihsan
       Qadir v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2016] EWCA  Civ
       1167. The respondent's evidence in the case of SM &  Qadir  was  the
       same as before me: the spreadsheet  evidence  that  the  appellant's
       tests had been deemed invalid by ETS, a look-up tool ( in this  case
       for Elizabeth College), and the witness statements  of  Ms  Collings
       and Mr Millington, two civil servants. I note this as in some  cases
       subsequent to SM & Qadir further evidence has been  adduced  by  the
       respondent. The respondent's evidence in SM & Qadir was found by the
       Upper Tribunal to suffice to meet, albeit by a  narrow  margin,  the
       initial evidential burden of  showing  deception.  The  burden  then
       shifted to the appellants to raise an innocent explanation.  In  the
       cases  of  Mr  Majumder  and  Mr  Qadir,  in  the  context  of   the
       explanations and evidence given by them, the  respondent  could  not
       satisfy the legal burden to show that their TOEIC certificates  were
       procured by dishonesty and so their  appeals  were  allowed  by  the
       Upper Tribunal. The respondent initially appealed to  the  Court  of
       Appeal but then settled those appeals by consent.

   20. The factors that the Upper Tribunal noted at paragraph 69  of  their
       decision  in  SM  &  Qadir  as  being  relevant  to  considering  an
       allegation of dishonesty in this context: "include  (inexhaustively,
       we would add) what  the  person  accused  has  to  gain  from  being
       dishonest; what he has to lose from being dishonest; what  is  known
       about his character; and the culture  or  environment  in  which  he
       operated.  Mr  Dunlop  also  highlighted  the  importance  of  three
       further considerations, namely how the  Appellants  performed  under
       cross  examination,  whether  the  Tribunal's  assessment  of  their
       English language proficiency is commensurate with their TOEIC scores
       and whether  their  academic  achievements  are  such  that  it  was
       unnecessary or illogical for them to have cheated."

   21. I find, on the balance of probabilities, that this appellant did not
       need to cheat on the basis of his English language ability as before
       me and as reflected in the IELTS test he took in September  2014.  I
       am satisfied that he was able to speak and understand English  in  a
       way not inconsistent with having taken his TOEIC test personally.  I
       appreciate  that  I  am  not  a  language  expert,  and  that  these
       assessments are considerably after the point in time when he said to
       have cheated in his TOEIC ETS test: the IELTS test was almost  three
       years later and the appearance before me five and and a  half  years
       later. I note as relevant in reaching this conclusion, that  he  has
       also managed to obtain a diploma in business management  in  the  UK
       and the first three elements of an  ACCA  qualification  before  his
       studies were halted  due  to  problems  with  his  English  language
       certificate in 2014.

   22. I accept the appellant evidence that he has not been able to find  a
       further college and CAS despite multiple applications trying  to  do
       this due to his leave having been refused  in  the  concept  of  his
       TOEIC ETS test having been found to be invalid and  deemed  to  have
       been obtained by deception is credible. The letters from  University
       of Reading refusing his application to do an MBA at Henley  Business
       School and from University of West  Scotland  both  explicitly  rely
       upon this matter to refuse his application, and support his evidence
       in this respect.

   23.  I  accept  that  the  applicant  has  given  a  credible  if  basic
       description of how he took the test;  that  he  has  no  history  of
       abusing immigration control or other deceptive  behaviour;  and  has
       demonstrated some commitment to studying in the UK through obtaining
       his diploma and trying to find another college.

   24. The decision is finely balanced, but  ultimately  when  all  of  the
       evidence before me is considered I conclude that the respondent  has
       not shown on the balance of probabilities with  sufficiently  robust
       evidence that the legal  burden  on  her  that  the  appellant  used
       deception to obtain his ETS TEOIC certificate. I therefore find that
       the appellant was not lawfully refused under paragraph 322(2) of the
       Immigration Rules. I therefore dismiss the  student  appeal  on  the
       sole basis that  the  appellant  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of
       paragraph 245ZX of the Immigration Rules.

   25. There was no attempt before me to argue that the  appeal  should  be
       remade and allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds although  this  was  an
       original ground of appeal. I deal with this matter therefore in  the
       briefest terms. I  find  that  the  appellant  has  no  family  life
       connection with the UK. He has not shown he can satisfy the  private
       life Immigration Rules at paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  as  there  is  no
       evidence  that  he  would  have  very   significant   obstacles   to
       integration on return to his country of nationality, Pakistan.  When
       looked at outside of those Rules I accept  that  the  appellant  has
       private life ties with the UK  having  lived  in  this  country  for
       almost seven years  and  that  to  remove  him  from  the  UK  would
       interfere with those private life ties.  However  that  interference
       would be entirely proportionate as I can give little weight  to  his
       private life ties to the UK as these have all been formed whilst  he
       has  been  precariously  present  in  the  UK,  s.117B(5)   of   the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, and he  has  given  no
       reasons why he could not re-establish his private life in  Pakistan.
       His ability to speak English, his good character and his ability  to
       support himself financially can  only  be  neutral  factors.  As  he
       cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  I  must  give
       weight to his inability to comply with immigration control and  thus
       the public interest in his removal. When all factors are  considered
       the  removal  of  the  appellant  is   therefore   a   proportionate
       interference with his private life ties in the UK.

          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision

   3. I re-make the decision in  the  appeal  by  dismissing  it  under  the
      Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.





Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  3rd May 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley






