
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/27905/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 November 2015                  |On 21 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                        BEBERLY KARIN SINGCO OCUAMAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Appiah (counsel) instructed by Bloomsbury
                    Immigration Specialists
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Majid promulgated on 27 February  2015  which  dismissed  the
appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal to  grant  a  derivative
residence card in terms of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

Background

3.    The appellant is a national of the Philippines, born on 17 May 1981.

4.    On 8 May 2014, the appellant applied  for  a  residence  card  on  the
basis that she is a third country national upon whom a British  national  is
dependent in the UK.

5.    On 20 June 2014, the respondent refused the  appellant's  application,
relying on Regulations 15A and 18A  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
2006.

The Judge's Decision

6.    The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal.  First  Tier
Tribunal  Judge  Majid  ("the  judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
respondent's decision.

7.    Grounds of appeal were lodged  and,  on  6  May  2015,  Judge  P  J  M
Hollingworth granted permission to appeal, stating:

         "1 An arguable error of law has arisen in relation to the  approach
         adopted by the judge  to  the  central  issues  in  the  case.  The
         arguable error rests on the degree of analysis  undertaken  by  the
         judge of the available evidence and  the  findings  to  which  such
         analysis would lead.

         2  A further arguable error of law arises as to the degree to which
         the findings by  the  judge  have  been  affected  by  the  judge's
         reference to the restrictive environment  of  immigration  at  this
         time."

8.    In a decision promulgated on 25 September 2015 the Upper Tribunal  set
aside the Judge's decision finding that it contained material errors of  law
as (inter alia) inadequate  findings  of  fact  had  been  made.  The  Upper
Tribunal directed that the case should be considered of  new  at  a  resumed
hearing of the Upper Tribunal.

The Hearing

9.    No new  evidence  is  placed  before  me.  I  was  provided  the  same
documents as were presented to the First-tier Tribunal. I have sight of  the
appellant's bundle, which contains the items listed  on  the  index  to  the
bundle, together with the respondent's  "PF1"  bundle.  The  appellant  gave
evidence. She adopted the terms of her witness statement dated  18  February
2015 before answering a few supplementary questions.  She  then  answered  a
number of questions in cross examination, before being briefly  re-examined.
The appellant's mother gave evidence. She adopted the terms of  her  witness
statement  dated  18th  of  February  2015  before  answering  a  number  of
questions in cross-examination. I then heard parties' agents submissions.





My Findings of Fact

10.   The appellant was born on 17 May  1981.  She  is  a  national  of  the
Philippines. The appellant's mother is Linda Singco. The appellant's  mother
left the Philippines to work in Hong Kong as a  nanny  to  3  children.  The
appellant's mother worked in Hong Kong between 1983 - 1994.

11.   In 1994 the appellant's mother entered the UK, when she came  here  as
a domestic worker for her Hong Kong employer who had removed from Hong  Kong
& relocated to the UK. The appellant's mother  continued  to  work  for  her
employer in the UK until 1998. In 1998 the appellant's  mother  was  granted
indefinite leave to remain in the UK. She  has  remained  in  the  UK  since
then. The appellant's mother retired from work in 2011.

12.   The appellant entered the UK in 2009 as a student.  She  has  remained
in the UK since then, living with her mother. The appellant's only  relative
in the UK is her mother.

13.   In 2012  the  appellant's  mother  has  an  accident  which  caused  a
fracture to the neck of the femur in her right hip. The injury  was  treated
with a dynamic hip screw and a de-rotation screw inserted into the bone.  In
the course of that treatment it was discovered that the  appellant's  mother
now suffers  from  osteoporosis.  The  osteoporosis  is  managed  with  oral
medication. The appellant's mother does not use a walking aid. She is  self-
caring and is able  to  pursue  the  ordinary  activities  of  daily  living
independently however she enjoys the  help  of  the  appellant  provides  in
grocery shopping and domestic chores. The appellant's  mother  also  suffers
from hypertension which is managed with oral medication.

14.   If the appellant leaves the UK, her mother will remain in the UK.  The
appellant's mother values her British citizenship and has  no  intention  of
leaving the UK.

Conclusions

15.   The appellant applied for a derivative right of residence as  a  third
country national upon whom a British citizen mother is dependent on the  UK.
 "Family member" is defined  in  article  2  of  directive  2004/38/EC.  The
appellant does not fall within  the  definition  of  family  member  contain
there, nor does the appellant fall within the definition  of  "other  family
members" contained in article 3 of the same directive.  The  respondent  has
therefore correctly considered  the  appellant's  application  in  terms  of
regulation 18A of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  regulations
2006. The appellant argues that she  is  the  primary  carer  of  a  British
citizen and relies on the case of Ruis Zambrano (C-34/09).

16.   In DH (Jamaica) and others v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1736  the  Court  of
Appeal said that the application of the Zambrano test required  a  focus  on
whether, as a matter of reality, the EU citizen would be obliged to give  up
residence in the EU if the non-EU national was removed. If the  EU  citizen,
be it wife or child, would  not  in  practice  be  compelled  to  leave  the
country if the non-EU  family  member  were  to  be  refused  the  right  of
residence, there was nothing in the jurisprudence to  suggest  that  EU  law
would be engaged simply because  their  continuing  residence  was  in  some
sense affected, for example, in relation to the quality of life.  The  right
of residence was a right to reside in the  territory  not  a  right  to  any
particular quality of life or particular standard  of  living  and  only  if
that was affected to such an extent that it was  likely  to  compel  the  EU
citizen to leave would the principle apply.

17.   In FZ (China) [2015] EWCA Civ 550  the  Chinese  appellant  sought  to
rely on Zambrano by asserting that his wife had decided to accompany him  to
China if he was deported and this  would  compel  his  British  daughter  to
leave with her parents. The Court of Appeal held  that  the  application  of
the Zambrano principle was  limited  to  exceptional  cases.   A  desire  to
preserve the family unit would not be enough for the principle to apply.  In
the instant case, there was no compulsion for the appellant's wife or  child
to leave.  The Tribunal had noted that after the Claimant's arrest the  wife
was the sole breadwinner of the family.

18.   In Ayinde and Thinjom (carers- Reg 15A - Zambrano) [2015]  UKUT  00560
it was held that (i)  The  deprivation  of  the  genuine  enjoyment  of  the
substance of the rights attaching to the status of European  Union  citizens
identified in the decision in Zambrano [2011] EUECJ C-34/09  is  limited  to
safeguarding a British citizen's EU rights as defined in  Article  20;  (ii)
The provisions of reg. 15A  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2006 as amended apply when the effect of removal  of  the  carer
of a British citizen renders the British citizen no longer  able  to  reside
in the United Kingdom or in another EEA state.  This requires the  carer  to
establish as a fact that the British citizen will be  forced  to  leave  the
territory of the Union; (iii) The requirement is not met  by  an  assumption
that the citizen will leave and does not involve a consideration of  whether
it would be reasonable for  the  carer  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   A
comparison of the British citizen's  standard  of  living  or  care  if  the
appellant remains or departs is material only in the context of whether  the
British citizen will leave the United Kingdom' (iv)The Tribunal is  required
to examine critically a claim that a British citizen will  leave  the  Union
if the benefits he currently receives by remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom
are unlikely to be matched in the country in which  he  claims  he  will  be
forced to settle.

19.   The evidence in this case dwells on the reunification  of  mother  and
daughter and the relationship that they have established in  the  six  years
the appellant has been in the  UK.  There  is  a  conflict  created  by  the
appellant's the evidence. The appellant claims that her mother  cannot  live
without the  care  that  appellant  provides.  In  her  oral  evidence,  the
appellant claimed that her  mother  requires  assistance  with  washing  and
bathing, household chores and shopping,  and  that  the  appellant's  mother
could not pursue  the  ordinary  activities  of  daily  living  without  the
appellant's help. That evidence was drawn into stark contrast by the  letter
from the appellant's mother's GP dated 1 May 2014, which  states  "she  does
not  require  any  walking  aids  and  is  self-caring  (Baths  and   cleans
herself)". Neither the appellant nor the appellant's  mother  could  give  a
realistic explanation for the difference in opinion  between  the  appellant
and the doctor who treats the appellant's mother.

20.   I did not  find  the  appellant  to  be  an  impressive  witness.  She
performed poorly under  cross  examination,  providing  answers  which  were
vague and lacking specification. I  did  not  find  her  to  be  a  reliable
witness.  The  appellant's  mother's   evidence   was   brief   and   lacked
specification. The evidence of both the appellant  and  her  mother  differs
from the opinion of the appellant's mother's  GP,  who  is  independent  and
impartial. When this case last  called  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  25
September 2015, directions  were  made  to  enable  the  appellant  to  lead
further evidence. The  appellant  chose  not  to  take  advantage  of  those
directions and produces no reliable evidence to challenge what  is  said  by
the  appellant's  mother's  GP.  I  am  not  therefore  persuaded  that  the
appellant is the primary carer of a British  citizen.  I  am  not  persuaded
that if the appellant leaves the UK her absence will have any impact on  the
quality of care for the appellant's mother.

21.   What is completely fatal to the appellant's case is the oral  evidence
of the appellant's mother. In cross-examination the appellant's  mother  was
asked by Miss Holmes if she would leave the  UK  if  the  appellant  had  to
leave the UK. She initially answered "yes". She was then reminded that  when
she gave evidence to the First-tier  Tribunal  in  February  2015,  she  had
given a different answer to the same question.  I  was  concerned  that  the
appellant's mother was becoming confused so  I  spoke  to  her  directly.  I
explained the meaning of the question  to  the  appellant's  mother  in  the
simplest possible terms. The appellant's mother told me that she  would  not
leave the UK. When I asked her  if  she  was  sure  about  her  answer,  she
started to explain that not only that she was sure  about  her  answer,  but
also the reason she was sure about her answer.

22.   The weight of reliable evidence indicates that the appellant's  mother
is not dependent upon the appellant for personal care and that she  is  able
to pursue the ordinary activities of daily living independently. The  weight
of reliable evidence also indicates that if the  appellant  leaves  the  UK,
the appellant's mother will remain in the UK.

23.   In Amirteymour and others (EEA appeals;  human  rights)  [2015]  UKUT
00466  it was held that where no notice under section 120 of the  2002  Act
has been served and where no EEA decision  to  remove  has  been  made,  an
appellant cannot bring a Human Rights challenge to  removal  in  an  appeal
under the EEA Regulations. Neither the factual matrix nor the reasoning  in
JM (Liberia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1402 has any application to  appeals  of  this
nature.

24.   The respondent's  decision  refused  the  appellant's  application  by
reference to the 2006 Regulations alone. No section 120  notice  was  served
on the appellant and there are no  removal  directions.  No  competent  ECHR
argument can be advanced.

Decision

25.   I consider the case of new and substitute the following decision.

26.   The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006.



Signed:     5 December 2015

                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

