
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27293/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On : 22 December 2016                     |On : 23 December 2016            |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 hysni paqa
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Lams, instructed by Oaks Solicitors


 DECISION UNDER RULE 21(6) OF THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES
                                    2008

1. For the purposes of this decision,  I  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
   Secretary of State as the  respondent  and  Mr  Paqa  as  the  appellant,
   reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.

2. The appellant is  a  citizen  of  Kosovo  born  on  26  August  1973.  He
   originally entered the United Kingdom on 24 April 2000 and  made  various
   unsuccessful applications to remain in the UK on asylum and  family  life
   grounds. On 24 September 2014 he made an application for leave to  remain
   on family and private life grounds, based primarily on  his  family  life
   with his wife and two sons (born on 12 May 2003 and  28  November  2004).
   His application was refused on 16 July 2015.  He  appealed  against  that
   decision and his appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal on  17  June
   2016, by which time he had a third child, a daughter born on 23  February
   2014.


3. The appellant's appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Miles  on
   Article 8 grounds, outside the immigration rules, on  the  basis  of  the
   provisions in section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Asylum and  Immigration
   Act 2002.


4. The respondent sought permission to appeal that  decision  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal on 12 July 2016. The application for permission was one day  out
   of  time  but  time  was  extended  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
   considering the  application,  although  permission  was  refused,  in  a
   decision issued and sent out by the First-tier  Tribunal  on  21  October
   2016. The decision was sent  under  cover  of  Form  IA67,  advising  the
   parties  that  the  application  for  permission  had  been  refused  and
   referring to the information enclosed about time limits.


5. In an application dated 7 November 2016, but  faxed  at  18.01  and  thus
   received and date-stamped by the Upper Tribunal on 8 November  2016,  the
   respondent renewed the application for permission to the Upper  Tribunal.
   At section D of the Form IAUT-1 seeking permission, headed  "Reasons  for
   any delay" the person completing the form,  a  Senior  Presenting  Office
   from the Specialist Appeals Team, UKVI, Home Office,  indicated  with  an
   "X" that  he  was  not  seeking  to  make  the  application  outside  the
   applicable time limit. However he also completed the  second  section  of
   part D, in the section intended for applying for an  extension  of  time,
   stating the following:


      "IA67 is dated 21/10/16, but received at Home Office on 24/10/16.


      This application is being submitted on 7/11/16, the 14th day since
      receipt of the IA67, and therefore in-time."


6. In a decision sent out on 5 December  2016,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gill
   granted permission to the  respondent,  but  made  no  reference  to  any
   timeliness issue. Indeed it was  only  in  Mr  Lams'  Rule  24  response,
   produced the day before the hearing, that the issue was raised.

7. At the hearing Mr Lams requested that the  application  not  be  admitted
   and time not be extended, further to Rule 21(6) of the Procedure Rules.


8. Mr Wilding invited me to extend time on the basis  that  there  had  been
   little more than a miscalculation and mistake and that, taking account of
   the weekend, the application was really only one day out of time. He also
   referred to the merits of the grounds, from which it was clear  that  the
   First-tier Tribunal had erred by making a decision  that  was  wrong,  in
   light of  the  subsequent  case  of  MA  (Pakistan)  &  Ors,  R  (on  the
   application of) v Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) &  Anor
   [2016] EWCA Civ 705.


9. In response, Mr Lams submitted that the application was four days out  of
   time, there had been no application to extend  time,  and  in  any  event
   there was no merit in the grounds.

10. I did not agree to time being extended. My reasons are as follows.


11. The grant of permission by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill cannot be taken  to
   include an implied extension of time. The cases of Samir (FtT  Permission
   to appeal: time) [2013] UKUT 00003 and Boktor and Wanis(late  application
   for permission) Egypt [2011] UKUT 00442 make it clear  that  a  grant  of
   permission has to be regarded as conditional upon a decision whether time
   should be extended. Accordingly, unless time is  extended,  there  is  no
   grant of permission.


12. Rule 21(3)(aa)(i) of the Procedure Rules makes it clear that the 14  day
   time period for applying for permission runs from the date on  which  the
   notice of the First-tier Tribunal's refusal of permission is  "sent  to",
   not "received by", the applicant. The notice  of  decision  refusing  the
   respondent's application for permission in the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
   sent out on 21 October 2016. The 14 day period  therefore  expired  on  4
   November 2016. The respondent's application was  received  by  the  Upper
   Tribunal on 8 November 2016. There is nothing in the time  period  stated
   in Rule 21 to suggest that non-working days were not to be  counted.  The
   application was therefore clearly four days out of time.


13. Although the Senior Presenting Officer completing the Form  IAUT-1  made
   the statement at [5] above in the second  part  of  section  D,  that  is
   clearly not an application  for  an  extension  of  time.  There  was  no
   application for an extension of time. Rule 21(6) requires there to be  an
   application of extension of time included with the  application,  and  it
   does not seem to me that it was therefore open to Mr Wilding to  make  an
   application at this late stage. In any event, Mr Wilding  was  unable  to
   give any reason for the delay in submitting the application,  other  than
   that the Presenting Officer completing the form made a mistake.  However,
   this was not the case of a lay member of the public completing the  form,
   but a Senior Presenting Officer from the Specialist Appeals Team  of  the
   Home Office who should be fully aware of the time limits in the Procedure
   Rules. There is therefore simply no excuse for the application being made
   out of time. Neither is it the case that the delay was  minimal.  It  was
   not one day out of time, but four days, which is over a quarter of the 14
   day time period. It seems to me, furthermore, that there  is  nothing  in
   the grounds of such merit as to override the timeliness issue. I  do  not
   see that any substantial injustice would be suffered to the respondent or
   to the public by allowing Judge Miles' decision to stand.


14. Accordingly I do not extend time and I refuse to admit the Secretary  of
   State's application for permission. There is no appeal pending before the
   Upper Tribunal and the decision of Judge Miles, allowing the  appellant's
   appeal on Article 8 grounds, stands.


                               Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
