
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/27595/2014
                                                               IA/27602/2014
                                                               IA/27606/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 4 September 2015                 |On: 8 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before




                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                       MRS RACHAEL OLUBUNMI OJUTALAYO
                         MISS SARAH TAIWO AJUTALAYO
                       MASTER ABRAM KEHINDE OJUTULAYO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Reynolds, Daniel Aramide solicitors



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  FTTJ's  Gibb  and  Kelly,
       promulgated on 27 March 2015.





       Background


    2. The first respondent (hereinafter referred to as the respondent), who
       is the mother of the second and third respondents,  claimed  to  have
       arrived in the United Kingdom in 2004, after entering  unlawfully  in
       order to join her husband who  it  was  said  arrived  in  1994.  The
       respondent also has an older child, born in the  year  2000,  however
       that child and the respondent's husband  were  not  included  in  the
       application under Appendix FM of HC 395 (as amended).  The  Secretary
       of State refused the respondents' applications on the basis that they
       could not meet the requirements of Appendix FM, paragraph 276ADE  and
       that there were no exceptional circumstances.

    3. At the hearing before the FTTJ's, the respondent and her husband gave
       evidence and the panel considered  supporting  documentary  evidence.
       The panel found that the  respondents  could  not  meet  any  of  the
       requirements of the Rules but allowed their appeals  on  the  limited
       basis that the Secretary of State's decision was  not  in  accordance
       with  the  law  owing  to  the  lack  of  any  consideration  of  the
       circumstances of the  respondent's  eldest  child  or  her  husband's
       claimed 20 year residence in the United Kingdom.

    4. The appellant's grounds sought an extension of time  for  making  the
       application. It was argued that the Secretary of State had  not  made
       an unlawful decision as the respondent's  eldest  child  and  husband
       were not included in the application and furthermore the Secretary of
       State had no records of any outstanding applications  by  the  eldest
       child and husband.

    5. FTTJ Cheales granted permission, finding  that  the  application  was
       made in time and that the grounds advanced showed an  arguable  error
       of law.

    6. No Rule 24 response was lodged by the respondents.

  The hearing


    7. The application for permission to appeal was  made  one  day  out  of
       time. Mr Reynolds made no submissions on this matter. The explanation
       provided is that Good Friday and Easter Monday fell within the 14-day
       period for appealing.  While  Rule  33  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       procedure rules does not make any reference to working  days,  I  was
       prepared to extend time given the very short period of the delay  and
       the reasonableness of the explanation provided.

    8. Mr Avery advised me that at the  time  the  grounds  of  appeal  were
       drafted, there was no outstanding application  for  the  respondent's
       husband. An application for leave to remain had been made  subsequent
       to the grounds being drafted and this had been refused with  a  right
       of  appeal.  There  was  also  no  outstanding  application  for  the
       respondent's eldest child and she had not been included in the latest
       application for leave to remain.

    9. Mr Reynolds conceded that this was the position. He advised  me  that
       the respondent and her husband had not intended to mislead,  in  that
       there had been a previous application for the husband but  that  fees
       were not taken. The application had been  made  again  in  May  2015,
       after the grounds of appeal were received.

   10. Mr Avery sought to rely on AJ (India) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1191. He
       submitted  that  the  tribunal,  who  had  heard  evidence  from  the
       respondent and her husband, ought to have gone ahead  and  determined
       the appeals. The Tribunal was under a misunderstanding that there was
       an outstanding application for the respondent's husband, which  ought
       to have been linked to the appeals. There was no reason for the  case
       to be remitted.

   11. Mr  Reynolds  agreed  that  the  Tribunal  had  erred  based  on  the
       misunderstanding identified by Mr Avery.  He  informed  me  that  the
       application of the respondent's husband had been refused for a number
       of reasons, including that he was not  in  a  genuine  or  subsisting
       relationship with  the  respondents.  The  respondent's  husband  had
       lodged his appeal with  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  was  awaiting
       confirmation of a hearing date. He invited me to remit the appeals to
       the First-tier Tribunal so that they could be linked to the appeal of
       the respondent's husband.

   12. Mr Avery was of the view that the  appeals,  including  that  of  the
       respondent's husband could be linked and heard together in the  Upper
       Tribunal.

   13. The Tribunal erred in finding that the Secretary of State's  decision
       was not in accordance with the law.  At  [22]  of  the  decision  the
       following is said;

           "However, it appears to us that it is not possible to conduct  a
           proper assessment of the impact on the children of removal until
           it is clear what is to happen to both parents. The Secretary  of
           State is in possession of the Appellant's husband's application,
           and it would not  therefore  be  overly  complex  to  link  that
           application to  those  that  generated  these  appeals,  and  to
           request further information about the older child."

   14. As conceded by Mr Reynolds,  there  was  no  outstanding  application
       before the Secretary of State in relation to the respondent's husband
       and nor  had  any  application  been  made  or  information  provided
       regarding the respondent's eldest child. Mr Reynolds advised me  that
       no application had been made in relation to that child  at  the  time
       because of her relatively short period of  residence  in  the  United
       Kingdom.

   15. The panel's decision to find that the respondent's decision  was  not
       in accordance with the law was based on their  mistaken  belief  that
       there were two unresolved  applications  in  relation  to  two  other
       members of the family unit. In this they, unwittingly, erred.

   16. The Secretary of State's decision referred to the respondent's eldest
       child, notwithstanding  that  she  had  not  been  included  or  even
       mentioned in the respondents' application. The panel  heard  evidence
       from the respondent and her  husband  and  there  was  a  substantial
       quantity of documentary evidence adduced on the respondent's behalf.

   17. The Tribunal was in at least as good a position as the  Secretary  of
       State to consider the circumstances of the eldest  child  along  with
       the rest of the family and indeed noted that at the age  of  14,  she
       was likely to be "approaching  a  critical  stage  of  her  secondary
       education." The panel therefore ought to have reached a conclusion on
       the merits of the appeals as all the facts were before them.

   18. In these circumstances I am satisfied that there are  errors  of  law
       such that the decision be set aside to be re-made.

   19. In terms of the venue of any future hearing, I bear in mind paragraph
       7.2 of the Practice Statements, in that I consider that the effect of
       the error of law has  been  to  deprive  both  parties  of  any  real
       consideration of their respective cases. Furthermore, in view of  the
       fact that the respondent's husband has an outstanding  appeal  before
       the First-tier Tribunal, it  would  be  appropriate  to  remit  these
       appeals to that venue in order that they all be heard simultaneously.

   20. Further directions are to follow.

  Conclusion

  The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
  making of an error on a point of law.

  I set aside the decision to be re-made.

  Directions


  These appeals are remitted to be heard afresh, at  a  hearing  at  Taylor
  House, with a time estimate of 2 hours, on a date to be confirmed.

  These appeals are to be linked with the  appeal  of  Mr  Kehinde  Adebola
  Ojutalayo (DOB 27 February 1967).




  Signed    Date: 6 September 2015


  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
