

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27442/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 26th April & 16th October 2013           |On : 18th October 2013       |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                            yusuf adan abdi jama

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss N. Manyarara & Miss Keelin McCarthy, instructed
by Duncan Lewis & Co. Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mrs Monica Tanner & Mr Chris Avery of the Specialist
Appeals Team

                                DETERMINATION

This appeal first came before me on 26th April 2013, when I  found  that  an
error of law had been made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   My  'Decision  &
Directions' were issued shortly afterwards, and are appended below  as  part
of this determination.

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   On 8th November 2012 a decision was finally taken  on  the  application
    which Yusuf Jama had made eight years previously, for leave  to  remain
    under paragraph 352D of  the  Immigration  Rules  as  the  child  of  a
    refugee.  According to his representatives, a firm called Law For  All,
    he arrived in the United Kingdom with an agent around 21st  June  2004,
    and on 4th October that year, three days before his 18th  birthday,  an
    application was submitted under what  the  representatives  called  the
    "family  reunion  concession"  ~  something  of  a  misnomer,  as   the
    concession had been absorbed into the Rules on 2nd October  2000.   The
    application was also considered, quite  unnecessarily  it  would  seem,
    under paragraph 298, as if Mr Jama's mother were an 'ordinary'  settled
    person.  In respect of the application under rule 352D,  it  was  noted
    that if, as Mr Jama's mother, Halimo Isse, averred, Mr  Jama  had  been
    separated from  the  rest  of  the  family  shortly  before  they  fled
    Mogadishu in 1991, when he was not yet 5 years old, and was believed to
    have been killed, she would have mentioned that as part of  the  asylum
    claim which she made here in September 2001.  She did mention that  her
    own parents had been killed during the unrest in 1991.   But  she  only
    referred to  her  husband  and  four  children,  those  children  being
    subsequently admitted under the Family Reunion Policy  after  Mrs  Isse
    had been recognised as a refugee.

2.    The mother-son relationship was  further  doubted  in  the  Notice  of
    Refusal of Leave to Remain.  Only a photocopy of the Cellmark DNA  test
    taken in September 2004 had been provided, and it was possible that  Mr
    Jama's photograph had been substituted at a later date.   It  partially
    covered over the date written underneath ("1.9.04"),  which   suggested
    that the photo was affixed to the page after the date had been written,
    and raised the possibility that the sample might have come from one  of
    Mrs Isse's other children.  The other objection raised in  the  refusal
    letter does not seem to me to have much substance, namely that the  DNA
    evidence is not sufficient to prove the claimed  relationship,  because
    the Cellmark report says that "in the absence  of  a  sample  from  the
    child's father ... the results cannot be  as  conclusive  as  when  the
    father is also tested."  Nevertheless, the report  concluded  that  Mrs
    Isse's "probability of maternity" was 99.9999%,  which  would  seem  to
    satisfy the civil standard of a balance of probabilities.

3.   When the appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal  on  14th  February
    2013,  Judge  Geraint  Jones  QC  accepted,  without   mentioning   the
    objections in the refusal letter, that Yusuf Jama and Halimo Isse  were
    related as claimed, but went on to find that it was "plain beyond doubt
    that the appellant was not part of Mrs Isse's family unit at  the  time
    that she left her country of habitual residence so as to seek  asylum."
    That was not Mrs Isse's evidence.  She insisted  that  Yusuf  had  been
    living with her and the rest of the family until just before they  fled
    from Mogadishu to Ethiopia in 1991.  Judge Jones seems  to  have  taken
    the date when Halimo left Somalia not as 1991 but as  2001,  which  was
    when she left Ethiopia and claimed asylum here.  This  misunderstanding
    was not picked up in the grounds seeking leave to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, which focused instead on the possibility that a parent can be
    separated from her child for a long period before she  flees  from  her
    own country, because of the situation in that country,  such  that  she
    and the child can still be regarded as living in the same family  unit.
    Judge Landes gave permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  this
    basis, but it seems to me that Judge  Jones  simply  misunderstood  the
    evidence about when Halimo left Somalia.

4.   Judge Jones also raised a ground which had not been  mentioned  in  the
    refusal letter, namely the requirement at  rule  352D(iii)  that  Yusuf
    should not have been leading an independent life.  But he stopped short
    of dismissing the appeal on that ground.  He went  on  to  dismiss  the
    appeal under Article 8, and then went on to dismiss it separately -  in
    a reversal of the usual order - under Appendix FM.  The grounds drafted
    by Duncan Lewis did not challenge the decision under Article 8, but did
    contend that it was not open to "the Defendant" (meaning the  Secretary
    of State) "to base his (sic) decision on  Appendix  FM."   This  ground
    appears to me to be completely misconceived.  The  refusal  letter  did
    not mention Appendix FM at all, but  considered  Yusuf's  private  life
    under paragraph 276ADE.  According to Judge Jones, it was actually  the
    wish of the appellant's representative  that  he  should  consider  the
    appeal under Appendix  FM.   Unsurprisingly,  Judge  Landes  could  see
    little merit in this ground.  Nevertheless, she  did  not  preclude  it
    from being argued, in case there was something she had missed.   I  can
    see nothing in it at all.

5.   When the matter came before me today, it was agreed on all  hands  that
    the First-tier determination was infected by error of  law,  and  would
    have to be set aside.  Mrs Tanner submitted that, in  order  to  remake
    the decision on the appeal, the Upper Tribunal would need  to  consider
    evidence bearing upon the  two  principal  objections  in  the  refusal
    letter, namely that Yusuf may not be the son of Halimo, and that he may
    not in any event have been part of her  family  unit  before  she  left
    Mogadishu.  Miss Manyarara was fairly sure that  the  original  of  the
    Cellmark DNA report can be made available, although she  was  reluctant
    to  let  go  of  Judge  Jones'  favourable  finding  on   the   claimed
    relationship.  In my view, however, the First-tier determination is  so
    fundamentally flawed that it must now be determined de novo whether the
    requirements of rule 352D were met at the time when Yusuf Jama made his
    application.

6.    Although  Judge  Jones'  findings  on  Article  8  were  not  actually
    challenged by Duncan Lewis, it seems to me that  the  appellant  should
    not be debarred from arguing that he has  an  Article  8  claim  to  be
    permitted to remain in the United Kingdom.  The strength of that  claim
    will no doubt be affected by the Tribunal's findings in respect of  the
    mother-son relationship and membership of the family unit.

                           RE-MAKING THE DECISION

7.   The 'second stage' hearing was twice listed and,  unfortunately,  twice
    adjourned, before reaching  a  conclusion  before  me  today.   In  the
    meantime, another  DNA  test  was  conducted,  this  time  by  Eurofins
    Medigenomix, and like Cellmark Diagnostics they found  the  probability
    of Halimo Isse and Yusuf Jama being mother and son to be 99.9999%.  One
    of the respondent's objections having thus  fallen  away,  the  hearing
    today was concerned with  establishing  whether  the  appellant  was  a
    member of his mother's family unit at the time when she  left  Somalia,
    as required by paragraph 352D(iv) of the  Immigration  Rules.   Witness
    statements had been taken from the appellant,  his  mother,  and  three
    brothers, and four of those statements were  tested  in  oral  evidence
    today.

8.   In his earlier statement, signed on 11th May 2012, the  appellant  said
    that, after being separated from his parents and siblings, he was taken
    in by the couple next door, Asha and Mohamed, and moved  with  them  to
    Belet Hawa.  He believed Asha to be his mother, and only  after  living
    for some years with his adoptive family, when he was 7 or 8 years  old,
    was he told that this was not so.  Asha said that she  had  decided  to
    adopt him as her own child, when she found him crying for  his  missing
    parents.  Mohamed continued to look  after  the  appellant  after  Asha
    died, and eventually arranged  for  him  to  be  taken  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  The agent dropped him off in Southall, with  instructions  to
    stop Somali passers-by and ask if they knew his family.  Fortunately, a
    lady called Hawa passed by and, being told Yusuf's name and  clan,  led
    him to his family.

9.   In his statement signed on 25th June 2013, the appellant is  unable  to
    say why his mother did not mention him when claiming asylum.   "On  the
    one hand she says I was lost for such a long time and she  believed  me
    to be dead.  On the other hand she says she never gave  up  the  search
    for me and was always asking about me within the Somali community."

10.  In his oral evidence, the appellant said that he had never  been  under
    the impression that Asha was his real mother.  He called her "aunty" or
    "mother" out of respect, as a young child would to an older woman.   He
    did not recall her ever having to tell him that she was  not  his  real
    mother.  As for Hawa bringing him to his family, he was "so, so  lucky"
    that he accosted her in Southall.

11.  When making her asylum claim in 2001, Halimo  Isse  gave  many  'Family
    Details'.  She gave the  names  of  her  husband,  four  children,  her
    parents  and  three  siblings.   Her  parents  were  deceased  and  the
    whereabouts of her siblings unknown, but her husband and children  were
    in  Ethiopia,  at  Jigjiga.   The  children  were,  in  order  of  age,
    Abdirahman, born in 1985, Asha, born in 1986, Essa, born in  1987,  and
    Hamza, born in 1988.  The family moved from  Budhole  to  Mogadishu  in
    1988, but at the beginning of 1991 the family home was looted by Hawiye
    militiamen, who killed Halimo's parents and grandmother, and  terrified
    the children.  In March 1991 Halimo fled to Ethiopia with  her  husband
    and four children, and more than ten years went by before she was  able
    to come to the United Kingdom and claim asylum.

12.  In her statement signed on 11th May 2012, Halimo says that  her  second
    child, Asha, has a twin, Yusuf.  She does  not  say  why  she  did  not
    mention Yusuf when claiming asylum, but says that she did  include  him
    in her application for family reunion, after she had been recognised as
    a refugee, "for practical reasons.  He was not physically together with
    his siblings and I did not know where he was."  She goes on to say that
    she never stopped looking for him and never gave  up  hope  of  finding
    him, but had to accept the real  possibility  that  he  was  no  longer
    alive.  She was overcome with joy therefore when her friend, Hawa Haji,
    brought Yusuf to her house in June 2004.

13.  In her statement signed on 25th June 2013, Halimo is unable to say  why
    she did not mention Yusuf's name in the course of her asylum interview,
    but then says that she omitted to mention him because she believed  him
    to be dead.  However, "I spent many years yearning for him and  longing
    to see him again.  Many nights I was  awake  just  wondering  what  had
    happened to him.  I would not under any circumstances  have  given  him
    away willingly."

14.  In her oral evidence, Halimo  reiterated  that  she  would  never  have
    given Yusuf to someone else to look after.  Asha was not a relative  or
    even a close friend, although she was a neighbour.  She must have taken
    Yusuf in, because she felt sorry for a vulnerable young child.   Halimo
    did not list Yusuf among her children when claiming asylum, because she
    thought he was dead.  She did not try to find out what had happened  to
    him, because she believed him to be dead, and so forgot about him.  She
    therefore had no idea that Yusuf would be coming to the UK.   When  her
    neighbour, Hawa Haji, brought him, she was overcome with joy.

15.  In his witness statement signed on  25th  June  2013,  the  appellant's
    elder brother, Abdirahman, says that he was 6 years old when Yusuf went
    missing, and he remembers how sad he felt at letting his  mother  down,
    because he was supposed to take care  of  Yusuf.   Abdirahman  did  not
    attend the hearing.  I was told he was at university that day.

16.  In his witness statement, signed on 25th  June  2013,  the  appellant's
    younger brother, Essa, says that his mother never stopped talking about
    Yusuf, and would ask the children every morning to pray for Yusuf.   In
    his oral evidence, Essa confirmed that his mother never stopped talking
    about Yusuf.  But she did not try to  find  him,  although  she  had  a
    feeling that he would come back.

17.  In his witness statement signed on  25th  June  2013,  the  appellant's
    youngest brother, Hamza, says that he was only 1 year  old  when  Yusuf
    when missing, so he has no memory of that happening.   But  his  mother
    never stopped talking about him, and he does not believe her capable of
    giving any child of hers away.  Hamza was not asked to  give  any  oral
    evidence, apart from adopting his statement.

18.  In his closing submissions, Mr Avery drew  attention  to  a  number  of
    inconsistencies in the evidence, which I shall  refer  to  below.   The
    inference must be that I had not been told  the  truth  about  how  the
    appellant came to be separated from his birth-family or how he came  to
    be looked after by a different family.  On the  contrary,  argued  Miss
    McCarthy, there was no contradiction between his mother  believing  the
    appellant to be dead, and at the same time hoping against hope that  he
    would come back.  Why would she give him away to  someone  else?   Asha
    was not a relative, so  this  could  not  be  a  case  of  intra-family
    adoption.

19.  As for Article 8, Mr Avery asked me to give weight  to  the  fact  that
    the appellant does not fall within paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration
    Rules, and that he is not only an illegal entrant but someone  who  has
    put forward a false account in order to try and  bring  himself  within
    the Immigration Rules.  Miss  McCarthy  acknowledged  that  her  client
    could not succeed under Article 8 as confined by the Immigration Rules,
    but asked me to find that, unusually, family life subsisted in Kugathas
    terms between this mother and her adult children, who all live together
    at the  same  address.   The  appellant  also,  she  contended,  had  a
    particularly strong private life.  He had come here as a minor, and had
    applied for leave to remain in October 2004.  He did not get a decision
    until November 2012, over eight years later.  This delay  implied  that
    the Secretary of State did not consider there to be a  pressing  public
    interest in removing him.  Mr Avery reminded us that the appellant  has
    a conviction for assault, but Miss McCarthy contended that this was not
    serious criminality, and that the appellant would not be able  to  fend
    for himself in Somalia, where he no longer has any contacts, and  where
    his long residence in the UK might expose him to danger.

20.  The chief obstacle  in  the  way  of  the  appellant's  claim  to  have
    belonged to the family unit of his parents and  siblings,  before  they
    moved to Ethiopia, is of course the absence of any mention  of  him  by
    his mother, when she made her claim for  asylum.   Her  explanation  is
    that she believed him to be dead.  That does not sit well with the fact
    that, when giving 'Family Details' on the asylum application form,  she
    named her parents, both of whom were deceased, and her three  siblings,
    whose whereabouts were unknown.  If she had a child  whose  whereabouts
    were unknown,  why  should  she  not  include  him  among  the  'Family
    Details'?  If he went missing  during  the  mayhem  and  carnage  which
    triggered the flight of Halimo and her family from Mogadishu,  why  did
    Halimo not include that among the terrible events, such as  the  murder
    of her parents and grandmother, which had forced  the  family  to  seek
    refuge abroad?

21.  If Yusuf did not go missing in the circumstances  claimed,  there  must
    be another reason why he did not accompany his parents and siblings  on
    their journey to Ethiopia.  One obvious  alternative  is  that  he  was
    voluntarily entrusted to someone else's care, a possibility  which  the
    witnesses in their evidence, and Miss McCarthy in her submissions, have
    been at pains to deny.  It is not uncommon, however, in many  parts  of
    Africa, for other people to play a much greater role in the  upbringing
    of children than is envisaged by the 'nuclear  family'  of  the  modern
    West.  Over the years, the appellate authorities have dealt  with  many
    'sole responsibility' cases, where mothers have entrusted  the  day-to-
    day care  of  their  children  to  relatives  or  friends,  while  they
    themselves toil overseas to provide financial support.  Informal intra-
    family adoptions are also  not  uncommon  in  Muslim  countries.   Miss
    McCarthy points out that Asha was not a relative,  and  Halimo  insists
    that she was not even a close friend, although in his  earlier  witness
    statement the appellant  recalls  that  he  would  often  play  in  her
    compound and that "she would mind me whilst my mother was out so I knew
    her well before I got separated from my family."  We know nothing about
    Asha, of course, except what we are told by Yusuf and Halimo, and while
    Halimo tries to  distance  herself  from  Asha,  Yusuf  emphasizes  her
    closeness to the family.

22.  In his earlier statement, Yusuf refers  to  Asha  and  Mohamed  as  his
    adoptive parents, and says that Asha "decided to adopt me  as  her  own
    child", although  of  course  he  places  this  after  the  involuntary
    separation from his birth family.  But there is a  serious  discrepancy
    between the witness statement, in which Yusuf  says  that  he  believed
    Asha to be his real mother ~ "It was only after we had lived there  for
    some years that Asha told me she was not my  mother"  ~  and  his  oral
    evidence, in which he insisted that he was never under  the  impression
    that Asha was his real mother.  Indeed, he called  her  'aunty',  later
    adding that he called her 'mother' as well.  But both  these  modes  of
    address were terms of respect which a young child might use to an older
    woman.

23.  The appellant's elder brother, Abdirahman, did not attend the  hearing,
    at which he might  have  been  questioned  about  the  rather  unlikely
    account in his witness statement that he was expected, at the age of 6,
    to take care of his younger brother, and that he  felt  very  sad  when
    upbraided  for  dereliction  of  his  duty.   The  reason   given   for
    Abdirahman's  non-attendance  today  was  that  he   had   classes   at
    university, but one might have thought he could take  the  morning  off
    without serious consequences for  his  education.   Curiously,  Yusuf's
    twin sister, also called Asha, has given no evidence at all, not even a
    written statement, about the appellant.  Added to  these  omissions  is
    another discrepancy, which the  appellant  himself  identifies  in  his
    recent witness statement (see paragraph 9 above).  On the one  hand  we
    are told that Halimo had a profound hope that Yusuf would one day  come
    back, that she made the children pray for him every morning,  that  she
    never ceased making inquiries about him.  On  the  other  hand,  Halimo
    thought there was no point in mentioning him when she  claimed  asylum,
    because he must be dead.  Indeed, in cross-examination today  she  said
    that she did not try to find out what happened to Yusuf.   She  thought
    he was dead, and so "forgot about him."

24.  On top of these inconsistencies comes the sheer implausibility  of  the
    appellant's account of how  he  found  his  long-lost  family  after  a
    separation of 13 years.  He was abandoned by the agent in the middle of
    Southall, with instructions to stop Somali passers-by and ask  them  if
    they knew his family, giving them his name and  clan.   As  luck  would
    have it, a lady whom he accosted in this manner, Haji Hawa  (from  whom
    we have not heard), lived right next door to the family, and  was  able
    to take the appellant there.  This story stretches credulity  too  far.
    'Abdi' and 'Jama' are very common names in  Somalia.   Someone  bearing
    those names could hardly expect total strangers to direct  him  to  his
    particular family.  It is far more likely that Halimo  was  well  aware
    that Yusuf was coming to the United Kingdom.  It was not  a  matter  of
    chance that he was able to locate his family.

25.  The burden is on the appellant to demonstrate that it  is  more  likely
    than not that he was a member of his mother's family unit at  the  time
    when she left her own country to seek asylum.  He  has  not  discharged
    that burden.  Has he, on the  other  hand,  established  family  and/or
    private life in the United Kingdom, such that it would breach Article 8
    of the Human Rights Convention for him to be removed  from  the  United
    Kingdom in accordance with the decision made on 8th November 2012?

26.  Miss McCarthy points out that the appellant is living at home with  his
    mother and siblings, and contends  that  this  arrangement  evinces  an
    unusual degree of dependency between parent and adult children, such as
    to constitute 'family life' for the purposes of Article 8.   I  do  not
    agree.  The appellant is a healthy young man of 27, well able to  stand
    up for himself, as his conviction for common assault tends to  suggest.
    But he has certainly established private life in  the  United  Kingdom,
    with which removal would interfere sufficiently to  engage  Article  8.
    Whether removal would be a disproportionate interference is, of course,
    the ultimate question which the tribunal has to resolve.  His strongest
    point, which Miss McCarthy rightly emphasizes, is  the  delay  of  over
    eight years between  his  application  for  leave  to  remain  and  the
    respondent's decision on that application.  By her delay the respondent
    has herself allowed the appellant to build up the Article 8 claim  with
    which he now resists removal.

27.  I cannot, however, accept Miss McCarthy's submissions  about  the  dire
    consequences of removal to Somalia, where the appellant is said to have
    no connections and where he would not be able to fend for himself.   He
    may well have connections in Somalia.  We have not been told the  truth
    about how the appellant was brought up and how  it  was  that,  on  the
    threshold of adulthood, he came to the United Kingdom.  Mr Avery  makes
    the point that the  appellant  does  not  satisfy  the  'private  life'
    requirements at paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules, and that his
    Article  8  claim  outside  the  Rules  is  weakened  by  his  lack  of
    credibility.  I agree.  The interests of the  individual  claimant  and
    his family must be balanced against the public interest in  maintaining
    effective immigration control, and when the Article 8 claim is  founded
    upon an account of his circumstances which is not credible, the  public
    interest may assume preponderant weight.  That,  I  find,  is  how  the
    balance falls in the instant case.




     DECISION

     The First-tier determination is set aside,  and  the  decision  on  the
    appeal is re-made by the Upper Tribunal.

     The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules and  under  Article
    8 of the ECHR.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                           17th October 2013


