

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: IA 27121-13

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   31.03.2014|
|on    31.03.2014                              |sent out:                    |
|                                              |03.04.2014                   |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                                SAIRA PARVEZ
                                                                   appellant
                                     and



                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Mr Liam Doyle (trainee solicitor, M & K, Luton)
For the respondent: Mr D Mills


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Michael Gillespie),  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross  on  17
    January, to  a wife's appeal by a citizen of Pakistan, born 7  February
    1987, against refusal of limited leave to remain in this country as the
    spouse of a person present and settled here.

 2. The judge was satisfied that this was a genuine  and  'subsisting'  (to
    use the peculiar language  of  the  Immigration  Rules)  marriage,  and
    nothing more turns directly on his findings about that. The other issue
    set out in the part of the refusal letter  dealing  with  the  position
    under the Rules was whether the appellant and the sponsor  intended  to
    live together permanently.

 3. Normally this would follow on naturally  from  a  conclusion  that  the
    marriage was genuine; but by the date of the hearing  the  sponsor  was
    working as an expatriate teacher in  Saudi  Arabia.  Though  the  judge
    posed the right question, as  to  the  'connubial  intentions'  of  the
    parties at paragraph 5, he did not answer it at paragraph 8.  Mr  Doyle
    realistically accepted that, in a case involving a sponsor who had only
    returned to this country for the purpose of  the  appeal  hearing,  and
    despite the finding on the genuineness of the marriage, this was a live
    issue which needed to be decided. The reason is that the Rules are  not
    intended to let people keep their dependent relatives here  while  they
    work abroad, but to let them have them with them when they  are  living
    here. The result is that the 'connubial intentions' point still has  to
    be decided.

 4. In answer to a question from me, Mr Mills made it clear that  he  would
    not argue that any absence of a husband, even  overseas,  would  negate
    any intention to live with his wife permanently in this country. He was
    content for the case to be decided on the basis that,  if  the  sponsor
    really was in Saudi Arabia on a fixed-term contract which  he  did  not
    intend to renew, then that would not stop him and  the  appellant  from
    having the necessary intentions.

 5. In those circumstances, Mr Doyle was  content  for  me  to  decide  the
    'connubial intentions' point for myself  on  the  material  before  me,
    without taking further oral evidence.  Neither  Mr  Mills  nor  he  had
    anything to add to what is set out respectively  in  their  grounds  of
    appeal and reply. There is no documentary evidence about the  sponsor's
    contract of employment; but he says  at  paragraph  9  of  his  witness
    statement, signed 13 January 2014, that he  started  working  in  Saudi
    Arabia in September 2013, and "This is a temporary contract job  for  a
    year": he is currently expected back at the end of  June,  which  would
    fit the academic year, at least as used in this country.

 6. The judge's reasons on the genuineness of the  parties'  marriage  were
    entirely satisfactory, and in my view it  is  inconceivable  that  this
    highly experienced judge would not also  have  accepted  the  sponsor's
    evidence on their intentions about where they would live in the longer-
    term future, if he had given his mind to the need for deciding that  as
    a separate issue. That means this point is decided in  the  appellant's
    favour, and her appeal is allowed.

 7. Mr Mills told me this would result in a grant of two  years'  leave  to
    remain to the appellant, when and if my  decision  became  final.  That
    means she will need to apply for indefinite leave to remain before that
    period  expires:  while,  according  to  Mr  Mills,  that   application
    (following on the present one, made 5 July 2012) will be decided on the
    Rules as they stood before the 9th, it will also have to be decided  on
    the facts as they stand then.


 8. If it turned out that the judge and  I  were  wrong,  and  the  sponsor
    simply intended to leave the appellant here with  his  family  in  this
    country, while he went on working in  Saudi  Arabia,  then  the  result
    would most likely go against them.

Home Office appeal : decision re-made in part
Appellant's appeal allowed



                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



