
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27733/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd September 2015                |On 8th September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                               mr Abbas Sadaf
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Chodha, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 15th January 1968.   His
    appeal against the refusal  to  vary  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
    (General) Migrant and the decision to remove him under Section  47  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands in a decision dated 7th
    April 2015.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Osborne
    on the grounds that it was arguable that the judge had been mistaken as
    to the amount of earnings  for  self-employment  and  also  as  to  the
    relevant period of self-employment.

3.   At the hearing before me there  was  a  discussion  about  whether  the
    documents showing that national insurance contributions had  been  paid
    were submitted with the application.  There was  no  mention  of  these
    documents  in  the  application  form  or  in   the   covering   letter
    accompanying the application.  It would appear from the court file that
    the documents were submitted with the grounds of appeal to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Accordingly, they  would  be  inadmissible  pursuant  to
    Section 85A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

4.   In submissions,  the  Appellant  claimed  that  he  had  sent  all  the
    documents save for a payslip with the application. There  was  evidence
    on the court file to show that  a  payslip  and  bank  statements  were
    submitted on 11th June 2014 prior to the decision on  19th  June  2014.
    Unfortunately, there was no evidence to show  that  national  insurance
    contributions had been paid and no evidence to show that the  documents
    which appeared at pages 72 and 73 of the  Appellant's  bundle  were  in
    fact sent with the application or before the decision was made on  19th
    June 2014.

5.   Paragraph 19 of Appendix A of the Immigration Rules states that if  the
    applicant is claiming points for self-employed earnings made in the UK,
    he must also provide the specified documents in paragraph  19-SD(b)  to
    show that he is registered as self-employed, he was registered as self-
    employed during the period(s) of self-employment used to claim  points,
    and he was paying class 2 national insurance contributions  during  the
    period(s) of self-employment used to claim points.

6.   Paragraph 19-SD states that the specified documents in paragraph  19(a)
    are: If the  applicant's  national  insurance  is  paid  by  bill,  the
    original  bill  from  the  billing  period   immediately   before   the
    application.  If the applicant's national insurance is paid  by  direct
    debit, the most recent bank statement issued  before  the  application,
    showing  the  direct  debit   payment   of   the   national   insurance
    contributions to HMRC.

7.   In the refusal letter the Respondent states: "As your  bank  statements
    do not show that you are paying national insurance via direct debit and
    you have failed to supply any other documents detailed above  you  have
    failed to demonstrate that  you  have  been  paying  class  2  national
    insurance contributions on your self-employed earnings."

8.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge found at paragraph 9: "I have  considered
    all of the evidence in this case including  that  to  which  I  do  not
    specifically refer and reach the  following  conclusion.  Some  of  the
    documents provided by the Appellant are those which I cannot take  into
    account as they fall foul of Section 19 of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007
    which specifies that I may not consider new evidence on an appeal which
    has only been provided after the decision.  If I were  able  to  do  so
    then I would have been satisfied at least that the Appellant had  dealt
    with the issue of national insurance contributions."

9.   I accept the Appellant's submission that the judge  applied  the  wrong
    figures at paragraph 4 and that there was evidence of earnings for  the
    relevant twelve month period.  However, there was  no  evidence  before
    the  Respondent  that  the  Appellant  was  paying  national  insurance
    contributions during  the  relevant  period  of  self-employment.   The
    evidence submitted with the grounds of appeal, which appears  at  pages
    72 and 73 of the Appellant's bundle  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    were not admissible.

10.  Accordingly, I find that there was no  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    finding at paragraph 9 that he could not consider  this  evidence.  The
    Appellant was unable to satisfy paragraph 19 of Appendix A and was  not
    entitled to the points claimed under paragraph 245CA(b).

11.  There was no material error of law in  the  decision  dated  7th  April
    2015 and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 7th September 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 7th September 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
