
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/27361/2015
     IA/27365/2025
     IA/27367/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 November 2016                           |On 2 December 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                    N A K
                                    Y A K
                                    R N K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms.D.Ofei-Kwatia, of Counsel, instructed by BWF
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr.I.Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellants are citizens of Ghana.  The  first  named  appellant  is
    the mother of her son born on 23 November 2000 in Ghana and a  daughter
    born on 17 March 2007 in the United Kingdom.

2.   The first appellant and her then husband came to the United Kingdom  in
    May 2004, he to study and she as his dependant.

3.   In 2010 the family left the UK and he applied to enter as a  post-study
    worker and they as his dependants. He re-entered the United Kingdom  in
    September 2010 in that capacity.   Significantly it was noted that  the
    first named appellant stated at the hearing that at point  she  had  no
    intention of returning to Ghana as she wanted to bring her children  up
    in the United Kingdom.

4.   In March 2011 the first appellant and her husband were divorced but  he
    has formed a new relationship with  an  EEA  citizen  and  has  an  EEA
    residence card until November 2017.  Although he no longer  lives  with
    the appellants he keeps in regular contact with them and sees them on a
    very regular basis.  He has a good relationship with his  children  and
    plays an important role in their lives.

5.   Essentially the appellants had valid leave until  17  August  2012  but
    not beyond.  Application for leave to remain made  in  April  2014  was
    refused in May 2015.  The appellants made a further  application  which
    was refused on 27 May 2014.

6.   A subsequent application for leave to remain on the  basis  of  private
    and family life was made which was refused on 22  July  2015.   It  was
    considered that the appellants did not meet the Immigration  Rules  and
    there  were  no  compelling  circumstances   which   rendered   removal
    disproportionate.

7.   The appellants mounted an appeal against that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Alis on 7 June 2016.  The  appeal
    was dismissed in all aspects.

8.   The appellants now seek to appeal  against  that  decision,  contending
    that it is fundamentally flawed by reason of error of law.   Permission
    was granted to do so on one ground.  Thus the matter comes before me to
    determine the issues.

9.   The central issue in the appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  given
    that the third appellant had acquired seven years in the United Kingdom
    is "and it would not be unreasonable to expect the appellant  to  leave
    the United Kingdom".

10.  It was common ground that if she succeeded in showing that a return  to
    Ghana would be unreasonable then her mother could bring her claim under
    Section EX1 of Appendix FM.   Although  the  second  appellant  had  no
    specific claim under the Immigration Rules, he was still  a  minor  and
    his mother the primary carer for him in the United Kingdom  so  he  too
    would remain.

11.  It is a detailed determination and focuses clearly upon  the  important
    issue as to what is  reasonable  particularly  relating  to  two  minor
    children whose best interests are a primary  consideration.  The  Judge
    directed himself to the case  of  Azimi-Moayed  and  Others  (Decisions
    affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 and PD and others
    (Article 8 : conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 108 (IAC).

12.  In paragraph 30 of  the  determination  in  particular  the  Judge,  by
    reference to the case of  Azimi-Moayed,  sets  out  factors  the  Judge
    should have regard to when considering the interests of children.   The
    Judge specifically reminds himself of the obligations under Section  55
    of the 2009 Act.

13.  The first submission made to me by  Miss  Ofei-Kwatia,  who  represents
    the appellants, is that the Judge failed to pay  particular  regard  to
    what the children had to say was in their best interests.   She  relies
    upon the decision in the High Court of Justice of Tinizaray [2011] EWHC
    1850 (Admin).  She relies in particular upon  letters  written  by  the
    children at D1 and D13.  She submits that  they  were  not  taken  into
    account in the overall assessment.

14.  I find there is little merit in that contention. The  first  letter  is
    from the third appellant saying that she does not  want to go and  live
    in Ghana because it is too hot and full of mosquitoes and that she will
    miss her big family and her friends  and  her  Sunday  school  and  her
    community activities.  The other letter is from her brother who did not
    like Ghana because of the threat of malaria. He enjoys  his  school  in
    the United Kingdom and its sporting  activities  and  the  certificates
    which he receives. He states that the education system is  better  than
    in Ghana and that he has got most of his friends and relatives  in  the
    United Kingdom.

15.  It is abundantly clear from the determination that those  factors  were
    very much in the mind of the Judge.  In  paragraph  32  he  quotes  the
    positive school reports, specifically the reasons given in  the  letter
    of the second appellant not wanting to go back. There  are  letters  of
    support from relatives and friends.  The family,  church  and  language
    are all matters looked at so far as the second appellant is concerned.

16.  Perhaps understandably the Judge concentrated considerable detail  upon
    the third appellant, recognising the relevance of  her  having  accrued
    seven years in the United Kingdom.  The Judge dealt with the  issue  of
    language and with education.  It  was  noted  that  Ghana  had  a  full
    education system. The Judge noted the arguments advanced that the third
    appellant was doing well in school and that it would be unreasonable to
    remove her from an environment in which  she  was  thriving.  The  good
    relationship between the father and the children was also considered.

17.  At paragraph 38 in particular the Judge takes account of  a  number  of
    specific matters affecting particularly the third appellant.

18.  It is entirely  clear  that  the  Judge  has  considered  all  relevant
    aspects in assessing the best interests of the  two  children  and  the
    facts which they had sought to advance in support of their stay.

19.  On the wider canvas the Judge also noted  the  evidence  of  the  first
    appellant and her family situation and the circumstances, in particular
    that although many of the extended family live in the  United  Kingdom,
    there were still the parents in Ghana albeit her father confined  to  a
    wheelchair.  Employment and language were also considered at  paragraph
    14.

20.  Having considered all matters the Judge came to the conclusion that  it
    would not be unreasonable to expect the third appellant  to  leave  the
    country and therefore that the appellants did not meet the  Immigration
    Rules.  In those circumstances the issue of proportionality fell to  be
    considered outside of the Rules, particularly in the light  of  Section
    117B of the 2002 Act as inserted by  the  Immigration  Act  2014  those
    factors were also set out in the decision.

21.  Miss  Ofei-Kwatia  submits  that  the  approach  to  reasonableness  is
    erroneous given that at  no stage has the Judge identified why it is in
    the best interests of the children that they leave the  United  Kingdom
    as opposed to remain in the United Kingdom.   She  submits  that  as  a
    matter of logic it is entirely in the best interests  of  the  children
    that they remain.  The Judge has failed to  indicate  why  they  should
    leave.

22.  It is to be recognised that the best interests of  the  children  is  a
    primary consideration but not the  only  consideration.   Interests  of
    immigration control and  the  public  policy  fall  to  be  considered,
    particularly those as set out in Section 117B and under the Immigration
    Rules.  The focus of attention therefore is not one of the reasons  why
    they should stay but to consider the reasonableness  of  their  leaving
    the United Kingdom.

23.  This matter was considered in some detail by the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    the case of MA and Others  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705.   It  was  noted  in
    paragraph 54 of the judgment

         "There is nothing intrinsically illogical in the notion that whilst
         the child's best interests are for him or her to stay,  it  is  not
         unreasonable to expect him or her to go.   That is so even  if  the
         reasonableness test should be  applied  so  as  to  exclude  public
         interest considerations bearing upon the parents."

24.  It is stressed in paragraph 57 that

         "it is vital for  the  court  to  have  made  a  full  and  careful
         assessment of the best interests of the child before any  balancing
         exercise can be undertaken. If that is not done there is  a  danger
         that those interests will be overridden simply because  their  full
         significance has not been appreciated. The court must not treat the
         other considerations as so powerful as to  assume  that  they  must
         inevitably outweigh the child's best interests whatever they  might
         be, with the result that no proper assessment takes place"

25.  It seems to me  that  in  this  case  the  Judge  has  made  a  careful
    consideration of the best interests of the children, weighing  up  with
    care those factors which support their remaining in the United  Kingdom
    and balancing those with what life they would experience  upon  return.
    The question to be asked is not  should  they  remain  but  rather  but
    rather whether it is unreasonable having regard to all the factors  for
    them to leave having regard to the context of the family situation as a
    whole.

26.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on the basis  of
    the relationship which they have with their  father.   He  is  not  the
    primary carer but it is clearly accepted in the determination  that  he
    enjoys an important role with his children.   The appellants also enjoy
    not only a relationship with him but with his daughter  as  well.   The
    Judge clearly recognised that it was  in  the  best  interests  of  the
    children to be brought up by  both  parents  and  addressed  the  issue
    clearly at paragraph 52, particularly having regard to EV (Philippines)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874.   Removal  would  prevent  the  level  of  contact
    currently enjoyed between the second and  the  third  named  appellants
    with their father but would not prevent family life continuing with him
    albeit on a different basis. It is to be noted that  he  is  also  from
    Ghana but that communicating could be continued by a  number  of  means
    particularly that of visits.

27.   Miss  Ofei-Kwatia   submits   that   the   Judge   has   fundamentally
    misunderstood the nature of the family life that exists as between  the
    children and their father. I do not find that to  be  the  case  having
    regard to paragraph 36 of the determination, as read with paragraph  42
    and 52.  The children will be returning to Ghana with their mother  who
    is the primary carer for them as a family unit.  There is little reason
    to believe that communication and contact  with  the  father  would  be
    impeded albeit it would be a contact in a different way.

28.  I find that it is clear, in the detailed determination, that the  Judge
    has sought to pay careful regard to the  interests  of  all  the  three
    appellants and indeed to the father  in  the  matter,  balancing  their
    interests  and  their   concerns.   The   Judge   has   conducted   the
    reasonableness consideration in accordance with MA and  has  sought  to
    balance proportionality in a proper manner with due  deference  to  the
    immigration control, the public interest of removal and  the  interests
    of the children. There is no  evidence  in  this  particular  case,  as
    advanced, that absence from the father  will  cause  any  emotional  or
    physical or educational detriment to the children.  They are  seemingly
    well adjusted to the education in the United Kingdom  and  it  was  the
    view of the Judge that they could readily adjust to education in Ghana.
     All relevant matters were looked at and a proper  assessment  made  in
    the round.

29.  In all the circumstances the appellants' appeal  against  the  decision
    of the first-tier Judge is dismissed.  The decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge shall stand, namely that the appellants'  appeals  under
    the Immigration Rules are dismissed and their appeals under  Article  8
    ECHR are also dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        [pic]                          Date 1 December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge King

