
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27395/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 22 June 2017                            |On 3 July 2017                   |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                SHAMIN AHMED
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M. Blundell, Counsel instructed by Taj Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The respondent (hereinafter "the claimant") is a citizen of Bangladesh
    born on 18 December 1987. On 3 November 2013 he applied for leave to
    remain in the UK on the basis of his family and private life. On 29
    June 2015 his application was refused. The primary reason for the
    refusal was that Educational Testing Services ("ETS") notified the Home
    Office that his score on a Test of English for International
    Communication ("TOEIC") they had administered had been obtained through
    deception. Consequently, the Secretary of State found that the claimant
    did not meet the suitability requirement in S-LTR 2.2(a) of Appendix FM
    to the Immigration Rules.


 2. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and his appeal was
    heard by Judge O'Rourke. In a decision promulgated on 24 August 2016,
    the judge allowed the appeal. The Secretary of State now appeals
    against that decision.


 Burden and standard of proof


 3. The burden and standard of proof, where it is alleged that an ETS test
    is invalid, was discussed in SM and Qadir v SSHD (ETS-Evidence-Burden
    of Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229), and is as follows:


 4. The legal burden of proving that the test taker used deception lies on
    the Secretary of State albeit that there is a three stage process.


     a) Firstly, the Secretary of State must adduce sufficient evidence to
        raise the issue of fraud.


     b) Secondly, the test taker then has a burden of raising an innocent
        explanation which satisfies the minimum level of plausibility.


     c) Thirdly, if that burden is discharged, the Secretary of State must
        establish on a balance of probabilities that this innocent
        explanation is to be rejected.


 5. There is one civil standard of proof (which is the standard to be
    applied). The seriousness of the consequences does not require a
    different standard of proof but flexibility in its application will
    involve consideration of the strength and quality of the evidence. The
    more serious the consequence, the stronger must be the evidence adduced
    for the necessary standard to be reached


 Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


 6. The judge found that the Secretary of State failed to discharge the
    legal burden of proving dishonesty.


 7. The judge, following the Upper Tribunal in  SM and Qadir, found that
    the Secretary of State discharged the initial evidential burden through
    the 'generic' statements of Ms Colling and Mr Millington, taken
    together with the data from the "look up tool" showing the claimant's
    test as being "invalid".


 8. The judge then considered the claimant's innocent explanation, stating
    at paragraph 16 (iii):
         "I note the [claimant's] evidence as to alternative explanations
         for the allegation against him (on a similar basis to those set out
         in SM and Qadir) and considered that he discharged the evidential
         burden upon him. I note also that he gave evidence in good English
         today and has undergone extensive third-level education in this
         country."

 9. The judge also stated, at paragraph 10, that:

         "[The Claimant] gave evidence today in good English. He described
         in detail how he arranged the TOEIC test and the process of taking
         it".

10. At paragraph 17(i) the judge concluded:


         "In respect of the TOEIC test, the [Secretary of State] has failed
         to discharge the legal burden of proving dishonesty on the
         [claimant's] part, because I am satisfied that there are
         potentially innocent explanations for the test results."


11. The judge then considered whether the claimant met the requirements of
    EX.1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and concluded that he did
    on the basis of insurmountable obstacles to his relationship with his
    wife continuing outside the UK.



Grounds of appeal and submissions

12. The grounds of appeal concern only the issue of whether the claimant
    used deception in obtaining an English language test certificate. The
    grounds submit that the judge failed to explain how the claimant met
    the evidential burden to offer an innocent explanation. They criticise
    the decision for relying on the claimant's English language ability
    without considering that a person who speaks English to the required
    level might nonetheless use a proxy candidate. It is also argued that
    the judge failed to exercise caution in making observations about the
    claimant's apparent command of English.


13. Mr Kotas argued that the judge failed to give adequate reasons to
    explain why he decided that the claimant met the evidential burden of
    giving an innocent explanation. He submitted that the judge's reasons
    have not been particularised and that the judge has failed to engage
    with potential reasons a test taker might cheat even if they speak good
    English.


14. Mr Blundell submitted that the judge's reasoning was adequate. He noted
    that the Secretary of State was not represented at the First-tier
    Tribunal hearing. At that hearing, the claimant explained to the judge
    the steps he took in taking the test, and answered questions the judge
    put to him on this point. This is reflected in the decision where the
    judge stated that the claimant described in detail how he arranged, and
    took, the TOEIC test.


15. Mr Blundell argued that the judge followed the approach established by
    the authorities, which is to draw together various strands and
    determine if the burden is discharged. He argued that there is only a
    limited amount any person can do to give the innocent explanation. They
    can show how they speak English and show how they took the test. This,
    argued Mr Blundell, is what the claimant did.


 Consideration


16. The issue in this appeal is whether the judge gave sufficient reasons
    to justify his conclusion that the claimant gave an innocent
    explanation to counter the allegation of deception.


17. There are a range of factors that are relevant to the question of
    dishonesty, as set out in paragraph 69 of SM and Qadir . They include:
    what a person had to gain from being dishonest, what he had to lose,
    what is known about his character, the cultural environment in which he
    operated, how he performed under cross examination, whether his English
    appears commensurate with the TOEIC scores, and whether his academic
    scores make it illogical or unnecessary to cheat.

18. Although the judge's reasoning is brief and lacking in detail, it is
    clear that the reasons the judge found the claimant had given an
    innocent explanation included that he:
     a) was able to explain how he arranged to take the test;
     b) was able to explain the circumstances in which he took the test;
     c) had a high level of education in the UK; and
     d) had a good command of English.


19. It is also apparent that the judge compared the factual matrix of the
    claimant to those of the appellants in SM and Qadir. At paragraph
    16(iii) the judge stated that he had taken into account the claimant's
    submissions as to alternative explanations for the allegations against
    him "on a similar basis to those set out in SM."


20. As explained in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT
    85 (IAC) reasons need not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes
    sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge. In this
    appeal, although the reasoning is undoubtedly brief and lacking in
    elaboration,  I am satisfied that it is sufficient. Having accepted,
    and found credible, the claimant's explanation of taking the test, and
    observed the claimant's capability in English as well as his
    educational background, the judge was entitled to find that the
    claimant had met the evidential burden. Accordingly, the Secretary of
    State's appeal on the basis of inadequate reasoning cannot succeed.



 Decision


A. The appeal is dismissed.

B. The judge has not made a material error of law and the decision of the
First-tier Tribunal stands.


      |                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 30 June 2017                  |


