
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/27543/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 11th October 2017                  |       25th October 2017              |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                   mr BTO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Amgbah, Counsel instructed by UK Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a  national  of  Nigeria,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of State  of  15th  July
    2015 to refuse to grant him leave to remain on the basis of his private
    and family life.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Chamberlain  dismissed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 2nd January  2017.   The  Appellant
    now appeals to this Tribunal  with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Andrew on 9th August 2017.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the  Appellant  and  his  partner
    have two children, both daughters, born on 25th October 2006  and  30th
    June 2009.  Both are British nationals.  It is unclear from the  papers
    when the Appellant claims to have  entered  the  UK,  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal letter states that he claims to have entered 19 years prior  to
    his application but that was not accepted by the Secretary of State. It
    states in the Reasons for Refusal letter that the Appellant first  came
    to the attention of the Home Office on 15th March 2010 when he  applied
    for leave to remain outside the Rules.  That application  was  refused.
    However on 31st January 2012 the Appellant  was  granted  discretionary
    leave  to  remain  until  31st  January  2015  on  the  basis  of   his
    relationship  with  his  partner  and  children.  The  refusal  of  the
    Appellant's application for further leave to remain is the  subject  of
    this appeal.

 3. As set out in the Reasons for Refusal letter, and found by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge, the Appellant has a number of criminal convictions
    obtained since the grant of discretionary  leave  in  January  2012  as
    follows:-
          . A conviction on 12th April 2013 for making false representations
            for gain and possessing or controlling an  article  for  use  in
            fraud and received a suspended sentence of four weeks.
          .  A  conviction  on  14th  February  2014  for   driving   whilst
            disqualified and possession or  control  of  identity  documents
            with intent and imprisoned for a period of eight months.
          . 26th March 2015 of using a vehicle while  uninsured,  driving  a
            motor  vehicle  with   excess   alcohol   and   driving   whilst
            disqualified for which he received a sentence of imprisonment of
            112 days, was disqualified  from  driving  for  four  years  and
            received a fine and his driving licence was endorsed.

 4. Having considered the convictions the  Secretary  of  State  considered
    that the application should be refused under paragraph  322(5)  of  the
    Immigration Rules on the basis that it would be undesirable  to  permit
    the Appellant to remain in the UK in the light  of  his  character  and
    convictions. The Secretary of State considered  the  application  under
    the partner route and under the parent route but noted in  relation  to
    both that the Appellant could not meet  the  suitability  requirements.
    In relation to private life under paragraph  276ADE  the  Secretary  of
    State considered that there would be no significant  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's integration in Nigeria. The Secretary  of  State  concluded
    that there were no exceptional circumstances in the case.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the  refusal  in  relation  to
    paragraph 322(5) and concluded that  the  Respondent  was  entitled  to
    refuse the application on the basis that the  Appellant's  presence  in
    the UK was not conducive to  the  public  good  [22].   In  considering
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules the judge  followed  the  steps
    set out in the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 including an assessment of
    the factors set out in Section 117B of the 2002 Act.   In  relation  to
    Section 117B(6) the judge noted at paragraph 28:

         "The Appellant's  children  are  British  citizens  and  hence  are
         qualifying children for the purposes of Section 117B(6).  However I
         have very little documentary evidence before  me  relating  to  the
         Appellant's  children.   While  I  would  not  necessarily   expect
         evidence from  them,  given  their  ages,  their  mother's  witness
         statement does not set out any detail relating to her children, but
         refers back to the Appellant's witness statement.  The only  detail
         is set out in the Appellant's witness statement and  I  have  found
         above that I do not consider him to be  a  credible  witness.   The
         only other documentary evidence I have is  one  letter  from  their
         school."

 6. The judge considered the best interests of the  children  noting  their
    ages and the fact that they have lived in the UK for all of their lives
    and the fact that they are both British citizens [30].  The judge found
    that the Appellant has spent time in prison when he has been  separated
    from his children due to his own behaviour but attached  no  weight  to
    the Appellant's claim that he was released early from prison because he
    played a significant role in his children's lives  given  that  he  has
    provided no corroborative evidence of that and in light of her  finding
    that he was not a credible witness.  The judge found that it  would  be
    in the Appellant's children's best interests to remain in the  UK  with
    both of their parents but given her finding that the Appellant has  not
    been honest  with  their  mother  about  the  extent  of  his  criminal
    offending and that due to his criminal offending the children have been
    separated from their father, the judge found that if the Appellant  and
    his partner decided to move to Nigeria the children would be  returning
    as a family unit [35].   She  noted  that  there  was  no  evidence  to
    corroborate  the  claim  by  the  Appellant's  partner  that   she   is
    responsible for looking after her mother and the judge  concluded  that
    it would be reasonable to expect the children to move to  Nigeria  with
    the Appellant and their mother but noted that this would be the  choice
    of the Appellant and his partner [39].  Alternatively, the  Appellant's
    partner could choose to remain in the UK with  the  children  and  they
    could continue the family life with their  father  through  visits  and
    modern means of communication noting that  they  have  been  previously
    separated from their father owing to his criminal behaviour  and  there
    is no evidence to suggest  this  caused  any  of  them  any  particular
    problems [40].

Error of Law

 7. The Grounds of Appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  contend  that,  as  the
    Appellant was granted  discretionary  leave  to  remain  prior  to  the
    introduction of the new Immigration Rules on 9th July 2012,  the  judge
    erred in failing to consider the appeal on the basis of the Home Office
    policy in relation to discretionary leave to remain.

 8. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted  the  relevant  policy  guidance  at  the
    hearing, the Asylum Policy Instruction Discretionary Leave Version  7.0
    published on 18th August 2015. The transitional  arrangements  are  set
    out at section 10 and 10.1,  which  relates  to  applicant's  grant  of
    discretionary leave before 9th July 2012, provides:

         "Those granted leave under the DL policy in  force  before  9  July
         2012 will normally continue to be  dealt  with  under  that  policy
         through to settlement if they continue to qualify for further leave
         on the same basis as their original DL was granted  (normally  they
         will be eligible to apply for settlement after  accruing  6  years'
         continuous DL (or where appropriate a combination of DL  and  LOTR,
         see Section 8 above)), unless at the date  of  decision  they  fall
         within the restricted leave policy.

         Caseworkers must consider circumstances prevailing at the  time  of
         the original grant of leave continue at the date of  the  decision.
         If the circumstances remain the same, the individual does not  fall
         within the restricted leave policy and the  criminality  thresholds
         do not apply, a further period of 3 years' DL  should  normally  be
         granted.  Caseworkers  must  consider   whether   there   are   any
         circumstances that may require departure from the  standard  period
         of leave.  (See section 5.4).

         If there have been significant changes that mean the  applicant  no
         longer qualifies for leave under the DL  policy  or  the  applicant
         falls for refusal on the basis of criminality (see criminality  and
         exclusion section above), the further leave application  should  be
         refused.

         Those granted DL for 6 months because of the refusal or  withdrawal
         of asylum or humanitarian protection on grounds of criminality  and
         who do not fall within the restricted leave policy,  must  normally
         wait 10 years before being eligible to apply for settlement...".

 9. The section on exclusion and  criminality  is  at  3.6.   It  sets  out
    details of the restricted leave policy which deals  with  discretionary
    leave for those excluded  from  protection  under  Article  1F  of  the
    Refugee Convention and does not apply in this case.  The relevant  part
    of 3.6 is the following:

         "Where an individual does not  fall  within  the  restricted  leave
         policy (for example, where they are not excluded under  Article  1F
         or the criminal sentence was  less  than  2  years'  imprisonment),
         caseworkers must consider the impact of any criminal history before
         granting DL, having  regard  as  appropriate  to  part  9  (General
         Grounds for Refusal) and, where an  individual  is  not  liable  to
         deportation, paragraph 353B(i) of the Immigration Rules.  Criminals
         or  extremists  should  not  normally  benefit  from  leave  on   a
         discretionary basis under this policy because it is a  Home  Office
         priority to remove them from the UK.

         In cases where there are exceptional reasons  for  granting  DL  to
         someone with a criminal  history  who  does  not  fall  within  the
         restricted leave policy, the duration of leave to be granted, up to
         30 months, will depend on the individual circumstances of the case.
          Caseworkers must consider whether removal appears to be reasonably
         likely and the extent of any risk posed by  the  individual,  which
         may justify keeping the case  under  more  regular  review,  eg  by
         granting 6 months' DL.  Where DL is granted for 6 months  or  less,
         if the individual travels outside the UK their limited  leave  will
         lapse whereas leave granted for a longer period allows a person  to
         leave the UK  and  be  readmitted  during  the  validity  of  their
         leave...".

10. In the Grounds of Appeal it is accepted on behalf of the Appellant that
    the criminality section  of  the  policy  does  apply.  However  it  is
    submitted that the manner  in  which  the  section  applies  under  the
    discretionary leave to remain policy is different from  the  manner  in
    which it was considered applied under Appendix FM and it  is  necessary
    to consider whether the approach taken by the Respondent and the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was in line with the  transitional  provisions  and
    criminality thresholds of the policy.

11. In relation to  this  issue  I  firstly  note  that,  contrary  to  the
    assertion in the  grounds,  in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  letter  the
    Secretary  of  State  did  consider  the  issue  of  an  extension   of
    discretionary leave to remain. At page  2  under  the  heading  "Active
    Review of Discretionary Leave" the Secretary of  State  considered  the
    Appellant's criminal convictions in line with paragraph 322(5)  of  the
    Immigration Rules. Paragraph 322(5)  provides as follows:

         "Grounds on which leave to remain and variation of leave to enter
         or remain in the United Kingdom should normally be refused


         ...


         (5) the undesirability of permitting the person concerned to remain
         in the United Kingdom in the light of his conduct (including
         convictions which do not fall within paragraph 322(1C), character
         or associations or the fact that he represents a threat to national
         security;..."


12. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that the Respondent did in fact  consider
    the policy and this is demonstrated by the way the Reasons for  Refusal
    letter is structured.

13. Further, I accept  her  submission  that  section  3.6  of  the  policy
    requires an assessment of the general grounds of refusal in part 9  and
    then an assessment of paragraph 353B(i) of the Rules.  In my view it is
    clear that the Secretary of State took the proper  approach  under  the
    Discretionary  Leave  policy.  Under  the  heading  "Active  Review  of
    Discretionary Leave" at pages 2 to 3 of the Reasons for Refusal letter,
    before deciding to refuse the application under paragraph  322(5),  the
    Respondent considered the general grounds for refusal deciding:

         "It would be undesirable to permit you  to  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom in the light of  your  character  and  convictions  as  you
         continue to display  scant  regard  of  the  law  and  persistently
         offend; causing undue alarm and distress"

14. In her decision the judge reviewed the Appellant's criminal convictions
    at paragraphs 14 to 21 taking account of the  Appellant's  evidence  in
    relation to those and noting in particular that the Appellant  was  not
    credible in relation to  his  explanations  about  the  nature  of  his
    convictions.  The judge undertook a detailed analysis of the PNC record
    of convictions which noted twelve aliases and found that the PNC record
    is accurate and that the Appellant has  used  multiple  identities  and
    different dates of birth.  The PNC record shows seven court appearances
    with twelve  convictions  which  the  judge  accepted  as  having  been
    established in relation to the Appellant.  The judge concluded that the
    Secretary of State was entitled to refuse the  Appellant's  application
    on the basis that his presence in the  UK  was  not  conducive  to  the
    public good and under the suitability requirements [22].   In  my  view
    this is clearly  a  review  of  the  Respondent's  application  of  the
    discretionary leave policy at paragraphs 2 to  3  of  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter.

15. It was Ms Willocks-Briscoe's submission that the  Respondent  undertook
    analysis of exceptional circumstances as set out in  paragraph  353B(i)
    of the Immigration Rules at paragraphs 5  and  6  of  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter.  In her assessment of  the  appeal  under  freestanding
    Article 8 that is exactly what the First-tier Tribunal Judge did too.

16. It is therefore my conclusion that there is no error of law in  respect
    of the  first  ground.  Therefore  the  contention  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that the Respondent erred in failing  to  consider  the  case
    under the discretionary policy has no basis.

17. The second main ground put forward in the Grounds of Appeal is that the
    judge erred in her approach to the consideration of Article  8  outside
    the Immigration Rules.  In particular it is contended  that  the  judge
    erred in her approach to Section 117B(6) in terms of the assessment  of
    the children.

18. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that the judge accepted that there was no
    decision for the children to leave but looked at whether  it  would  be
    reasonable for the children to leave the UK if that choice was made  by
    the  family.   She  submitted,  in  reliance  on  the  decision  in  AM
    (Pakistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 180, that the judge was entitled to look  at
    the wider public  interest.  Lord  Justice  Elias  gave  the  following
    guidance:


         "19. There were two grounds of appeal. First, it was said that  the
         UT erred in assessing the question of  reasonableness  by  focusing
         solely on the position of  the  child.  The  FTT  had  adopted  the
         correct   approach   in   looking   at   wider   public    interest
         considerations. Second, the UT was wrong to treat  section  117B(6)
         as a self-contained provision to be read independently of the other
         matters identified in that section. The considerations  in  section
         117B(6) ought to have been treated as just one relevant factor when
         considering whether an interference with article 8  was  justified.
         Properly construed, it  did  not  take  priority  over  the  public
         interests  considerations.  In   effect,   this   was   challenging
         the Treebhawan ruling.


         20. After the appeal was lodged, these two grounds were  considered
         by this court in MA (Pakistan) where I gave the  leading  judgment
         with which King LJ and Sir Stephen  Richards  agreed.  The  court's
         analysis is consistent with the first ground of appeal  succeeding,
         but  the  second  failing.  The  court,   admittedly   reluctantly,
         concluded that it  was  inherent  in  the  reasonableness  test  in
         section 117B(6) that the court should have regard to  wider  public
         interest considerations and in particular the  need  for  effective
         immigration  control.  The  Court  would  not  have  reached   that
         conclusion absent authority, but felt  obliged  to  follow  another
         decision of the Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 617; [2016] IMM A R  954.
         That was a case concerning foreign criminals which engaged  section
         117C rather than 117B, and in particular to  the  need  in  section
         117C(5) to show that it would be "unduly harsh" rather than  simply
         not unreasonable, to require the qualifying child to leave the  UK.
         However the court in MA (Pakistan) considered that the structure of
         the relevant provisions  was  sufficiently  similar  to  require  a
         common approach. Accordingly, since the Court in MM (Uganda) had
         held  that  wider  public  interest  considerations   relating   to
         effective immigration control could  be  taken  into  account  when
         deciding whether or not it was unduly harsh to  send  an  applicant
         back to the country of origin, so likewise  should  they  be  taken
         into account when considering under section 117B whether it is  not
         unreasonable to do so. But the court also held that section 117B(6)
         was  a  self-contained  provision  in  the  sense  that  where  the
         conditions specified in the subsection are  satisfied,  the  public
         interest will not  justify  removal.  The  wider  public  interests
         considerations  can  only  come  into  play  via  the  concept   of
         reasonableness in section 117B(6) itself.  In  the  light  of  this
         decision, the Secretary of  State  no  longer  pursues  the  second
         ground of appeal."

19. The judge was entitled to  take  into  account  the  wider  significant
    factors in relation to criminality and  not  just  the  fact  that  the
    children were British citizens in considering Section 117B(6). I accept
    Ms Willocks-Briscoe's submission that the  judge  here  looked  at  all
    relevant factors including the best interests of the children  and  the
    evidence presented and found, notwithstanding Section 117B(6), that the
    children were British citizens that there was significant weight to  be
    attached to the public interest here.  She emphasised that there was no
    decision here for the children to leave but the issue was a  matter  of
    choice if the remainder of the family  members  wish  to  go  with  the
    Appellant to Nigeria.  I accept  that  the  judge  has  given  adequate
    reasons for her findings that in the circumstances  of  this  case  the
    wider public interest outweighs the best  interests  of  these  British
    children.

20. In my view it is clear that the judge found there was family  life  and
    properly considered the best interests  of  the  children  taking  into
    account the limited evidence before her in relation  to  the  children.
    The judge considered all of the provisions of Section 117B.

21. In conclusion in my view it is clear that the judge considered  all  of
    the evidence before her and gave weight to  all  relevant  factors  and
    attributed the weight she did to them. The conclusion by the judge that
    the decision to remove the Appellant was proportionate to his right  to
    family life in accordance with Article 8 was open to her on  the  basis
    of the evidence before her.

Notice of Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law.

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 24th October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed, therefore there  is  no  fee  award.  I  have
dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 24th October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

