
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27500/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 August 2013, 2 October 2013 and          |On 6 February 2014           |
|23 January 2014.                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                        Okeowo Oluwatoyin Bose nemack
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Nwosu of DCK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer (2
                    August 2013 and 2 October 2013)
     Mr T Melvin (23 January 2014)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing an appeal by the appellant against the respondent's decision
    dated 7 November 2012 refusing her a residence card as confirmation  of
    her right to reside in the UK.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 21  December  1973.   She
    entered the UK in July 2008 and on 3 May 2012 applied for  a  residence
    card as the spouse of an EEA national exercising  treaty  rights.   She
    claimed that she had met her husband (the  sponsor)  Mr  Uwe  Nemak,  a
    German citizen currently residing in the UK, in  November  2008.   They
    decided to get married on 16 December 2010 by proxy  in  Nigeria  under
    native laws and customs and since then, they  have  continued  to  live
    together as man and wife.  The respondent was not satisfied that  their
    marriage was conducted in accordance with  Nigerian  law  and  did  not
    accept the marriage certificate as lawfully issued or  as  evidence  of
    their relationship.  She went on to consider whether the appellant  was
    entitled to a residence permit as an extended family member but, on the
    basis of the information provided, she was not satisfied that  she  was
    in a durable relationship as Mr Nemak's partner.

The Hearing Before the Immigration Judge

3.   At the hearing of her appeal the judge heard  evidence  from  both  the
    appellant and Mr Nemak.  It was argued that their  proxy  marriage  was
    valid and that they were in a durable relationship.  In his findings of
    fact and credibility at [7] the judge dealt first with the issue of the
    durable relationship.  He noted that  the  utility  bills  produced  in
    evidence were in the name of the sponsor, care of the  appellant,  that
    bank statements were in the name of the sponsor  and  that  apart  from
    photographs contained in the bundle, there was no evidence of cards  or
    other demonstrations of devotion between them.  He found that there was
    little evidence to persuade him even on a balance of probabilities that
    the parties were in a durable relationship.

4.   The judge then  turned  to  the  question  of  the  proxy  marriage  in
    Nigeria.  There was evidence in an affidavit from a Mr  Ajayi  that  he
    personally presided over the marriage  ceremony  which  took  place  in
    proxy form.  The judge commented that whilst  proxy  marriages  may  be
    accepted in Nigerian customary law, the parties would have to adhere to
    some procedure whereby both would have  to  be  represented  and  often
    their interest such as by token dowries being  made.   The  judge  said
    that whilst he found that a proxy marriage had been conducted, but  not
    fully in accordance with the expected procedure in Nigeria,  it  was  a
    cosmetic  exercise  that  the  appellant  relied  on  to  enhance   her
    immigration status.  He concluded that the sponsor was not the putative
    husband of the appellant as claimed or that  they  were  in  a  durable
    relationship.  For these reasons the appeal was dismissed.

The Grounds and Submissions

5.   In the grounds it is argued that the judge  failed  to  deal  with  the
    real issues in the  appeal  and  that  there  was  a  preponderance  of
    evidence pointing to cohabitation  by  the  couple  either  as  durable
    partners or as a married couple.  There was no categorical statement in
    the respondent's decision that this  was  a  marriage  of  convenience.
    Proxy marriage had been accepted by the judge as valid in  Nigeria  and
    it was therefore valid in the UK.  The grounds then argue that  married
    couples or indeed unmarried EU couples did not necessarily have to live
    together and that the appellant as a family member of  an  EU  national
    exercising treaty rights was entitled, in the absence of any  inference
    that there was a marriage of convenience, to enjoy the rights conferred
    on her under EEA regulations.

6.   Permission to appeal was granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  on  the
    basis that there was a wealth of evidence in the file  that  the  judge
    had arguably failed to engage with adequately.

7.   Mr Nwosu submitted that the appellant was able to meet the  requirement
    of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006
    Regulations") as she had contracted a valid  proxy  marriage.   In  the
    alternative, she was in a durable relationship with the sponsor and the
    judge had erred by failing  to  take  into  account  all  the  relevant
    evidence.  Mr  Walker  made  the  point  that  the  validity  of  proxy
    marriages in Nigeria was an issue still being considered by  the  Upper
    Tribunal and accepted that the judge's findings on that issue were  not
    satisfactory.  He did not seek to  challenge  the  assertion  that  the
    judge had not given proper consideration to all the  evidence  produced
    in support of the fact that there was a  genuine  relationship  between
    the appellant and the sponsor.

The Error of Law

8.   I am satisfied that the judge erred  in  law  such  that  his  decision
    should be set aside.  It is not clear whether he  found  that  a  valid
    proxy marriage had been conducted in Nigeria:  he  commented  that  the
    marriage had been conducted  but  not  fully  in  accordance  with  the
    expected procedure.  There was no clear finding on whether the marriage
    was valid in Nigerian law.  He  then  commented  that  it  had  been  a
    cosmetic exercise to enhance the appellant's immigration status.   This
    conclusion follows his finding that  he  was  not  persuaded  that  the
    parties were in a durable relationship but I am satisfied that on  this
    issue he erred in law by failing to take into account  the  substantial
    documentation  produced  in  support  of   the   assertion   that   the
    relationship was genuine and durable.  Although he dealt with  some  of
    the documents, he has not dealt with their cumulative effect.

9.   Both representatives accepted that in these  circumstances  the  proper
    course was for the decision to be set aside to be re-made by the  Upper
    Tribunal  at  a  further  hearing.   I  made  the   following   further
    directions:

    (a)  If it is proposed to call further oral  evidence,  an  application
         must be made pursuant to rule  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 supported by witness  statements  drawn
         in sufficient detail to stand as evidence-in-chief no later than 14
         days before the date of the resumed hearing, a copy being served on
         the other party.


    (b)  Any further documents to be relied on by either party  are  to  be
         filed with the Tribunal and served on the other party no later than
         14 days before the date of the resumed hearing.

10.  The hearing was adjourned until 2 October 2013  when  I  heard  further
    submissions from Mr Nwosu and Mr Walker.  No further evidence was filed
    by either party and no oral  evidence  was  called  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.  By that stage the Tribunal determination on the validity of
    proxy marriages in Nigeria referred to in [7] above had  not  yet  been
    decided.  The appeal was  adjourned  part  heard  and  relisted  on  23
    January 2014 shortly after the decision in Kareem (Proxy marriage -  EU
    law) [2014] UKUT 0024 was issued.   At  this  hearing  Mr  Melvin  also
    sought  to  rely   on   an   unreported   Tribunal   decision,   Igbede
    (IA/10669/2012) but this adds  nothing  to  the  reported  decision  in
    Kareem.  Mr Nwosu relied on the bundle  of  documents  (A)  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and produced a skeleton argument.

Further Submissions

11.  In his submissions on 2 October 2013 Mr Nwosu relied  on  his  original
    grounds of appeal at A12-18.  He submitted that a  valid  marriage  had
    been contracted between the appellant and her sponsor in December  2010
    and that a marriage by proxy was recognised by the UK courts if it  was
    valid in the country where it took  place.   Taking  into  account  the
    documentary evidence submitted, there was clear evidence, so he argued,
    to show that the requirements for a valid marriage in Nigeria had  been
    met.   Customary  marriages  were   recognised   under   the   relevant
    legislation in Nigeria and the marriage was properly evidenced.  On the
    issue  of  whether  the  appellant  and  sponsor  were  in  a   durable
    relationship  within  reg  8(5),  he  submitted  that  this  had   been
    established on a balance of probabilities.   There  was  no  indication
    that  this  was  a  marriage  of  convenience  and  the  fact  of   the
    relationship was amply evidenced by the documents produced in support.

12.  Mr Walker submitted that there was insufficient evidence  to  establish
    that a valid proxy marriage had been contracted and no  evidence  about
    the position in German law.  Although submissions had been  made  about
    the position under Nigerian legislation, it was clear  that  there  had
    been amendments to the Nigerian Marriage Act 1990.  He  submitted  that
    there was  inadequate  evidence  to  show  that  there  was  a  durable
    relationship between the parties.  The  documentary  evidence  did  not
    discharge the onus of  proof.   The  parties  had  been  invited  to  a
    marriage interview but neither had attended.  There were no  statements
    from friends and at the hearing no further evidence  had  been  put  in
    about the relationship.

13.  At the hearing on 23 January 2014 after Mr  Nwoso  had  been  given  an
    opportunity of considering the determination in  Kareem,  he  submitted
    that the evidence already produced  provided  a  sufficient  evidential
    basis for a finding that a valid marriage had been made.   He  referred
    to the certificate of registration  at  A32  and  the  confirmation  of
    customary marriage at A33.  The marriage had been registered within  60
    days as required by Nigerian law and there was further evidence at  A34
    from the appellant's uncle who was also a legal practitioner and at A35
    confirmation from the appellant's father that the  marriage  had  taken
    place and was conducted with the consent of both parents.

14.  Mr Nwosu submitted that it  would  be  harsh  in  the  absence  of  any
    tangible contrary evidence  to  hold  that  these  documents  were  not
    authentic and it was onerous for the appellant to  try  and  prove  the
    position under German law.  The fact that the  marriage  was  valid  in
    Nigeria should be regarded as the overwhelming factor.  He argued  that
    if the marriage was accepted as valid in a non-EEA state, the  marriage
    should be accepted as  valid  in  absence  of  proof  that  the  formal
    requirements were not met.  He relied  on  the  submissions  previously
    made  on  the  issue  of  durable   relationship   arguing   that   the
    preponderance of evidence was such that the only proper  inference  was
    that there was such a relationship.

15.  Mr Melvin submitted that the appellant could  not  show  that  a  legal
    marriage by proxy under customary  law  in  Nigeria  had  taken  place.
    Neither the appellant nor  sponsor  had  been  present.  There  was  no
    evidence of the sponsor having family present or of  their  consent,  a
    dowry being paid or that the marriage would be  regarded  as  valid  in
    Germany.   He  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  supplied  BT  bills
    including her name from May 2011 to July 2012 at her sponsor's  address
    and a medical card indicating that she  resided  at  that  address  but
    these documents, together with the other documents submitted,  did  not
    amount to sufficient evidence to show that the couple had been or  were
    in a durable relationship such that they could meet the requirements of
    reg 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations.  There was very little evidence  that
    the appellant actually resided with the  sponsor.   Her  name  did  not
    appear   on   the   tenancy   agreement   which   stated    that    the
    gas/electricity/water and TV licence were all payable  by  the  tenant.
    There was no explanation why, if the couple married in  December  2010,
    no  application  had  been  made  to  regularise  her  stay  until  the
    application in May 2012.  He submitted that  the  appellant  could  not
    show  that  the  proxy  marriage  was  valid  in  accordance  with  the
    principles set out in Kareem and that there was  insufficient  evidence
    to show that there was a durable relationship.

Assessment of the Issues

16.  The first issue which arises is whether the appellant is able  to  show
    that she is a family member of the sponsor, a German citizen exercising
    treaty rights in the UK.  In order to show that she is his spouse,  she
    has to show that there has been a valid  marriage.   She  relies  on  a
    proxy marriage which she  says  was  entered  into  in  Nigeria  on  16
    December 2010.  In Kareem the Tribunal held that in the  light  of  the
    connection between the rights of free movement and  residence  and  the
    nationality laws of the member states, in a situation where  a  marital
    relationship was disputed, the question of whether  there  was  such  a
    relationship was to be examined in accordance  with  the  laws  of  the
    member state from which the Union citizen obtained nationality and from
    which therefore that citizen derived free  movement  rights  [17].   In
    summarising its conclusions the Tribunal said at [68(g)]:

         "It  should  be  assumed  that  without  independent  and  reliable
         evidence about the recognition of the marriage under  the  laws  of
         the EEA country and/or the country where the marriage  took  place,
         the Tribunal is  likely  to  be  unable  to  find  that  sufficient
         evidence has been provided to discharge the burden of proof.   Mere
         production of legal materials from the EEA country or country where
         the marriage took place will be insufficient evidence because  they
         will rarely show how such law is understood  or  applied  in  those
         countries.  Mere assertions as to the effect of such laws will, for
         similar reasons, carry no weight."

17.  In the present case  there  has  been  no  evidence  produced  to  show
    whether the sponsor's marriage would be regarded as valid under  German
    law.  Further, there is no adequate evidence to show that the  marriage
    is valid under Nigerian law.  In Kareem the Tribunal gave  guidance  on
    assessing firstly whether a marriage certificate had been issued  by  a
    competent authority at [33]-[44] and secondly, whether the marriage  in
    that appeal was otherwise valid in  Nigerian  law  at  [45]-[62].   The
    Tribunal emphasised the need  for  proper  evidence  to  show  where  a
    marriage certificate was relied on  that  it  had  been  issued  by  an
    authority with legal power to create or confirm the facts attested.  In
    the present case there  is  no  adequate  evidence  to  show  that  the
    documents relied on by the appellant at  A32  and  A33  are  what  they
    purport to be i.e. documents issued by  an  authority  with  the  legal
    power to create or confirm what is attested.  More  generally,  as  the
    Tribunal in Kareem  said  at  [68(g)]  the  mere  production  of  legal
    materials from the country where the marriage took place would normally
    be insufficient evidence because  they  rarely  show  how  the  law  is
    understood or applied in those countries.  For these reasons I  am  not
    satisfied that the appellant has shown that she entered  into  a  valid
    marriage by proxy in Nigeria.

18.  I now turn to the issue of whether the appellant has shown that she  is
    an extended family member as the partner of an  EEA  national  who  can
    prove to the decision maker that she is in a durable relationship  with
    that EEA national: reg 8(5).  The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard  oral
    evidence which he did not find to be credible.  However, that  decision
    has been set aside and I must re-make it on the basis of  the  evidence
    before me.  I make it clear that I do not take into account the judge's
    credibility findings.  However, the fact remains that I must deal  with
    the issue on the basis of the documentary evidence in  the  absence  of
    any  further  oral  evidence.   Directions  were  given  enabling   the
    appellants to file further oral evidence and it was  open  to  them  to
    give evidence before me but there has been no such evidence.

19.  The appellant's witness statement is at  A23-24.   She  says  that  she
    first entered the UK on 27 July  2008  and  has  remained  since  then.
    Shortly afterwards  she  met  her  partner  and  they  entered  into  a
    relationship  leading  to  marriage  on  16  December  2010.   She  had
    previously been married to a man who had abandoned her and  she  refers
    to the decree nisi and decree absolute (A36 and 37).  She says that she
    has lived with her husband since 2010 and it has  continued  to  mature
    into a loving relationship.  At [7] of her statement she adds that  she
    has built up a close group of friends since living in the UK and enjoys
    a close relationship with them.

20.  Mr Nemack's witness statement is at A25-26.  He confirms that he  is  a
    German citizen and therefore an EEA national residing in  the  UK.   He
    runs a business, Mackboss  Resources,  which  sells  second-hand  goods
    including computers, televisions, kitchen equipment,  shoes  and  toys.
    He says that he does not wish to be separated  from  his  wife  because
    they have built up a beautiful life together  and  he  loves  her  very
    much.  He then refers to the documents  submitted  in  support  of  the
    application.

21.  These documents are  set  out  at  A37-158.   They  include  a  tenancy
    agreement for the property at 9 Boxley House, E5 where the  sponsor  is
    identified as the tenant.  There is  a  photocopy  of  the  appellant's
    medical card issued on 12 April 2011  giving  9  Boxley  House  as  her
    address.  The appellant's name does not appear on the tenancy agreement
    or on any other bills save for the BT account which is addressed to the
    sponsor care of the appellant and on the TalkTalk monthly  bills  which
    are in the appellant's name.  There are photographs  of  the  appellant
    and the sponsor at [153]-[158], some showing them  wearing  traditional
    Nigerian dress and others western dress.

22.  This evidence has to be  assessed  in  the  absence  of  oral  evidence
    before me from the appellant, the sponsor or any of the  close  friends
    the appellant refers to in her statement, the  absence  of  explanation
    why, if the couple married in December 2010, no  attempt  was  made  to
    regularise the position until May 2012 and the fact  that  having  made
    their application, they failed to attend an interview on  20  September
    2012 as requested by the respondent.

23.  On the evidence before me the appellant fails to satisfy  me  that  she
    has discharged the onus of showing on a balance of  probabilities  that
    she is or has been in a durable relationship  with  the  sponsor.   The
    documentary evidence without more does not satisfy me  that  they  have
    been in a durable relationship.   It  follows  that  the  appellant  is
    unable to meet the requirements of reg 8(5).  In  the  light  of  these
    findings I am not satisfied an appeal can succeed on article 8 grounds.
     The appellant has failed to show that there is any family life falling
    within article 8.  In so far as she has private life in  the  light  of
    the length of her residence in the UK, there was no  adequate  evidence
    to show that she can meet the requirements of para 276ADE or that there
    are  any  sufficiently  compelling  or  exceptional  circumstances  not
    covered by the rules which merit further consideration.

Decision

24.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was erroneous in  law  and  has
    been set aside.  I re-make the decision by dismissing the  appeal  both
    under the EEA regulations and under article 8.





Signed:                                 Date: 4 February 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
