
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27854/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 December 2016                          |On 16 December 2016           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                               UMAR AMIR BUTT
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     M, Counsel, instructed by Legal Rights Sponsorship
For the Respondent:    M, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal RR Hopkins, promulgated on 10 August 2016, dismissing  the
        Appellant's appeal against a refusal by the  Respondent,  dated  27
        July 2015, to issue him a residence card  as  confirmation  of  his
        right to reside in the UK under the Immigration (European  Economic
        Area) Regulations 2006.




Background


     2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan,  date  of  birth  22nd  of
        August 1989. He entered the UK on  1  January  2011  as  a  Tier  4
        (General) Student with leave  valid  until  31  May  2014.  He  was
        granted a further period of leave until  5  November  2014.  On  16
        October 2014 he applied for leave to remain on  the  basis  of  his
        family/private life. This was refused. On 6 January 2015 he applied
        for an EEA residence card as a result of  his  marriage  to  Silvia
        Nicoleta Dumitru (sponsor),  a  Romanian  national.  The  Appellant
        claimed he had been in a relationship with his sponsor  since  June
        2014 and they had been living together since August 2014.


     3. The Respondent noted that, in his application of 16  October  2014,
        the Appellant made no mention of his sponsor or any family  he  had
        in the UK. Although they were  married  on  16  December  2014  the
        Respondent held against the Appellant his failure to inform her  of
        the marriage  or  to  update  the  Respondent  in  respect  of  his
        relationship. The Respondent did not accept that  the  sponsor  was
        exercising treaty rights and noted that the marriage  occurred  one
        month after his student leave  expired.  The  Respondent  concluded
        that the  marriage  was  not  genuine  and  believed  the  marriage
        contracted on 16 December 2014 was one of convenience.


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     4. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from the Appellant and  from
        his sponsor. Having considered  the  various  employment  documents
        produced by the Appellant's sponsor the judge  was  satisfied  that
        she was indeed a worker and therefore a qualified person under  the
        EEA regulations [25].


     5.  The  judge  then  considered  whether  the  marriage  was  one  of
        convenience. The judge noted that no reference had been made in the
        Appellant's application of 18 October  2014  to  his  sponsor.  The
        judge accepted as plausible the Appellant's explanation that he had
        been advised by his representatives to not mention his relationship
        because he and his sponsor were not at that stage married. At  [27]
        the judge found that the timing of  the  marriage,  which  occurred
        around a month after the Appellant's previous  leave  expired,  was
        sufficient to give rise to a reasonable suspicion that the marriage
        might be one of convenience.


     6. The judge noted that the Appellant and sponsor had not been invited
        to a marriage interview, and referred  to  evidence  given  by  the
        Appellant to the effect that a home visit occurred on 3 August 2015
        during which the immigration officers expressed their  satisfaction
        as to the relationship. There was  however  no  evidence  from  the
        Respondent in relation to this home visit and the judge was  unable
        to attach further weight to the Appellant's assertions.


     7. At [31] the judge considered the oral evidence from  the  Appellant
        and his sponsor. The judge noted that  their  evidence  was  fairly
        consistent  in  a  number  of  respects   but   there   were   some
        discrepancies. The judge proceeded to list  some  of  the  evidence
        that had been provided and identified how  the  oral  evidence  had
        been  both  consistent  and  inconsistent.  The  judge  attached  a
        significant amount of weight  to  a  discrepancy  in  the  evidence
        relating to whether the Appellant collected his sponsor  from  work
        on the Monday prior to the hearing or whether she took a  bus  home
        from  work  [32].  The   judge   additionally   found   there   was
        'substantially diverging  to  evidence'  relating  to  whether  the
        Appellant's sponsor wanted an Islamic marriage (he said she did not
        want an Islamic marriage, but when asked why  they  hadn't  had  an
        Islamic marriage the sponsor said it was because she wanted lots of
        people to come).


     8. At [34] the judge considered evidence  relating  to  the  issue  of
        cohabitation and considered in  detail  the  various  bank  account
        statements provided by the Appellant and his sponsor. They both had
        a joint Lloyds bank account that started in October 2014. They also
        each had separate Barclays bank accounts.  The  judge  appeared  to
        hold against the Appellant the  delay  in  starting  a  joint  bank
        account given that he and his  sponsor  began  living  together  in
        August 2014.  The  judge  additionally  noted  that  the  financial
        evidence did not present a clear  picture  of  them  sharing  their
        resources. Only one salary payment was made into  the  Lloyds  bank
        account, the joint bank account showed a number  of  cash  deposits
        the provenance of which were unknown, and there were many transfers
        into the account by the Appellant. It was not apparent to the judge
        whether it had  been  the  Appellant  or  his  sponsor  making  the
        withdrawals from the account.


     9. Having considered the discrepancies in the evidence and taking  all
        the matters into  account  the  judge  found,  on  the  balance  of
        probabilities, that the marriage was  one  that  was  entered  into
        primarily to enable the Appellants to claim a right  to  reside  in
        the UK and not for cohabitation. Having found that the marriage was
        one of convenience the appeal was dismissed.


The grounds of appeal, the grant of permission, and the oral submissions

    10. The grounds took issue with the judge's application of  the  burden
        of proof at [27],  and  the  basis  for  his  conclusion  that  the
        evidence from  the  Appellant  and  his  sponsor  was  'essentially
        divergent' in respect of whether she wanted  an  Islamic  marriage.
        The grounds contended that the judge failed  to  accord  sufficient
        weight to the other ways in which the  Appellant  and  his  sponsor
        gave consistent evidence. The grounds finally  contended  that  the
        hearing and decision were procedurally  unfair  because  the  judge
        failed to raise his concerns relating to the bank accounts and  the
        sharing of resources at the hearing.


    11. The first-tier Tribunal  granted  permission  on  all  grounds.  Mr
        Nasim, who represented the Appellant in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
        expanded upon his  grounds  at  the  'error  of  law  hearing'.  He
        submitted that the judge's reference at [27]  related  not  to  the
        evidential burden but to the legal burden. he submitted that  there
        was no material inconsistency between the  evidence  given  by  the
        Appellant and that given by his sponsor as to whether she wanted an
        Islamic marriage. I was reminded that the judge had found that  the
        evidence from the Appellant and the sponsor to be consistent  in  a
        lot of ways and that the judge's conclusions,  at  [35]  failed  to
        take into account this positive evidence. It was finally  submitted
        that the judge had engaged in  procedural  unfairness  as  he  drew
        adverse inferences against the Appellant and his sponsor,  relating
        to their bank accounts and their sharing of resources,  when  these
        had never been put to them, either by the parties or by  the  judge
        himself.


    12. I confirmed both with Mr Nasim and Mr Walker whether there was  any
        evidence in their records of proceedings relating to the First-tier
        Tribunal hearing indicating that the Appellant and his sponsor were
        asked about their bank accounts. Mr Walker did not have a  copy  of
        the record of proceeding and Mr Nasim confirmed that there had been
        no questions put to either witness relating to the  bank  accounts,
        and there had been no questions asked about any  of  the  transfers
        made into the  bank  accounts  or  the  cash  deposits.  Mr  Walker
        accepted that it was  "troubling"  that  the  judge  had  drawn  an
        adverse inference in circumstances where there  had  not  been  any
        opportunity given to the Appellant to comment on this issue.


    13. Having carefully considered the judges record  of  proceedings  and
        the financial documents on file I indicated that  I  was  satisfied
        the judge had committed a procedural error by not  identifying  his
        concerns relating to the financial documents and that this amounted
        to a material error of law.


Discussion

    14. At [34] the judge considered, inter alia, the  financial  documents
        provided by the Appellant and  his  sponsor  including  their  bank
        accounts and some  of  her  salary  slips.  The  grounds  seemingly
        criticise the judge for undertaking  a  forensic  analysis  of  the
        transactions in the bank statements but the evidence was adduced by
        the Appellant and  the  judge  was  fully  entitled  to  look  very
        carefully at the financial documents. It is  irresistibly  implicit
        in the judge's analysis at [34] that he harboured concerns relating
        to the bank account statements. The judge noted that the joint bank
        account was only started in October 2014 whereas the Appellant  and
        the sponsor began cohabiting in August 2014. The judge  noted  that
        each maintained separate bank accounts in  addition  to  the  joint
        account and there appeared to be little evidence that  the  sponsor
        was contributing to the joint bank account. The judge referred to a
        number of cash deposits the provenance  of  which  was  unclear  in
        respect of this bank account. There were said to be many  transfers
        into the account by the Appellant and it was not clear  whether  he
        or the sponsor were making withdrawals from the account.


    15. None of these concerns were however put to  the  Appellant  or  his
        sponsor, or raised by the judge at the hearing. There had  been  no
        cross-examination on these points and the judge had not  asked  any
        questions  relating  to  the  transactional  history  of  the  bank
        accounts or made any enquiries as to  why  separate  bank  accounts
        were maintained. No questions were posed in respect of the apparent
        lack of evidence of  shared  financial  resources.  Had  the  judge
        raised his concerns with the Appellant or sponsor,  or  with  their
        representative,  explanations  could  have   been   provided.   I'm
        satisfied that the Appellant has been deprived of an opportunity of
        engaging with or responding to the  concerns  only  raised  by  the
        judge in his decision. This constituted a procedural impropriety.


    16. I am satisfied that the other grounds are less meritorious.  It  is
        quite clear to me that the judge's reference, at [27],  related  to
        the evidential burden incumbent on the Respondent.  The  judge  did
        not materially misdirect himself as to the appropriate standard  of
        proof. Having regard to the judges record of proceedings  I  accept
        that there were  some  aspects  of  the  oral  evidence  that  were
        consistent as between the Appellant and his sponsor which were  not
        directly addressed by the judge, but these were relatively minor in
        nature and small in number (such as the type of birthday cake). The
        judge was entitled to draw an adverse inference based on discrepant
        evidence between the Appellant and the sponsor relating to how  she
        made  her  way  home  from  work  the  previous  Monday,  and   the
        inconsistent evidence as to whether she wanted an Islamic marriage.
        Whilst another judge may have been entitled to conclude that  these
        discrepancies were not sufficient to discharge the legal burden  of
        proof incumbent on the Respondent,  it  cannot  be  said  that  the
        judge's conclusions were irrational ones  not  reasonably  open  to
        him.


    17. I am nevertheless satisfied that the procedural error is  material.
        Had the judge not committed this procedural error, and had he given
        the Appellant an opportunity to address his concerns, it cannot  be
        said that the judge's findings would inevitably have been the same.


    18. In circumstances where there has been a procedural  failure  it  is
        appropriate to remit the matter back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
        before a judge other than judge the First-tier Tribunal RR Hopkins,
        to be considered a fresh primarily  in  respect  of  the  issue  of
        marriage of convenience. Although the judge was satisfied that  the
        sponsor was a qualified person the First-tier  Tribunal  re-hearing
        the appeal must still be satisfied that  she  remains  a  qualified
        person.




Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by a  material  error  of  law.
The matter is remitted back to  the  first-tier  Tribunal,  before  a  judge
other than judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  RR  Hopkins,  for  a  fresh
hearing.

No anonymity order is made.


[pic]                               15 December 2016
Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


