
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27340/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 21st April 2015                     |On 15th May 2015                    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                                     SHJ
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Nasim, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Woolley issued on 5th December 2014, allowing
    under the Immigration Rules the appeal of  the  Appellant  against  the
    decision of the Respondent made on 28th May 2014  to  refuse  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant and to remove him from the  United
    Kingdom by way of directions  under  Section  47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lambert
    on 28th January 2015.  She said:

         "2.  This application had been successfully appealed  and  remitted
             for reconsideration by the  Respondent  in  2012.   The  Judge
             found that the present refusal was based on exactly  the  same
             set of facts and for the same reasons as had been found by the
             previous Judge  to  be  unsustainable  -  namely  an  Advanced
             Diploma Document that was said by the Respondent to be  false.
             The ROP shows that the Home Office Presenting Officer accepted
             that this was so, made no  submissions  and  agreed  that  the
             appeal should be allowed.

         3.   No further enquiries had been made by the Respondent since the
             previous remittal and it is clear  that  the  Judge  concluded
             that  there  had  been  a  total  failure  to  reconsider  the
             Appellant's  case.   Rather  than  remit  again  and  although
             recording that 'there still has been  no  lawful  decision  in
             relation to the application', the Judge considered the case on
             the basis that Advanced Diploma Document before him was one on
             which he could rely.

         4.   The grounds argue material misdirection in law in  that  there
             was no jurisdiction to allow the appeal in the  absence  of  a
             lawful decision by the Respondent.  The application is, in the
             context of the long history of  this  case  and  the  apparent
             total failure of the Respondent to engage  with  the  previous
             findings and remittal  by  the  Tribunal,  hard  to  find  any
             sympathy with.  However the Respondent's case is, as a  matter
             of law, manifestly arguable."

 3. The position of the Respondent is that no lawful decision has  been  by
    the Secretary of State and the Judge should have remitted  it  back  to
    her so that a lawful decision could be made.

 4. There is in this  case  a  previous  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal following a hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Morgan on
    6th December 2012.  He spoke of the "very unfortunate history"  of  the
    case which had at that point  been  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by the Upper Tribunal.  He explained that  the  Appellant  had
    first arrived in the UK in August 2003 with leave as a  student.   This
    leave was extended until  December  2008  when  the  Appellant  further
    extended his leave as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work)  Migrant  until  March
    2011.  On that date he applied for further leave as a Tier 1  (General)
    Migrant and this application was refused on the  grounds  that  he  had
    relied on a false document in  the  application.   The  Respondent  had
    proclaimed herself satisfied that the Advanced  Diploma  in  Management
    Studies from the London College of Management and IT was false  because
    the college had never  delivered  the  programme  to  which  the  award
    relates.  The Appellant was removed pursuant to directions  because  he
    did not have an in-country right of appeal.   Judge  Morgan  said  that
    there was no evidence before him that would enable or justify a finding
    that  the  qualification  relied  upon  was  a  false  document.    The
    Presenting Officer had accepted that she was in  some  difficulties  on
    this point.  Indeed the Appellant had provided a printout from the UKBA
    points-based calculator which expressly contradicted  the  Respondent's
    assertion that the qualification was  never  offered  by  the  college.
    There was further evidence in the form of  an  invoice  and  acceptance
    letter from the  college  and  certainly  no  suggestion  that  in  any
    previous grants of leave the  authenticity  of  the  qualification  was
    questioned by the Respondent.  The representatives accepted that if the
    allegation of deception was not made out then  the  denial  of  an  in-
    country right of appeal and the certified removal  would  be  unlawful.
    Judge Morgan went on to find  that  the  decision  and  his  subsequent
    removal were unlawful.  He said that the Respondent had made the  whole
    process unnecessarily complicated.   The  consequence  of  denying  the
    Appellant an in-country right of appeal meant that the  hearing  before
    him was at least the fifth hearing in relation to the  case,  including
    two in the High Court.  Judge Morgan found that  the  decision  on  the
    application remained outstanding before the Respondent and  he  invited
    the  Respondent  to  take  a  flexible  approach  in  considering   the
    application.  He suggested that if  the  application  succeeded,  entry
    clearance should be granted 'forthwith'.  He allowed the appeal to  the
    extent that the decision was not in accordance with the law.

 5. When the case came before Judge Woolley, he too expressed surprise  and
    displeasure at the history of  the  case.   It  was  accepted  by  both
    parties that the application had been refused by the Secretary of State
    for exactly the same reasons as previously, namely the submission of  a
    false diploma.  No further enquiries had been made  by  the  Respondent
    following the findings at the appeal hearing before Judge Morgan.

 6. The conclusion of Judge Woolley as set  out  at  paragraph   11  is  as
    follows:

         "On the other hand there has  still  been  no  lawful  decision  in
         relation to the application.  I think I may consider  the  case  on
         the basis that the Advanced Diploma Document before me is one  upon
         which I may rely  for  the  purposes  of  proving  the  Appellant's
         qualifications.  This means that he was entitled to the  30  points
         required for qualifications under Appendix  A  and  the  10  points
         necessary for the English language requirement  under  Appendix  B.
         No other issues were in question.  I find he meets the requirements
         of paragraph 245ZX(c) and (d)."

 7. Mr Nasim submitted at the hearing before me that the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State was not unlawful.  I  agree  with  that  submission.
    The fact that it was wrong and not in accordance with the evidence does
    not make it unlawful.  Judge Morgan found that the decision  to  remove
    was unlawful and that the Respondent had not made out the allegation of
    deception.  It seems to me that given these findings it may  well  have
    been open to him to simply allow the appeal at that point but  he  gave
    the Respondent the opportunity to issue a decision reflecting the  true
    situation  including  presumably  the  fact   that   the   Respondent's
    representative at the hearing had accepted that there was  no  evidence
    of deception.  Despite this the refusal letter that was issued  by  the
    Secretary of State on 28th May 2014 was in virtually identical terms to
    the previous one.  Clearly the Secretary of State paid no attention  to
    the previous correspondence.  No account was taken  of  the  number  of
    previous hearings in this case or of the public expense.  Judge Woolley
    had before him an appeal against a  refusal  to  extend  leave  and  to
    remove the Appellant from the UK.  He found that all the  documentation
    necessary in  terms  of  the  Immigration  Rules  to  succeed  in  that
    application for further leave had been supplied  to  the  Secretary  of
    State with the application.  It seems to me that he was entitled to  do
    that and on that basis to allow the appeal. There was no need  for  the
    Respondent to have to issue 'a  lawful  decision'.   Her  decision  was
    lawful.  She had  fully  considered  the  evidence  in  the  appeal  in
    accordance with  the  applicable  law  for  the  second  time  and  had
    misconstrued the facts of the  case,  in  particular  failing  to  take
    account of the fact that it had been conceded on her  behalf  that  the
    document initially said to be false was not.

 Notice of Decision

I find that there is no material error of law in the determination of  Judge
Woolley and that decision shall stand.

Signed   Date: 11th May 2015

N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
