
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27617/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 April 2015                     |On 8 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                          mr Richard Anane Brobbey
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs A Brocklesby-Weller, a Home Office Presenting
Officer


                      DECISION AND REASONS FOR FINDING
                               NO ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Ghana, was born  on  22  August  1976.   He
    originally came to the UK in 2002 illegally.  He claims to have married
    a French national by the  name  of  Cherryl  Charline  Aurore  Michelle
    Vespier on 15 December  2003.   Subsequently,  on  27  April  2004,  he
    submitted an application under the Immigration (European Economic Area)
    Regulations  2006  ("2006  Regulations")  on  27  April   2004.    That
    application was refused on 21 October 2004.

2.   The appellant then appears to have formed a relationship with one  Nade
    Fabiola Gbra and they had a child together (Joceline Grace Brobbey)  on
    6 June 2005.  Ms Gbra subsequently became a naturalised British citizen
    in 2007.

3.   The appellant was discovered  working  illegally  at  Greencore  on  18
    February 2010 and was served with a notice (form IS151a) as an  illegal
    entrant advising him that he was liable for removal from the UK.  On 16
    April 2010 the appellant applied for further leave to remain  but  this
    was refused with no right of appeal on 30 March 2011.   A  request  for
    reconsideration was received on 18 April 2011.

4.   Action was taken to remove the appellant as an illegal absconder  on  9
    February 2013 and on 16 April 2014 he was issued with  forms  IS75  and
    IS76 giving the appellant a one stop final chance to submit any further
    evidence he wished to have considered.  According to  the  respondent's
    decision notice dated 20 June 2014, the  appellant  failed  to  provide
    evidence requested despite being given two  extensions  to  submit  the
    required documents.  Accordingly, the appellant was informed that on 19
    June 2014 a decision had been made to refuse his application for  leave
    to remain on the basis that the appellant's removal from the  UK  would
    not constitute a breach of  any  of  the  UK's  obligations  under  the
    European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) as incorporated into English
    law by the Human Rights Act 1998.  The respondent also refused to  vary
    the leave to remain in the United Kingdom and  informed  the  appellant
    that he had a right to appeal by 2 July 2014.

The Appeal Proceedings

5.   The appellant's notice of appeal, which was received on  2  July  2014,
    claims that the respondent had failed to consider  the  fact  that  the
    appellant met the criteria in  the  2006  Regulations.  The  respondent
    ought to have confirmed the appellant's right to reside in the UK as  a
    partner of an EEA national (presumably  Nadia  Fabiola  Gbra).   It  is
    alleged that the respondent failed to consider the appellant's  partner
    was exercising treaty rights in the UK.   The  appellant  also  averred
    that the appellant's human rights, and specifically  his  rights  to  a
    private  or  family  life  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR,  would  be
    disproportionately interfered with if he were removed from the UK.  The
    appellant's circumstances were said to  be  "unique"  in  that  he  had
    formed close connections with the UK where he had been "woven into  the
    very fabric of  life".   The  respondent  had  failed  to  give  proper
    consideration to the  relevant  matters  necessary  for  assessing  the
    appellant's application.  The respondent  had  allowed  herself  to  be
    influenced by irrelevant facts and erred in law.

6.   The appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Paul,  who
    having heard evidence from Ms Gbra, Ms Eunice Mensah and the  appellant
    himself, decided  that  the  respondent's  decision  had  not  been  in
    accordance with the "the Rules" and he  also  allowed  the  appeal  "on
    human rights grounds".  No anonymity direction  was  made  and  no  fee
    award was payable.

7.   The present appeal is by the respondent, whom I will continue to  refer
    to as "the  respondent"  despite  the  fact  that  her  role  has  been
    reversed.  I note by a notice of appeal  dated  18  December  2014  the
    respondent alleges that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  (FTJ)  made  a
    material error of law in allowing the appeal.  The  reference  to  "the
    Rules" in the Immigration Judge's conclusions is  a  reference  to  the
    "Immigration Rules".  The respondent points out in her grounds that the
    appellant cannot satisfy that route because there are no insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing with his partner in Ghana.  As  far
    as the appellant's  child  is  concerned,  it  was  necessary  for  the
    appellant to show a genuine and subsisting relationship with a  British
    child and that he met all the other requirements of the Rules.  This he
    was unable to do.  The Immigration Judge had departed from the  concept
    of reasonableness  in  artificially  separating  his  consideration  of
    "outside the Rules" under Article 8, with reference to Section  117  of
    the Immigration Act 2014, and this  was not the correct approach.

8.   EX.1 (i) of the Immigration Rules expressly requires  an  appraisal  of
    what is reasonable before  the  Rule  can  be  met.   EX.1  deals  with
    exceptions to eligibility requirements of the rules in cases where  the
    applicant has or claims to have a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
    with a child who fulfils certain criteria.

9.    The  concept  of  reasonableness  involves  an   assessment   of   the
    appropriate legal threshold.  In this case no proper reason for finding
    that it was unreasonable for the appellant's child to leave the UK  had
    been given.  The Immigration Judge had found that the appellant  had  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his daughter and that
    it was not in the best interests of his child to be relocated to Ghana.
     However, it is alleged in the grounds that the Immigration  Judge  had
    given no adequate reasons for finding that the it was not in  the  best
    interests of the child to leave the UK. The proportionality  assessment
    required under the Rules/Article 8 (i.e.  the  reasonableness  test  as
    contained in EX.1 Section 117B (vi)) was  flawed.   There  is  a  clear
    distinction between what is reasonable and what is perceived to  be  in
    the best interests of the child the two are not  necessarily  the  same
    and the former could  be  displaced  by  public  interest  factors.   A
    difference in provision of schooling as between the UK  and  Ghana  was
    not  itself  sufficient  to  render  the  removal  of   the   appellant
    unreasonable.  And  in  any  event  there  was  a  need  for  effective
    immigration control.  The respondent alleges that the family unit could
    relocate to Ghana otherwise the appellant's daughter and partner  could
    choose to remain in the UK and the appellant could make an  application
    from Ghana to return to the UK.  Article 8 does  not  confer  a  choice
    upon an individual as to where he wishes to  exercise  his  private  or
    family life.  It protects a fundamental right.  The appellant  and  his
    partner had no legitimate expectation of maintaining the status quo and
    there was  a  public  interest  in  maintaining  effective  immigration
    control which in this case outweighed other considerations.

10.  Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Mark  Davies  thought  that  these
    grounds were at  least  arguable  on  4  February  2015  when  he  gave
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   He  considered  that  the
    Immigration Judge had given "no explanation whatsoever  as  to  why  he
    finds it would not be reasonable for the appellant, his partner and his
    British citizen child to relocate  (sic)  to  Ghana.   The  Immigration
    Judge had given no proper consideration  to  proportionality  vis-�-vis
    the appellant's poor immigration history and the public interest in his
    removal."

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

11.  At the hearing  I  heard  submissions  by  both  representatives.   The
    respondent  submitted  that  the  relevant  provision  was  EX.1.   The
    appellant had two children, one with his present partner and one with a
    previous partner.  The Immigration Judge had only considered one of the
    children, however.  I was referred to  paragraph  29  of  the  decision
    where the Immigration Judge said  that  it  was  in  the  child's  best
    interests to remain in contact with her father.  It was pointed out the
    "best interests" did not equate with "reasonableness".  Holding British
    nationality is not a "trump card" and I was invited to  substitute  the
    decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the refusal of  leave  to  remain.   The  appellant's  daughter
    Joceline was born in 2005.

12.  On behalf of the appellant it was submitted that the  FTT  had  reached
    the correct conclusion.  Although the appellant  had  two  children  by
    separate mothers, one from the Ivory Coast and  one  from  Ghana,  both
    those  mothers  were  now  naturalised.   The  appellant's  length   of
    residence and the fact that his child was a British citizen  mean  that
    they need to remain in the UK.  All the correct factors were considered
    at paragraph 32 of the decision.  They must, therefore,  have  been  in
    the judge's mind when he reached his decision.  The  Immigration  Judge
    had resolved the conflicts of evidence and had made no  error  of  law.
    It was submitted that were I to decide that there had been  a  material
    error of law further submissions may be necessary.

13.  The respondent said the appellant and Joceline  did  not  have  regular
    contact (two times a month) (paragraph 8 of the decision).   There  was
    no balancing exercise to be conducted.  The  Immigration  Judge  should
    have considered the changes introduced by  the  Immigration  Act  2014.
    The appellant had no relationship with his other child.

14.  Mr Sharma responded to say he did not accept the  submission  that  the
    appellant only contacted his child twice a month.  Although he was  not
    the "primary carer" he was clearly an important figure in  the  child's
    life.  The child was mainly cared for  by  the  mother.   The  case  of
    Senade was relied on and Section 117B of the Immigration Act.  The fact
    that the child had been here  all  her  life  and  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had been in the UK for at least seven years meant  relocation
    was problematic.  The appellant and his child could not be expected  to
    relocate.  I also considered the appellant's written submissions  which
    state that it was necessary for the respondent to show that  there  had
    been a "misdirection of  law"  and  the  key  issue  was:  whether  the
    Immigration Judge had identified and  resolved  the  key  conflicts  in
    evidence and explained in clear and  brief  language  the  reasons  for
    reaching his  decision  as  to  why  the  appellant  had  won  and  the
    respondent had lost the appeal.  It was submitted that the  Immigration
    Judge had done all that was required of him and  that  the  appeal  had
    been correctly decided in the appellant's favour.



Discussion

15.  Both parties agreed that Appendix FM and in particular  EX.1  were  the
    relevant provisions.  They came into force on 9 July 2012.  It  appears
    that Appendix FM, EX.1 (a)  is  relevant  rather  than  (b),  i.e.  the
    appellant relies on the "parent route" rather than the "partner route".
     In particular, the Immigration Judge, at paragraph 24 of his decision,
    found  "no  insurmountable  obstacles"  to  family  life  between   the
    appellant and his present partner (Ms Mensah) continuing in Ghana.   Ms
    Mensah is from Ghana and continues to have a number of  family  members
    there but came to the UK aged 16. Hence the Immigration  Judge  decided
    that the appeal could not succeed under the "partner route". There  was
    no cross-appeal by the appellant against that decision.

16.  However, the Immigration Judge went on  and  found  for  the  appellant
    under "the parent route". This was on the basis that  the  requirements
    of EX.1 (a) were satisfied because  of  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and Joceline.  In short, the  Immigration  Judge  found  that
    Joceline "meets all these requirements" in that there was a genuine and
    subsisting parental relationship with the appellant, she was under  the
    age of 18, she was in the UK and a British citizen.   He  also  decided
    that "it would not be in her best interests  to  now  be  relocated  to
    Ghana".

17.  The Immigration  Judge  also  purported  to  decide  the  appeal  under
    "Article 8 outside the Rules" on the basis that the appellant's removal
    "would be disproportionate".

18.  As to these findings,  the  Immigration  Judge  appears  to  have  paid
    little or no regard to the requirement of the  Immigration  Rules  that
    "little  weight"  should  attach  to  family  life  formed  whilst  the
    appellant is in the UK unlawfully  (see  Section  117A  and  B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and in particular s.  117B
    (4)).  In particular, the "public interest considerations" include  the
    requirement, where a court or tribunal determines a question of whether
    a person's right to private or family life under Article 8 is breached,
    that effective immigration controls should be maintained in the  public
    interest (see s.117B (1)). Little weight should  attach  to  a  private
    life or a  relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner  that  is
    established  at a time when the appellant  is  in  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully but under section 117 B (6) the  public  interest  does  not
    require his removal where he has a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    with a qualifying child.  A qualifying child is a British citizen or  a
    child who has lived in the UK for 7 years continuously.

19.  Here, the Immigration Judge seems to have attached  significant  weight
    in paragraph 32 of his decision to the  fact  that  the  appellant  had
    worked whilst he had been here, that he had not committed any  criminal
    offences and that his current  partner's  heavy  dependence  on  public
    funds may if anything be reduced if he were to settle here.  These  are
    largely irrelevant or peripheral considerations I find.

20.  The Immigration Judge appeared to be confused  in  his  reasoning.   He
    seems to have assumed that in the event of the appellant being  removed
    to Ghana Joceline would "be expected to leave  the  UK".   That  by  no
    means follows.  The appellant is  not  the  main  carer  for  Joceline.
    According to paragraph  8  of  the  decision  he  had  contact  on  two
    occasions each month.  It does not seem to follow that the  appellant's
    removal would require Joceline to leave the  United  Kingdom.  Thus  it
    does not appear obvious that section 117B (6) (b) did in fact apply.

21.  The Immigration Judge was rightly concerned  in  paragraph  29  of  the
    rights of the children which  the  appellant  had  helped  to  produce.
    Indeed, the best interests of  the  children  needed  to  be  paramount
    considerations,  regardless  of  the  appellant's  immigration  status.
    However, the appellant had not formed a relationship with  Isabel,  his
    child with Ms Mensah, as she was only a few months old at the  date  of
    the hearing.  With regard to his elder child, Joceline, the Immigration
    Judge found that she would be "very sad if he had to leave".   He  also
    thought that he would not be able to afford his daughter to  visit  him
    in Ghana.  That is a questionable finding, given the appellant  appears
    to have met  the  income  criteria  for  settlement  in  the  UK.   The
    appellant was found to have "a very important role  in  his  daughter's
    life" in paragraph 14 of the decision.   The  Immigration  Judge  found
    that Joceline was settled at school and that it would  not  be  in  her
    interests to be relocated to Ghana.

22.  As Ms Brocklesby-Weller pointed out, and  as  the  grounds  make  clear
    there is a  distinction  between  what  is  "reasonable"  and  what  is
    perceived to be "in the best interests of a child".   No  reasons  were
    given by the Immigration Judge as to why Joceline could not settle in a
    supportive family unit in Ghana if this did become  necessary  and  the
    different education provision in the two countries  was  not  itself  a
    reason for not  enforcing  effective  immigration  control  against  an
    illegal immigrant.  Where section 117B(6) did  apply  it  simply  meant
    that the appellant's  removal  was  not  required  by  public  interest
    considerations, it did not mean he automatically qualified for leave to
    remain on article  8  grounds.  Furthermore,  it  is  likely  that  the
    appellant will  be  separated  from  his  mother  and  daughter  for  a
    relatively short period of time given that the appellant may well  have
    met the income requirements for admission as the partner of Ms  Mensah.
    The period of separation was not even  considered  by  the  Immigration
    Judge.  There as  no  reason  why  the  appellant  could  not  make  an
    application for entry clearance from Ghana and return to live  with  Ms
    Mensah and his daughter, Isabel.  Thus, his relationship with  Joceline
    would soon be reinstated.  In the interim it  could  be  maintained  by
    more remote means of communication.

23.  As far as the finding "outside the Rules" is concerned, it is now well-
    established it was only in exceptional cases that a judge should depart
    from  these  requirements  where   there   are   "unjustifiably   harsh
    consequences to the appellant or his family flowing from  the  refusal"
    of leave to remain.  As the respondent has submitted, there  is  not  a
    choice available to the appellant as to  where  he  establishes  family
    life.  The purpose of the ECHR it to protect fundamental  rights.   The
    appellant did not have an expectation that he could remain in the UK in
    the long-term. The public interest of maintaining effective immigration
    control means that the respondent's decision was  not  disproportionate
    and the appellant had not established that his  removal  would  require
    Joceline to leave the UK, although that was one possible outcome.



Conclusions

24.  For these reasons I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal did  make
    a material error of law and that it  is  necessary  to  substitute  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal.  There being no application to  produce
    any fresh evidence before  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  given  the  clear
    findings of fact made by the Immigration  Judge  I  conclude  that  the
    respondent's decision to refuse leave  to  remain  was  lawful  and  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules.

Decision

25.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law such as it is required to be set aside.

26.  I substitute the decision of the Upper Tribunal that is to dismiss  the
    appeal against the respondent's refusal of leave to remain on both  the
    Immigration Rules and under the ECHR.

27.  There is no application before me for an anonymity direction.

28.  There is no challenge to the failure to make a fee award.


Signed   Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

