

                                    [pic]
ST
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/27212/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 30 March 2016                           |On 12 April 2016               |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    O M A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Adebayo, solicitor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. OMA is a citizen of Nigeria.  She appealed against the decision of  the
    Secretary of State on 9 June 2014  to  refuse  to  vary  her  leave  to
    remain, on the grounds of long residence, and to remove her by  way  of
    directions under s47 of the Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act
    2006.   Her appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Lingam
    ("the FTTJ") who in a decision promulgated on 28 September 2015 allowed
    her appeal under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

 2. For ease of reference I refer to the parties as they were in the First-
    tier Tribunal with the Secretary of  State  being  the  respondent  and
    [OMA] being the appellant.

 3. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal  but,  given
    my references  to  her  personal  circumstances,  she  is  entitled  to
    anonymity in these proceedings and I made a direction accordingly.

 4. The respondent sought permission to appeal. It was granted by Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Robertson on 15 February 2016 who considered it
    was arguable that the FTTJ had made a  factual  error  insofar  as  the
    appellant's immigration history was concerned, had failed to take  into
    account the respondent disputed a lengthy period of  leave  granted  to
    the  appellant,  had  sought  to   exercise   a   discretionary   power
    inappropriately and had  considered  the  wrong  version  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi). It was also arguable that the proportionality assessment
    under Article 8 was contaminated by errors made in the assessment under
    the Immigration Rules.  Permission to appeal was therefore granted.

 5. Thus the appeal came before me.

Submissions

 6. For the respondent, Mr Duffy submitted that the FTTJ had failed to take
    into account a period between 2007 and 2009 when the appellant did  not
    have leave to remain. Whilst this period had only  been  identified  by
    the respondent in the preamble to the reasons for refusal  (ie  in  the
    immigration history) this was sufficient to identify it as an issue for
    consideration  in  the  calculation  of  the   period   of   residence.
    Furthermore, the FTTJ had taken  the  appellant's  immigration  history
    into account in paragraph 15 of the decision. Her failure to take  that
    history fully into account when applying the Immigration Rules  was  an
    error of law.

 7. It was not open to the FTTJ to give direct effect to a policy  set  out
    in permissive terms (Ukus (Discretion:  when  reviewable)  [2012]  UKUT
    00307 (IAC)). In any event, it was not clear how the FTTJ  had  applied
    the policy.

 8. Mr Duffy submitted that there was a period of about 18 months when  the
    appellant did not have leave to remain. She could  not  therefore  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules  (the  long
    residence provisions).  In addition, the FTTJ  had  applied  the  wrong
    test in considering paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) insofar as the  appellant's
    private life was concerned. Given that the appellant's father lived  in
    Nigeria, it was perverse to find that she had no ties to that  country.
    Mr Duffy accepted there was no challenge to the FTTJ's consideration of
    the appeal outside the Immigration Rules and  in  accordance  with  the
    Article 8 jurisprudence but submitted that, given she could  only  base
    her claim on her private life and  did  not  meet  the  long  residence
    provisions in the Immigration  Rules,  the  Article  8  assessment  was
    infected by the errors of law in the  findings  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 9. Mr Adebayo, for the appellant, agreed that the appellant's  application
    for leave to remain in November 2007 was not made in time, contrary  to
    the FTTJ's record  of  her  immigration  history  [15(iii)].  He  noted
    however that this gap in her leave to remain was not addressed  in  the
    main body of the reasons for refusal letter and submitted that it could
    be inferred from this  lack  of  reference  that  the  respondent  "had
    exercised her discretion by overlooking this". He submitted  that  that
    discretion was available to the respondent under  paragraph  276A.   He
    submitted that the FTTJ had not erred in law in failing  to  take  this
    period into account.

10. Mr Adebayo submitted that the two week gap in  the  appellant's  lawful
    leave to remain in 2007 did not materially affect the  outcome  of  the
    appeal: her application had been made on 15 November 2007 and had  been
    refused;  her  solicitors  had  applied  for  reconsideration  and  the
    respondent had agreed to this following the issue  of  judicial  review
    proceedings. He noted that leave to remain was granted in 2010 and that
    this was in response to the  original  application  made  in  2007.  He
    submitted that the existence of the consent  order  made  in  those  JR
    proceedings (and which noted the  grant  of  leave  had  been  agreed),
    negated any gaps in leave to remain between October 2007 and  May  2010
    when the order was made. However, when I pointed out to Mr Adebayo that
    this could not be the case because the appellant had  applied,  out  of
    time, on 15 November 2007 for further leave to remain he accepted  that
    was the case and that, at best, it could only have  been  backdated  to
    the date of her application in N November 2007. He also  accepted  that
    there was no evidence that the grant of leave to remain,  as  evidenced
    by the consent order and letter from TSols, had been backdated at all.

11. Mr Adebayo conceded that the FTTJ had no power to  exercise  discretion
    on the respondent's behalf (Ukus) and that her findings in this  regard
    amounted to an error of law.   He  also  conceded  that  the  FTTJ  had
    applied the wrong version  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).   However,  he
    submitted  that  the  latter  was  not  a  material  error,  given  the
    appellant's father's ill health and her medical condition.

12. Insofar as the FTTJ's consideration of proportionality under Article  8
    was concerned, Mr Adebayo submitted that this stood or  fell  with  the
    FTTJ's findings under the Immigration Rules.

13. In reply, Mr Duffy submitted that the consent order was related  to  an
    extension of the appellant's student leave; it was  issued  at  a  time
    when her right to remain under the long residence provisions was not in
    contemplation.  The "mischief"  the  JR  proceedings  were  seeking  to
    address was the fact that the appellant had not been able to remain  in
    the UK to  complete  her  studies,  having  been  unable  to  take  her
    examinations due to ill health. The grant of leave in 2010 enabled  her
    to do so.  He noted that the author of the grounds of  appeal  to  this
    tribunal had not had access to TSols' letter issued in December 2009.

Discussion

14. The reasons for refusal letter makes  it  clear  that  the  appellant's
    leave to remain expired on 31 October 2007;  she  applied  for  further
    leave out of time on 15 November 2007.  Whilst this  is  only  set  out
    under the heading "Immigration History" and not discussed in  the  main
    body of the reasons for refusal letter, the reader can be in  no  doubt
    the appellant applied out of  time.  The  FTTJ  takes  the  appellant's
    immigration history into account, setting it out (albeit  inaccurately)
    at paragraph 15.  She erroneously refers at sub-paragraph (iii) to  the
    appellant's having made an in-time application on 15 November 2007. She
    also states at paragraph 19 that "whilst the appellant does not dispute
    with  the  respondent's  record  of  dates  regarding  her  immigration
    presence in the UK; she disagrees with  the  gaps  in  her  immigration
    presence in the UK [sic]".  The FTTJ then goes on to say  at  paragraph
    20 that "as the respondent does not contest it, the  appellant  entered
    the UK for studies in January 2003 and  she  remained  with  a  student
    leave February 2010 [sic]".  Taken  together,  the  FTTJ  relied  on  a
    misrepresentation  of  the  appellant's  immigration  history  and  the
    respondent's position in that regard.  Whilst I take into account  that
    the respondent did not specifically refer to the issue in  her  reasons
    for refusal, the gap in her immigration history was  set  out  in  that
    letter and the letter did not contain any form of concession in respect
    of any period when she  was  without  leave.  Whilst  the  reasons  for
    refusal focused solely on a later period, it was incumbent on the  FTTJ
    to make findings on the appellant's  ability  to  meet  the  continuous
    residence provisions, an essential element for the grant  of  leave  on
    the basis of long residence under the  Rules.  The  FTTJ's  failure  to
    address this issue constitutes an error of law.

15. The FTTJ also erred in law in purporting to  exercise  her  discretion.
    This is contrary to  the  guidance  in  Ukus.   The  exercise  of  such
    discretion is limited to the respondent and the FTTJ's options were, in
    turn, limited to  making  a  finding  that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.

16. I agree with the respondent that the  FTTJ  made  a  factual  error  in
    stating that the appellant had had existing leave when she left the  UK
    on 13 July 2012; in fact her leave had expired on 27 May 2012.  This is
    relevant to the application of paragraph  276A(a)  which  required  the
    appellant to have leave on departure.

17. I also agree with the parties that the FTTJ applied the  wrong  version
    of  paragraph  2786ADE(1)(vi)   with   regard   to   the   respondent's
    consideration of the appellant's private life under the Rules.

18.  Finally,  I  find  that  the  errors  made  in  consideration  of  the
    appellant's evidence under the  Immigration  rules  have  infected  the
    FTTJ's  analysis  of   proportionality   under   Article   8.    Proper
    consideration of the public interest factors requires accurate findings
    as to the appellant's ability to meet the Immigration Rules.

19. Given the number and variety of errors of fact and law  in  the  FTTJ's
    decision, there can be no doubt that, taken together, those errors  are
    material to the outcome of the appeal. They render the decision  unsafe
    and unsustainable.

20. I have considered whether I can remake the decision  on  the  basis  of
    preserved findings. However I consider these to  be  inadequate  for  a
    fresh decision to be taken with all relevant issues  in  mind.  I  also
    consider that fairness dictates that further evidence  be  obtained  to
    address apparent anomalies which  were  not  considered  by  the  FTTJ,
    particularly with regard to the period October 2007 - 05 February 2010.
     I note the terms of the consent order compromising the judicial review
    proceedings and the letter from TSols  dated  23  December  2009  which
    includes the following:

       "Having taken  instructions  from  my  clients,  the  Defendant  [the
       Secretary of State] is willing to agree to your request to extend the
       Claimant's [appellant's] leave period until the end of  April  2010."
       [my emphasis]

    The use of the word "extend" suggests that the earlier leave to  remain
    was continued and that there was no gap as a result. However,  this  is
    inconsistent with the appellant's leave to remain as a  student  having
    expired on 31 October 2007 and her making an out of time application on
    15 November 2007.  There is a further issue: in the reasons for refusal
    letter it is stated that "On 05 November  2009  [her]  application  was
    reconsidered further and [she was] granted leave to remain as a student
    with leave valid until 05 February 2010".   This can  be  read  in  two
    ways: either that the date of 5  November  2009  applies  only  to  the
    reconsideration or that it applies to both to the  reconsideration  and
    the grant of leave.  Thus it is not clear  from  the  evidence  or  the
    reasons for refusal letter whether  the  grant  of  leave  was  from  5
    November 2009 or, as is submitted by Mr Adebayo, whether it  was  back-
    dated.   These  two  anomalies  impact  on  the  calculation   of   the
    appellant's period of residence.  It is possible, for example,  if  the
    grant were back-dated, that there would only be  a  short  gap  in  her
    leave to remain of about two weeks between 31 October  2007  (when  her
    leave to remain expired) and  15  November  2007  (when  she  made  her
    application for further leave out of  time).   In  addition,  once  the
    issue has been decided  it  is  necessary  to  take  into  account  the
    relevant paragraph of the Immigration Rules applicable at the  time  GK
    (Long residence - immigration history) Lebanon [2008] UKAIT  00011  and
    MD (Jamaica) and GE (Canada) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 213.  This has  not
    been provided to me.

21. Given that the Article  8  assessment  should  be  conducted  with  the
    appellant's ability to fulfil the criteria in the Immigration Rules  in
    mind and the FTTJ's findings in that regard  are  not  sustainable,  it
    follows that the FTTJ's  findings  on  human  rights  grounds  are  not
    sustainable either.

22. For these reasons I find that the decision contains various  errors  of
    laws and that these are material to the outcome. The  most  appropriate
    course is for the matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    a fresh hearing.

Decision

23. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of errors on a point of law.  The decision is  set  aside.   The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with afresh,
    pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunal Courts and  Enforcement
    Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(v), before  any  judge  aside  from
    FTTJ Lingam.



A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
    Dated: 1 April 2016



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
  Dated: 1 April 2016
                                 DIRECTIONS


 1. Any further documentary evidence relied upon by either party is  to  be
    filed with the Tribunal and served upon the other  party  by  no  later
    than 14 days before the date of the hearing in the First Tier Tribunal.

 2. The appeal is listed at Taylor House with a time estimate of two  hours
    to be heard at 10.00 am on ............................

 3. An interpreter is not required.





A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
         Dated: 1 April 2016

