
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27478/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th November 2015                |On 21st December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Mr Oladele Michael Solanke
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Blundell, Counsel instructed by UK Migration
                    Lawyers, Birmingham


                            DECISION AND REASONS
              ON TIMELINESS ON CONDITIONAL PERMISSION TO APPEAL

 1. Mr Solanke is a citizen of Nigeria whose date of birth is  recorded  as
    26th September 1988.  He made application for permission to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom which application for leave was refused on 31st July
    2013.  He appealed and on 23rd March 2015 the appeal was heard by Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Buckwell, who in a decision  promulgated  on
    1st May 2015 allowed the appeal both under the Immigration Rules and on
    human rights grounds.  In the First-tier, a significant  focus  of  the
    Tribunal was upon the suitability requirements and whether or not those
    had been met given the character, conduct and the like of  Mr  Solanke,
    as contended for by the Secretary of State.

 2. Not content with the decision, the Secretary of State by  Notice  dated
    15th May 2015 made application for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 8th July 2015 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Pooler
    refused permission.  It is of note that that application for permission
    was made in time.  The judge considered the grounds but was of the view
    that the grounds did not disclose any arguable error of law.

 3. The Secretary of State was still not content and so on 28th  July  2015
    she made a renewed application for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 3rd September 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer purported
    to grant permission but did so without consideration of whether or  not
    she needed to make a decision on the lateness of the application.

 4. By Rule 21(3)(aa)(i) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 the Secretary of State for the Home Department had  fourteen  days
    after the agreed date in this case of 8th July 2015,  within  which  to
    apply for permission to appeal.

 5. Where permission has been granted but  without  an  extension  of  time
    having been considered in circumstances where such is required then the
    grant of permission is to be treated only  as  conditional  until  such
    time as an extension is granted, if at all.

 6. This matter first came before me on 23rd October 2015 when Mr  Blundell
    took the point that there had been no extension of time granted in this
    case.  He pointed to the reasons given by the Secretary  of  State  for
    her lateness which are set out as follows:

         "It is respectfully asked that the Tribunal extends the time  limit
         for making this application.  The main reason for delay was because
         the Specialist Appeals Team on behalf of the Secretary of State had
         a lack of resources  following  receipt  of  the  determination  to
         consider this appeal, having had to focus  on  more  priority  work
         instead.  It is submitted that the  Specialist  Appeals  Team  have
         endeavoured to  submit  this  appeal  as  soon  as  possible.   The
         Secretary of State apologises for the delay but submits that it was
         a short one and  is  unlikely  to  have  been  prejudicial  to  the
         Respondent.  An extension of time is respectfully requested."

 7. There is guidance as to the proper approach to be taken in  cases  such
    as this where an extension of time is sought and I refer to the case of
    SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387  from  paragraph  93  onwards  in  which
    guidance in the earlier case of R (Hysaj) -v- Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1633 was approved  of.   There  are
    three stages to be followed:

         "i)  The first stage is to identify and assess the  seriousness  or
             significance of the failure to comply  with  the  Rules.   The
             focus should be on whether the  breach  has  been  serious  or
             significant.  If a  judge  concludes  that  a  breach  is  not
             serious or significant, then relief will  usually  be  granted
             and it will usually be unnecessary to spend much time  on  the
             second or third stages; but if  the  judge  decides  that  the
             breach is serious or significant, then the  second  and  third
             stages assume greater importance.

         ii)  The second stage is to consider why the failure occurred, that
             is to say whether there is a  good  reason  for  it.   It  was
             stated in Mitchell [Mitchell MP -v- News Group Newspapers  Ltd
             [2013] EWCA Civ 1537], at paragraph [41] that if  there  is  a
             good reason for the default,  the  court  will  be  likely  to
             decide that relief should be  granted.   The  important  point
             made in Denton & Ors -v- TH White Ltd & Ors  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
             906 was that if there is a serious or significant  breach  and
             no good reason for the breach, this does  not  mean  that  the
             application  for  relief  will  automatically  fail.   It   is
             necessary in every case to move to the third stage.

         iii) The third stage is to evaluate all the  circumstances  of  the
             case, so as to enable  the  court  to  deal  justly  with  the
             application.  The two factors specifically  mentioned  in  CPR
             Rule 3.9 are of particular  importance  and  should  be  given
             particular weight.  They are (a) the need for litigation to be
             conducted efficiently and at proportionate cost, and  (b)  the
             need to enforce compliance with Rules, Practice Directions and
             court orders."

 8. I observe in relation to the reference to CPR that whilst they  do  not
    directly apply to the Upper Tribunal the overriding objectives lead one
    to the same principles.  Was the breach  in  this  case  serious?   The
    Secretary of State had fourteen days but she took a further  six  days.
    This is not a case in which the time was missed by a day but almost  an
    additional fifty per cent of the time permitted.   Still  further,  the
    Secretary of State had already made an application  for  permission  to
    appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It  was  not  as  if  in   the
    circumstances she needed to spend much  time  drafting  fresh  grounds.
    The grounds had already been drafted.  Yet, in her own words,  she  had
    other work which required a greater priority; this clearly goes to  the
    seriousness she thought related to this particular case.   The  failure
    due to insufficient resources cannot ordinarily be  sufficient  reason.
    Indeed it is trite law and a matter upon which the Tribunal  has  given
    guidance in the past and in respect of which the Court of Appeal itself
    made observations at paragraph 42 of Hysaj.

         "I am unable to accept that the court can construct a special  rule
         for public authorities. I am well aware that the resources of  many
         public authorities are stretched to breaking point, but in my  view
         they have a responsibility to adhere to the rules just as  much  as
         any other litigants."

 9. I turn then to the third stage which is to consider  the  merits.   The
    court said in Hysaj, as set out at paragraph 95:

         "If applications for extensions of time are allowed to develop into
         disputes about the merits of  the  substantive  appeal,  they  will
         occupy a great deal of time and  lead  to  the  parties'  incurring
         substantial costs.  In most cases the merits  of  the  appeal  will
         have little to do with  whether  it  is  appropriate  to  grant  an
         extension of time.  Only in those cases where  the  court  can  see
         without much investigation that the grounds of  appeal  are  either
         very strong or very weak will the merits have a significant part to
         play when it comes to balancing the various factors that have to be
         considered at stage three of the process.  In most cases the  court
         should decline to embark on an  investigation  of  the  merits  and
         firmly discourage argument directed to them ..."

10. I cannot say that this is a case which is  obviously  strong  or  weak.
    Given that there were  arguments  that  could  have  been  advanced  in
    relation to the seriousness of a series of cautions and the  nature  of
    the offences, I am bound by the guidance in the Court of Appeal to look
    to whether or not an extension should be granted having regard  to  the
    reasons given.  I have already indicated that the reasons are not  good
    enough and in those circumstances the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed and  in  those  circumstances
    there is no appeal before me.

Notice of Decision

Permission to appeal is refused.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

