
[pic]
IAC-fh-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27522/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd September 2015                |On 18th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 RENE CHANG
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Lam, Counsel instructed by David Tang & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I shall refer to  the  parties  as  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    Appellant is a citizen of Malaysia born on  17th  February  1977.   Her
    appeal against  the  refusal  of  a  derivative  residence  card  under
    Regulations 15A and 18A of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 [the Regulations] was allowed by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Devittie on 14th April 2015.

2.   The Respondent applied for permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that
    the judge arguably failed  to  properly  apply  the  Regulations.   The
    Appellant resided with her British citizen son and her Algerian husband
    who had indefinite leave to remain and who was the father of the child.
     In finding that the Appellant was the primary carer  of  her  son  the
    judge failed to consider who had responsibility for her son's care  and
    whether that responsibility was in fact shared given that the Appellant
    remained in a relationship with the child's father.

3.    Secondly  it  was  submitted  that  the  judge's  finding   that   the
    Appellant's British citizen son would be unable to reside in the United
    Kingdom if the Appellant was  required  to  leave  the  UK  was  flawed
    because her son would be able to live with his father.  The  Respondent
    relied on  Harrison  (Jamaica)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1736 at paragraph 63 which states:

         "If the EU citizen be it child or wife would  not  in  practice  be
         compelled to leave the country if the  non-EU  family  member  were
         refused the right of residence there is in my view nothing in these
         authorities  to  suggest  that  EU  law  is  engaged.   Article   8
         Convention rights may then come into the picture to protect  family
         life as the court recognised in Dereci  but  that  is  an  entirely
         distinct area of protection."

4.   The Respondent argued in the grounds that the  evidence  disclosed  did
    not suggest that the Appellant's son would be compelled to leave the UK
    if the Appellant were refused a right of  residence.  The  only  reason
    given as to why it was difficult for the Appellant's husband to  assist
    the Appellant in the care of her son was because he worked long hours.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mark
    Davies on 18th June 2015 on the ground that the  judge's  decision  was
    inadequate and contained a distinct lack of consideration of the  facts
    and the application of the law to the facts.

6.   Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that the judge's findings  at  paragraph
    8 were totally inadequate. The judge had failed to direct himself as to
    whether there was shared responsibility  and  therefore  the  Appellant
    could not be the primary carer.

7.   In relation to whether the Appellant's son would be compelled to  leave
    the UK the judge's finding was based solely on the fact that his father
    was in full-time employment.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller relied on  MA  &  SM
    (Zambrano - EU children outside the EU) Iran [2013] UKUT 00380 (IAC) at
    paragraph 41(4) where it states:

         "Nothing less than such compulsion will engage Articles 20  and  21
         of the TFEU.  In particular EU law will not be engaged where the EU
         citizen is not compelled to leave the EU.  Even if the  quality  or
         standard of life of the EU citizen is diminished as a result of the
         non-EU national upon whom he is dependent is for example removed or
         prevented from working.  Although (a) diminished in the quality  of
         life might engage EU law  if  and  only  if  it  is  sufficient  in
         practice to compel the relevant ascendant relative and hence the EU
         dependent citizen to leave and  (b)  such  actions  as  removal  or
         prevention of work may result in an interference  with  some  other
         right such as the right to respect for family life under Article  8
         of the European Convention of Human Rights."

8.   She also relied on paragraph 56 which states that:

         "There is no suggestion that the Sponsor is not capable of  looking
         after JM and FM. He has tailored his  working  hours  thus  far  to
         ensure that they fit in with the need to care for JM, and  we  have
         no doubt he would also ensure that FM was similarly cared for.  The
         mere fact that the Sponsor cannot be as economically active  as  he
         would wish, because of his care responsibilities to JM and  FM,  is
         not sufficient to support a conclusion that  JM  and  FM  would  be
         denied the genuine enjoyment of their EU  citizenship  rights,  nor
         would this be the case even if the Sponsor were  required  to  stop
         working altogether. The right of residence is a right to reside  in
         the territory of the EU. It  is  not  a  right  to  any  particular
         quality of life or to any particular standard of living (see Dereci
         at paragraph 68, and Harrison at paragraph 67)."

9.   Ms Brocklesby-Weller therefore submitted that the threshold was one  of
    compulsion.  It was not  sufficient  that  there  would  be  a  reduced
    quality of life.  In this case  the  judge  did  not  engage  with  the
    principle of MA & SM.  He relied purely on the working pattern  of  the
    father to show that the child would be compelled to leave the UK.  Many
    single parents work and look after a child.  The  judge  conflated  the
    best interest assessment with fundamentally different  concepts.  There
    was no evidence identified by the First-tier Judge that the Appellant's
    spouse was unable, but for work, to look after the child.  The Zambrano
    cases were reserved for a lone parent of a British citizen child  where
    the child would be unable to reside in the  UK.   Paragraph  8  of  the
    decision was devoid of any analysis or management of the issues in this
    case.

10.  Mr Lam submitted that there was a Presenting  Officer  at  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal and both the Appellant  and  her  spouse
    gave oral evidence and were cross-examined.  The judge's conclusions at
    paragraph 8, although brief, were open to him and his finding  of  fact
    that the Appellant was the primary carer was one that he  was  entitled
    to make given that the evidence was tested in cross-examination and  it
    was not unusual that a young child would be looked after by his  mother
    who was not working.

11.  Accordingly, the Appellant satisfied the Regulations in  that  she  was
    the primary carer of her son and  looked  after  him  on  a  day-to-day
    basis.  It was not the case that  the  EU  Regulations  demanded  'sole
    responsibility'. It was possible for responsibility to be shared by the
    father and for the mother still to be  the  primary  carer.   The  word
    primary in the  EU  Regulations  encompassed  some  element  of  shared
    responsibility.

12.  The judge might well have expressed  his  conclusions  better  but  the
    evidence supported his finding that  the  Appellant  was  in  fact  the
    primary carer and therefore this finding was open to the judge  on  the
    evidence before him.

13.  In relation to whether the Appellant's son would be  unable  to  reside
    in the UK if the Appellant was required to leave, SM and  MA  could  be
    distinguished on the facts which relied on different  regulations.   Mr
    Lam sought to rely on paragraph 42 of SM & MA and the case of  Campbell
    (exclusion: Zambrano) [2013] UKUT 00147 (IAC)  which  was  referred  to
    therein.  Again this was an  entry  clearance  case  but  the  Tribunal
    concluded in relation to the application of Zambrano principles that:

         "30.  We  see  no  reason  why  Zambrano  principles  cannot   have
             application in entry clearance cases: in both  in-country  and
             out of country cases the Member State  must  ensure  that  any
             refusal does not lead, for the Union  citizens  concerned,  to
             the denial of the genuine enjoyment of the  substance  of  the
             rights conferred by virtue of his status as a citizen  of  the
             Union: Dereci & Others (European citizenship) [2011] EUECJ  C-
             256/11, 15 November 2011, paragraph 74.  Indeed the ruling  of
             the Grand Chamber  of  the  Court  of  Justice  in  this  case
             encompassed not just the cases of those  applicants  who  were
             already living in the host  Member  State  (Austria)  but  Mrs
             Stevic who resided in Serbia (see paragraphs 26, 35, 74)."

14.  Mr Lam submitted that the Appellant's son should be able,  at  the  age
    of three years old, to remain with his mother.  This  amounted  to  the
    basic enjoyment of a substantive right  as  a  British  citizen.   Just
    being able to remain with his mother  was  a  basic  substantive  right
    conferred on the Appellant's son by virtue of his status as  a  citizen
    of the Union.  In practice, without his mother, the child would have to
    leave the UK because it was impossible for the father in this  case  to
    replace the Appellant given that the child had been with the  Appellant
    since birth and his father was in full-time employment.

15.  The genuine enjoyment  of  the  substance  of  an  EU  right  was  fact
    sensitive and in order to enjoy the basic rights as a Union citizen the
    Appellant's son should be able to  remain  with  his  mother.   Mr  Lam
    referred  to  a  First-tier  Tribunal  case  which  appeared   in   the
    Respondent's bundle and which was before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.
    There was evidence at the hearing and  testimony  in  cross-examination
    sufficient to show that the Appellant was the primary carer. There  was
    therefore sufficient evidence to show that her son would be  unable  to
    enjoy his substantive rights  as  an  EU  citizen  if  his  mother  was
    required to leave the UK.

16.  There was some discussion on how to proceed in the event  of  an  error
    being  found  given  that  the  judge's  conclusions  in  relation   to
    Regulation 15(4)(a)(iii) were arguably inadequate i.e. the second point
    of challenge for the Respondent.

17.  Mr Lam submitted that even if there was an error of law in paragraph  8
    in relation to whether the Appellant's son would have to leave  the  UK
    the error was not material because the Appellant  succeeded  under  the
    Regulations in any event.  Mr Lam invited me to remake the decision  in
    the Appellant's favour.

Discussion and Conclusions

18.  The Respondent refused the application on the basis that the  Appellant
    failed to produce a valid national passport.  Mr Lam confirmed that the
    Presenting Officer before the First-tier Tribunal had  indeed  conceded
    this point and that there was relevant evidence before  the  Respondent
    as to the Appellant's identity.  This  point  was  not  raised  in  the
    grounds of appeal and  therefore  I  proceed  on  the  basis  that  the
    Respondent  conceded  the  fact  that  the  Appellant   could   satisfy
    Regulation 18A(1)(a) of the EEA Regulations.

19.  The grounds of appeal challenge the judge's findings at paragraph 8  of
    the decision in which he states:

         "It is not contested that the  Appellant  and  her  spouse  who  is
         lawfully settled in the UK have a son who is 3 years  old.   It  is
         common ground that the child lives  with  both  his  parents  in  a
         family  unit,  that  the  child's  father  is  in  full-time  self-
         employment and that the child is a British citizen.  It seems to me
         therefore that I am bound to find that the Appellant is the primary
         carer of her 3 year old son.  That is her natural role as a  mother
         and the evidence in this case does not point to the fact  that  she
         has not been performing that role.  I am further satisfied that the
         Appellant's son would be unable to reside in  the  UK  if  she  was
         required to leave.  He would have no one to care  for  him  and  he
         would be bound to join her if she were compelled to return  to  her
         country of origin."

20.  It was the Appellant's evidence that it was hard  for  her  husband  to
    assist her with caring for her son because he worked long and irregular
    hours. The Appellant's husband was a self-employed landscape  gardener.



21.  Regulation 15A(4A) of the EEA Regulations 2006 states:

         "A person (P) who  is  not  an  exempt  person  who  satisfies  the
         criteria in paragraph 2344A or (5) of this Regulation  is  entitled
         to a derivative right to reside in the United Kingdom for  as  long
         as P satisfies the relevant criteria.  Sub-paragraph 4(a) states:

             'P satisfies the criteria  in  this  paragraph  if  P  is  the
             primary carer of  a  British  citizen,  the  relevant  British
             citizen is residing in the UK and the relevant British citizen
             would be unable to reside in the UK or in another EEA state if
             P were required to leave'."

22.  Regulation 15(7) states:

         "P is to be regarded as a primary carer of another person if P is a
         direct relative or legal guardian of  that  person  and  P  is  the
         person who has primary responsibility for  that  person's  care  or
         shares equally the  responsibility  for  that  person's  care  with
         another person who is not an exempt person."

23.  The judge found that the Appellant was a primary  carer  on  the  basis
    that she was the mother of a British citizen and that was  her  natural
    role.  The judge also found that the Appellant's son would be unable to
    reside in the UK if the Appellant was required to leave.

24.  I find that the evidence before the judge was sufficient to  show  that
    the Appellant was the primary carer, but not sufficient to support  the
    finding that the Appellant's son would be unable to reside in  the  UK.
    The child's father had indefinite leave to remain and had  been  living
    with his son  since  birth.   Although  he  was  working,  he  was  not
    incapable of looking after his son and his son would be  able  to  live
    with him if the Appellant was required to leave.

25.  The judge's finding that the Appellant was the primary carer,  although
    brief and inadequately reasoned, was not material because it was  clear
    from the evidence in the Appellant's witness statement,  her  husband's
    witness  statement  and  the  supporting  evidence  contained  in   the
    Appellant's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal, that  the  Appellant
    had day-to-day responsibility for her son and therefore she  was  as  a
    matter of fact a primary carer.  I find that this finding was  open  to
    the judge on the evidence before him and there was no error of  law  in
    respect of Regulation 15(4A).

26.  However, I find that the judge's conclusion that  the  Appellant's  son
    would be required to leave the UK was inadequately reasoned and was not
    supported by the evidence before him.  The judge merely relied  on  the
    fact that father was working.  There was insufficient evidence to  show
    that the father could not in practice care for his son and he would  be
    compelled to leave the UK with his mother.

27.  The threshold test in respect of Regulation 15A(4A)(c) is  a  high  one
    and nothing short of compulsion will satisfy that limb of the test.  In
    this case, the Appellant's child would not be required to leave the  UK
    and therefore the genuine enjoyment of his EU citizenship rights  would
    not be diminished even though the his father may  be  unable  to  work.
    This may well engage Article 8, but it was insufficient to satisfy  the
    Regulations.

28.  I am of the view that Amirteymour (EEA appeals;  human  rights)  [2015]
    UKUT 000466 (IAC) applies and therefore the Appellant  cannot  bring  a
    human rights challenge on an appeal under the  Regulations.  This  does
    not mean the Appellant cannot succeed under Article 8.

29.  Accordingly, I set aside the decision to allow  the  appeal  under  the
    Regulations and re-make it: The Appellant has failed to show  that  her
    son would be unable to reside in the UK without  her  under  Regulation
    15A(4A)(c).  There  was  insufficient  evidence  to   show   that   the
    Appellant's son would be compelled to leave the UK.  I accept that  his
    right to family life would be affected by the Appellant's  removal  and
    it is open to the Appellant to make an application on that basis.

30.  Accordingly the Respondent's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed
    insofar as the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in allowing the  appeal
    under Regulation 15A(4A)(c).  The judge's finding  that  the  Appellant
    was a primary carer still stands as there was  sufficient  evidence  to
    enable him to make such a finding.   However,  there  was  insufficient
    evidence to enable him to  find  that  the  Appellant's  son  would  be
    required to leave the UK and accordingly I  re-make  the  decision  and
    dismiss the Appellant's appeal under the Regulations.

Notice of Decision

The Respondent's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

The Appellant's appeal is dismissed under the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations
2006.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 17th September 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the Respondent's appeal I set aside the fee award  of  the
First-tier Tribunal.  I have considered making a fee award and have  decided
to make a fee award of 50% of any fee which has been paid for the  following
reason: The finding that the Appellant was a primary carer was upheld.


Signed   Date 17th September 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
