
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/27944/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20th June, 2013                            |On 3rd July, 2013            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                               xiao ling chen
                          (No anonymity order made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs L Brakaja solicitor of Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of China whose date of birth is 8th  March,
    1976.  The appellant claims to have entered the United Kingdom using  a
    false instrument to which he was not entitled.  On 20th November, 2012,
    a firm of solicitors (not those currently instructed) wrote to the Home
    Office on behalf of the appellant seeking permission for the  appellant
    to remain in the United Kingdom, on  the  basis  of  her  rights  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights
    and Fundamental Freedom.

2.   The appellant's application was refused by the respondent who, on  28th
    November, 2012, made the decision to remove the appellant as an illegal
    entrant.

3.   The appellant appealed that decision and her appeal was heard  on  31st
    January, 2013, by First-tier Tribunal Judge Katharine E Gordon.

4.   In her determination, promulgated on 13th  February,  2013,  First-tier
    Tribunal Gordon found that the appellant did enjoy family life with her
    partner and accepted that they had lived  together  since  March  2009.
    However, she went on to dismiss the appeal, suggesting  that  that  the
    appellant in decision of the House of Lords in Chikwamba v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 40, was a refugee  who  could
    not be returned to Zimbabwe and seeking to  distinguish  the  facts  of
    this appeal.  The Immigration Judge found that there was  no  certainty
    that the appellant would be allowed to return to  the  United  Kingdom,
    because  she  could  not  meet  the  maintenance  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  In considering proportionality, the judge concluded
    that the appellant's removal would not be disproportionate.

3.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Froom granted  the  appellant  permission  to
    appeal and in doing so said this:-

         "The appellant seeks  permission  in-time  to  appeal  against  the
         decision of Judge K E  Gordon,  dismissing  her  appeal  against  a
         decision of the respondent to remove her  as  an  illegal  entrant,
         having refused her application for leave to remain on human  rights
         grounds.  The judge accepted that  the  appellant  has  been  in  a
         relationship with her partner, Mr Chong Hin Siow,  and  lived  with
         him since 2009.  He is a Malaysian national with  indefinite  leave
         to remain in the United Kingdom.  The appellant did  not  meet  the
         suitability  requirements  of  the  new  rules.   The  judge   then
         considered the article 8 claim according to existing case law.  She
         concluded  that  removal  was  proportionate.   In  doing  so   she
         distinguished the case from the facts of Chikwamba.  She fund  that
         there was a 'sensible reason' for requiring the appellant to return
         to China to apply for entry clearance because she did not appear to
         be able to meet the maintenance rules.  The  judge  saw  no  reason
         family life could not be continued by means of Mr Chong joining her
         in China.  There are no children.


         The grounds seeking permission to appeal  argue,  in  essence,  the
         judge treated the maintenance rule as a condition form  success  on
         proportionality, rather than as a starting point.  The grounds also
         suggest the rules would be met in any case.  I grant leave  because
         it is arguable  that  the  judge  failed  to  apply  the  Chikwamba
         principles correctly in the light of the  subsequent  determination
         the Court of Appeal in KH (Pakistan)."

4.   The reference by First-tier Tribunal Judge Froom to KH  (Pakistan)  is,
    of course, a reference to Secretary of State for the Home Department  v
    Kizhar Hayat (Pakistan) and Arvim Treebhowan (Mauritius) v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department) [2012] EWCA Civ 1054.

5.   I indicated to Ms Pettersen that while  I  was  open  to  be  persuaded
    otherwise and had not made a decision, having  read  the  Secretary  of
    State's Rule 24 response and the Court of Appeal decision in  Hayat,  I
    was of the preliminary view that the determination could not stand.  Ms
    Pettersen indicated that she agreed with me.

6.    I  referred  both  representatives  to  paragraph  7  of  the   Senior
    President's Practice Statement and indicated that I was minded to remit
    the appeal for hearing before  the  First-tier.   Both  representatives
    indicated that they would not object to this course.

7.   Paragraph 7 of the Senior President's Practice  Statement  provides  as
    follows:-


         "7.  Disposal of appeals in Upper Tribunal


         7.1  Where under Section 12(1)of   the  2007  Act  (Proceedings  on
             appeal to the Upper Tribunal) the Upper  Tribunal  finds  that
             the making of the decision concerned involved the making of an
             error on a point of law, the Upper Tribunal may set aside  the
             decision and, if it does so, must either remit the case to the
             First-tier Tribunal under Section 12(2)(b)(i) or  proceed  (in
             accordance with relevant Practice Directions)  to  remake  the
             decision under Section 12(2)(b)(ii).


         7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
             to remake the decision, instead of remitting the case  to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that:-


             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for that party's case to be put and considered
                  by the First-tier Tribunal; or


             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact-finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
                  remade is such  that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                  objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal.


         7.3  Remaking rather than remitting  will  nevertheless  constitute
             the normal approach to determining appeals where an  error  of
             law kin found, even if some further fact-finding is necessary.


8.   I am satisfied  that  this  is  a  case  which  falls  squarely  within
    paragraph 7 of the Senior President's  Practice  Statement,  given  the
    length of time the parties would have to wait for the matter to be  re-
    listed before me in either North Shields or in Field House and that  it
    could, conversely, be  heard  relatively  speedily  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and in view of the overriding objective informing  the  onward
    conduct of this appeal, I have decided that the appeal be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh before a First-tier Tribunal
    Judge, other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Katharine E Gordon.


        [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
