
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27196/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 February 2015                           |On 5 May 2015                 |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 RUBAB JAVID
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Rashid, instructed by Southern Solicitors


                            DECISION and REASONS


 1. A memorandum was sent to the parties  following  my  oral  decision  to
    allow this appeal at the hearing on 25 February 2015 in  the  following
    terms.

      a) It has been necessary for me to reconsider my decision given at the
         hearing to allow this appeal.

      b) First-tier Tribunal Judge De Haney dismissed  the  appeals  by  the
         parents on Article 8 grounds considered under the Rules  and  on  a
         second stage basis but allowed the appeal by the respondent.   This
         was because he had been persuaded that the provision she relied  on
         under paragraph 276ADE was not a subject to the qualification  that
         was added on 12 December 2012  ... "and it would not be  reasonable
         to expect the applicant to leave the UK".

      c) The parents unsuccessfully applied for permission to appeal to  the
         Upper Tribunal.  The Secretary of State also applied for permission
         to appeal in relation to the decision on the respondent.  This  was
         on the basis that the judge had  erred  by  failing  to  take  into
         account HC 820.  The Statement of Changes in HC  760  inserted  the
         following wording into paragraph 276ADE:

         "201. In paragraph 276ADE(iv) (after  'discounting  any  period  of
             imprisonment'), insert ', and it would not  be  reasonable  to
             expect the applicant to leave the UK'".

      d) As to the transitional  provisions  HC  760  provided  that  if  an
         applicant had made an application  for  entry  clearance  or  leave
         before 13 December 2012 and it had not been decided,  it  would  be
         decided in accordance with the Rules in force on 12 December 2012.

      e) These transitional arrangements were however  amended  by  HC  820.
         The effect of that amendment was that the  changes  to  inter  alia
         paragraph 276 in HC 760 were to apply to all  applications  decided
         on or after 13 December 2012 regardless of the date the application
         was made.

      f) Mr Rashid explained in the course of review at the  outset  of  the
         hearing that were the decision to be  remade,  the  claimant  would
         succeed under a different provision of paragraph 276ADE(v):

         "Is aged 18 years or above and under 25  years  and  has  spent  at
         least half of his life living continuously in the  UK  (discounting
         any period of imprisonment); ..."

         This category does not carry with it  any  reasonableness  or  ties
         test. Accordingly he conceded that the judge had  made  a  material
         error and that there was  in  force  a  reasonableness  requirement
         applicable to the category under  276ADE  when  considered  in  the
         decision.

      g) Reporting on a discussion he  had  had  with  Mr  Diwnycz,  it  was
         accepted that the respondent had entered the United  Kingdom  on  6
         March 2005 which indicated that she had to date  spent  nine  years
         eight months and four days in Pakistan and nine years eleven months
         and seventeen days in the UK.  He  invited  me  to  set  aside  the
         decision and remake it on the basis of allowing the appeal.

      h) Mr Diwnycz was content to leave matters in my hands.

      i) I announced that I set aside the decision insofar as it related  to
         the respondent and I allowed the appeal.

      j) I have reflected on what I have heard.  Whilst it is  correct  that
         the claimant has now been here for a sufficient period of  time  to
         qualify under paragraph 276ADE(v), the rule requires  that  at  the
         date of application she came within one of the six categories. I am
         therefore unable to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

      k) Although Mr Rashid indicated that he no longer wished  to  rely  on
         Article  8  grounds,  I  consider  it  entirely  proper  in   these
         circumstances for him to now do so.

      l) It was evident at the hearing that Mr Diwnycz did not challenge the
         assertion by Mr Rashid that the respondent is now able to meet  the
         requirements of the rule.  Of course he is not  in  a  position  to
         concede compliance where it is simply  not  possible  on  a  proper
         construction of the rule. Nevertheless the ability of her  to  meet
         the requirements of  the  Rules  were  she  now  to  reapply  is  a
         compelling factor under Article 8.

      m) Accordingly unless within ten working days from  the  date  of  the
         sending out of this memorandum I receive  a  proposal  from  either
         party objecting to this course, I will allow the appeal on  Article
         8 grounds.

 2. There has been no response from either party. I set aside the  decision
    of the FtT and allow the appeal on article 8 grounds.




Signed                                  Date 1 May 2015

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


