
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27362/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31st October 2016                 |On 22nd November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                raheela begum
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Sarwar of A S H Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Mrs Abone


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Pakistan born on 10th August 1983.
     The Appellant first arrived in the UK on 25th September 2006 when  she
    was given limited leave to enter until 8th September 2008 as the spouse
    of a British citizen, Hakeel Khan.  Thereafter  the  Appellant  made  a
    number of unsuccessful applications for further leave to  remain  as  a
    spouse and also  on  the  basis  of  long  residence.   Eventually  the
    Appellant applied for leave  to  remain  on  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds on 28th January 2014.  That application  was  refused  for  the
    reasons given in the  Respondent's  letter  of  17th  June  2014.   The
    Appellant appealed, and her appeal was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Mathews (the Judge) sitting at Stoke-on-Trent on 24th June  2015.
    He decided to dismiss the appeal on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection,
    and human rights grounds, and also under the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision,  and  on  28th  October
    2015 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Appellant's case was that he was at risk on return to Pakistan from
    her husband's  family  whom  she  had  married  against  their  wishes.
    Otherwise, the Appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with
    her husband, and it would not be possible for him to return to Pakistan
    with her, and that the Respondent's decision amounted to  a  breach  of
    the Appellant's rights under Article 8 ECHR.

 4. The Judge dismissed the appeal because he found  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor as regards the  risk  on  return  lacking  in
    credibility.   The  Judge  described  the  evidence  as  contradictory,
    lacking in detail, and implausible.  The Judge also took account of the
    Appellant's delay in claiming protection.   In  any  event,  the  Judge
    found that the Appellant could safely relocate within Pakistan.

 5. It was agreed between the parties at the  hearing  that  the  Appellant
    could not benefit from the provisions of Appendix  FM  of  HC  395  and
    particularly paragraph EX.1 because of the timing of  her  application.
    In the alternative, the Judge decided that there were no insurmountable
    obstacles to the Appellant's husband returning to  Pakistan  with  her.
    Further, the Judge found that the Appellant had not resided in  the  UK
    for long enough to be able to rely on paragraph 276ADE of HC  395,  and
    that there were no factors not already taken into account  which  would
    allow him to consider the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights outside  of
    the Immigration Rules.

 6. At the hearing, Mr Sarwar argued that the Judge had  erred  in  law  in
    these conclusions.  The Judge had been prejudiced against the Appellant
    from the  outset  in  the  error  as  regards  the  timeliness  of  the
    Appellant's application referred to  at  paragraphs  4  and  5  of  the
    Decision,  and  this  error  had  infected  the  Judge's  view  of  the
    credibility  of  the  evidence.   In  any  event,  the  Appellant   had
    satisfactorily explained any delay.  The Judge had  also  misunderstood
    the evidence of the Appellant who had married her husband  in  Pakistan
    fully aware of the situation.  Also the Judge had failed to put to  the
    Appellant his finding in the Decision that the Appellant  could  safely
    relocate within Pakistan.

 7. As regards Article 8, Mr Sarwar submitted that the Judge had  erred  in
    law in finding that there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's husband returning to Pakistan with her partly  because  the
    Appellant's husband had not produced evidence of his employment in  the
    UK.  In fact, in the Appellant's Bundle there was documentary  evidence
    of  such  from  HMRC.   The  Judge  had  not   fully   considered   the
    proportionality of the Respondent's decision, and  had  been  wrong  to
    find that it would not be unreasonable for the Appellant to  return  to
    Pakistan and seek entry clearance from there.

 8. In response, Mrs Abone referred to the Rule 24 response and argued that
    there were  no  such  material  errors  of  law.   The  Judge  had  not
    misunderstood the chronology of  the  Appellant's  immigration  history
    which he had set out at paragraphs 4 and 5 of the Decision,  and  dealt
    with at paragraphs 22 and 27.  The Judge had made findings open to  him
    on the evidence.

 9. As regards Article 8 ECHR, the Judge had dealt  with  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE of HC 395 and those decisions had not been challenged.
     The Judge had properly and fully considered the Appellant's Article  8
    rights both within and outside the Immigration Rules.

10. I find no material error of law in the decision of the  Judge  which  I
    therefore do not set aside.  The Judge dismissed the appeal  on  asylum
    and humanitarian protection grounds because he did  not  find  credible
    the evidence of the circumstances of the  Appellant's  marriage.   This
    was a decision open to the Judge and which  he  fully  explained.   The
    Judge identified inconsistencies, vagueness,  and  implausibilities  in
    the evidence.  He gave  adequate  reasons  over  and  above  his  view,
    perhaps mistaken, that the Appellant had delayed in seeking protection.
     In any event, any error in  this  respect  is  immaterial  because  at
    paragraph 28 of the Decision the Judge found the Appellant not to be at
    risk on return even taking her case at its highest.

11. As regards Article 8 ECHR, the Judge dealt properly  with  Appendix  FM
    and paragraph 276ADE of HC 395.  He made a finding that there  were  no
    insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's  spouse  returning   to
    Pakistan with her.  Again this was a decision open  to  the  Judge  and
    which  he  fully  explained.   Any  error  concerning   the   Sponsor's
    employment in the UK was only a small part of  that  consideration  and
    not determinative.  At paragraph 42 of the Decision the  Judge  decided
    that there were no further factors for him to consider outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The Judge was therefore  correct  not  to  consider
    proportionality as such in accordance with the decision in  SS  (Congo)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

12. For these reasons I find no material error of law in  the  decision  of
    the Judge.



Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so and indeed I find no reason to do so.  I  therefore  make  no
order.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

