
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27569/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 September 2017                         |On 09 October 2017            |



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                           Catherine Frida bafour
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mold, Counsel instructed by Daniel Aramide
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Graves promulgated 30 December 2016.  The  grounds  pursuant  to  which
    permission was sought read as follows:
         "2.1 It is submitted that the  failure  to  consider  all  relevant
             evidence, give adequate reasons for findings and make adequate
             findings of fact amounts to an error of law which is  material
             to the outcome of the appeal"

    It is contended that the appellant had submitted P60s for the last five
    years of residence in the United Kingdom and that the Immigration Judge
    had misdirected himself by not specifying which year was  not  accepted
    with respect of the appellant's residence.

2.   In granting permission to appeal on 26 July 2017,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Page said:

         "The application argues that the appellant had  submitted  evidence
         of his tax records for the previous five years of residence in  the
         UK and the judge has erred by not specifying where the judge  found
         there was a gap in the evidence of the appellant exercising  Treaty
         rights in the United Kingdom after the date of her divorce".

3.   There was then a Rule 24 response by the Home Office, the salient  part
    of which is at paragraph 3:

         "In a well reasoned determination the judge considered all  of  the
         evidence and concluded as was open to him that the appellant is not
         entitled to a  permanent  residence  card.   The  judge  refers  to
         evidential gaps at [16], [17] and [29].   The  burden  was  on  the
         appellant to make her case which she clearly failed to discharge."

4.    The  determination  is  full  and   lucid   determination   addressing
    significant absences of documentary and other evidence. The judge asked
    Mr Mold of Counsel to confirm which five year period the appellant  was
    relying upon ([16] and [17]), concluding:

         "I note that even at its  highest  the  appellant's  own  financial
         documents did not cover the period up to the date of hearing  since
         they end in 2016."

5.   The judge at [28], having touched on  the  applicable  periods  several
times already     states:

     "I therefore find that there is sufficient evidence  before  me,  based
         on the HMRC documentation in the respondent's bundle, to find  that
         the sponsor was exercising Treaty rights between  31  January  2012
         and the date of divorce.  The HMRC document says  the  sponsor  was
         employed with Anabas from 31 January 2012 to 5 June  2014,  and  by
         Champion Employment between 6 July 2012 to 1  November  2013.   For
         each employer he earned a non incidental amount  of  gross  income.
         He  was  then  employed  between  March  2014  and  July  2014  for
         International Subcontracting and appeared to have ceased all of his
         various employments by July 2014, which was the month in which  the
         divorce was decreed.  He may well have registered as self employed,
         but only made returns from 2012 for a small amount of turnover."

6.   Then at [29]:

     "There is evidence before me to demonstrate,  to  the  civil  standard,
         that the sponsor was employed between  31  January  2012  and  July
         2014.  In the months immediately before  31  January  2012  I  find
         there is insufficient evidence to establish that he was  exercising
         Treaty rights."

7.   Mr Mold, who again  appears  for  the  appellant  this  morning,  quite
    rightly points out that there is an error in the grant of permission to
    appeal in that it refers to the appellant's exercise of  treaty  rights
    rather than those of the sponsor. Leaving that aside, he very  properly
    states that the ground upon which permission has been  granted  is  not
    one which is sustainable on the evidence.  Not having  instructions  to
    concede the appeal, he has left the matter for my determination.

8.   I come inevitably to the conclusion that there is no error  of  law  in
    the determination of the First-tier Tribunal and in those circumstances
    I dismiss this appeal.


Notice of Decision

   1) Appeal dismissed and determination of First-tier Tribunal affirmed.


   2) No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Mark Hill                 Date          9 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

