
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/27341/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 24 August 2015                    |On 26 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                               MR LYES LEFFAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Jacobs, Counsel (instructed by BMAP)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1.     The Appellant appealed with permission granted on 2 June 2015 by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish against  the  dismissal  of  his
         appeal seeking the issue of a residence card under regulation 7  of
         the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (as
         amended) ("the  EEA  Regulations")  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Raymond in a  determination  promulgated  on  2  April  2015.   The
         Appellant is a national of Algeria, born on 31 July 1977.   He  had
         denied that his  marriage  to  a  Hungarian  national  was  one  of
         convenience.

    2.     Judge Raymond found that the Appellant's  marriage  was  one  of
         convenience, i.e., was a sham.

    3.     Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  Frankish  because  he
         considered it arguable that the  judge  had  reached  an  incorrect
         assessment of the evidence, and in particular had  failed  to  take
         into account the Home Office Presenting Officer's concession at the
         hearing that there were no material discrepancies in the record  of
         the Home Office interview(s) of the couple.

    4.     By notice under rule 24 of the Upper Tribunal  Procedure  Rules,
         the Respondent (the Secretary of State) indicated that she  opposed
         the application for permission to appeal.

    5.     Mr Jacobs for the Appellant produced  a  redacted  copy  of  his
         email to his instructing solicitors dated 12 November  2014,  which
         recorded the Home Office Presenting Officer's concession.  This was
         particularly relevant because the interview records  had  not  been
         produced at  the  hearing.   There  had  been  material  procedural
         unfairness amounting to an error of law.  The decision and  reasons
         should be set aside and the appeal reheard before another judge.

    6.     Ms Fijwala for the Respondent (the Secretary of State) relied on
         the rule 24 notice.  There was no note  on  the  Respondent's  file
         recording any concession about the interview record.  The  findings
         which the judge reached had been open to  him.   The  determination
         contained no material error of law.

    7.     At the conclusion of submissions the tribunal  stated  it  found
         that there were material errors of law by First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Raymond in his determination. The tribunal  reserved  its  decision
         which now follows.

    8.     The tribunal  regrets  to  note  that  the  experienced  judge's
         determination was promulgated very late  indeed.   The  hearing  in
         Richmond was on 12 November 2014 and yet the determination was  not
         promulgated until 2 April 2015, which is some 5 months  afterwards.
         That is simply not acceptable.  The parties can have no  confidence
         that the judge has recalled the facts accurately and  exactly  that
         complaint is made in the grounds of onwards appeal.   At  [131]  of
         his determination the judge noted that there were matters where  he
         might have been willing to extend the Appellant the benefit of  the
         doubt, which indicates that he considered that the appeal  was  not
         entirely clear cut.  That  made  accuracy  and  promptness  in  the
         analysis of the evidence of importance.

    9.     The critical issue, in the tribunal's view, was whether  or  not
         there had been a concession about the marriage interview record  by
         the Home Office Presenting Officer at the hearing.  Nothing to that
         effect was mentioned in the determination.  The judge's  record  of
         proceedings, so far as it can be read, is silent.  It was the case,
         however, that the Respondent failed to  produce  the  interview(s),
         which she most certainly ought  to  have  done.   The  judge  quite
         rightly continued with the hearing, but  (having  decided  to  take
         that approach) ought to have been very cautious in his treatment of
         discrepancies  said  to  be  from  that  source.   Importantly  and
         crucially, Mr Jacobs's  contemporaneous  note  to  his  instructing
         solicitors is categorical that there were concessions made  by  the
         Home Office Presenting Officer.  There is no reason  to  doubt  the
         accuracy of Mr Jacobs's note.  Such concessions would have been the
         right course in the circumstances.  The tribunal accordingly  finds
         that the concessions relied on by the Appellant  were  made,  which
         the judge had unfortunately forgotten about by the time he analysed
         the evidence months after the hearing.

    10.    The tribunal does not intend to suggest that the judge's  robust
         yet careful analysis might otherwise not have  been  open  to  him.
         Many of the points adverse to the Appellant he has made are  sound,
         but the judge seems not to have  recalled  that  the  wedding  gift
         jewellery  was  produced  to  him  at  the  hearing.   Again   this
         undermines the determination.

    11.    The tribunal concludes  that  these  matters  go  to  procedural
         fairness.  There could have been a different outcome.  They  amount
         to material errors of law, such that the determination cannot stand
         and must be set aside.  The onwards appeal succeeds.

    12.    It was not possible to rehear the appeal as no interpreters were
         available.  The interview records were not available either.  These
         records must be produced by  the  Respondent  when  the  appeal  is
         reheard.

    DECISION

    There  were  material  errors  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision, such that the decision must be set aside.

    The appeal must be reheard at the Hatton  Cross  hearing  centre  by  a
    judge other than First-tier Tribunal Raymond, on a date  to  be  fixed.
    Interpreters in Algerian and in  Hungarian  must  be  booked  for  that
    hearing.  The Respondent must produce, at least 14 days prior to the re-
    hearing, typed copies of any interview records on which she  wishes  to
    rely.




    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


