
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27671/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 December 2016                   |On 18 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                            Olabode Dauda Falade
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Lazar of Highland Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Cope)  dismissing  his   appeal   against   the
    respondent's decision of 15 July 2015 refusing to issue him with an EEA
    residence card as a family member of an EEA national who  has  retained
    the right of residence.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria  born  on  1  January  1972.   He
    first came to the UK on 12 February 2005.  Subsequently, he met a Dutch
    citizen who was living in this country.  A relationship  developed  and
    on 13 August 2008 they were married.  The appellant was issued  with  a
    residence card on 9 September 2009 valid for five years.  His wife  was
    working as an  office  assistant  but  in  2009  she  started  her  own
    hairdressing  business.   From  2011  the   appellant   worked   as   a
    manufacturing operator.   On  23  October  2013  he  returned  home  to
    discover his wife having an affair with another man.  As  a  result  of
    this incident she left the home the following day and the appellant has
    not seen her since.  He started divorce proceedings in January 2014 and
    the decree absolute was issued on 19 May 2014.  On  4  August  2014  he
    made an application for a further EEA residence card.

3.   His application was refused as his EEA  family  member  had  failed  to
    provide evidence that she was a qualified person as set out in  reg.  6
    of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the
    Regulations").  In the Reasons for Refusal Letter dated  15  July  2015
    the respondent set the matter out more fully, saying that in  order  to
    qualify for a residence  card  an  applicant  must  provide  sufficient
    evidence to demonstrate that their EEA  family  member  was  exercising
    their treaty rights in the United Kingdom as defined under  reg.  6  of
    the Regulations.  The appellant had submitted a number of documents but
    the respondent was not satisfied that there was sufficient evidence  to
    show that his wife had been economically active in the UK at  the  time
    of the application.  The respondent said that if  his  wife  was  self-
    employed up until the date of divorce, she would have expected  to  see
    regular  tax  and  national   insurance   contributions,   HMRC   self-
    assessments,   invoices,   advertising,   business   bank   statements,
    accountancy letters and monthly accounts for her business.

The Hearing Before the First-tier Tribunal

4.   The appellant appealed against the respondent's  decision.   He  relied
    on the evidence referred to by the judge at [40] as follows:

         "This evidence is in the form of thirteen receipts in the  name  of
         Daimarie Mobile Hairdresser from the period 8 January  2011  to  12
         January 2014; various HMRC tax  and  national  insurance  documents
         from the period 27 October 2010 to March 2014; a business  card  in
         the name of Daimarie Mobile Hairdresser; and  an  e-mail  dated  31
         December 2013 from Nottingham Post classified advertisement agents,
         together with the advertisement in  the  name  of  Daimarie  Mobile
         Hairdresser."

5.   The judge identified the issue before him as whether as at the date  of
    the termination of the marriage the  appellant's  wife  was  exercising
    treaty rights, whereas after that date the focus switched to  the  non-
    EEA national working or being self-employed as though an EEA  national.



6.   The judge was concerned about how some of the documents relied  on  had
    come into the possession of the appellant who had taken them from  post
    sent to his wife where they had been living together.  However, in  the
    light of MB (Iran) [2012] UKUT 00019  he  accepted  that  the  evidence
    should be admitted and taken into account.  However, for the reasons he
    gave in [56]-[64] he did not accept that the appellant was  a  credible
    witness or that the documents produced could be relied on.  He said  at
    [65] and [66]:

         "65. I am afraid that the only conclusion that I can draw  is  that
             the appellant is not telling the truth about the circumstances
             of any contact or relationship that he had with  Ms  Allee  up
             until the time that the decree  absolute  was  issued  in  May
             2014.  I am therefore unable to accept his assertion  that  Ms
             Allee was in fact exercising treaty rights up until that time.

         66.  In any event there is quite  simply  no  documentary  evidence
             before me to show that Ms Allee was actually exercising treaty
             rights up until the date of the decree  absolute  -  the  last
             piece of documentary evidence in the form of receipts is dated
             12 January 2014.  Because the HMRC documentation by its nature
             is concerned with tax years, I do not consider that  it  shows
             that she was actually working or was self-employed in May 2014
             as opposed to sometime earlier in the tax year 2013-2014."

7.   It had been submitted on behalf of the appellant that where, as in  the
    present case it was difficult to obtain  relevant  documents  from  the
    divorced EEA national spouse, then  the  respondent  should  assist  by
    using s. 40 of the UK Borders Act  2007  ("the  2007  Act")  to  obtain
    relevant documentation from HMRC of Ms Allee's national  insurance  and
    tax documents to show whether she was working.  The judge was  referred
    to Amos v Secretary of State [2011] EWCA Civ 552  in  support  of  this
    submission, but  the  judge  took  the  view  that  this  reliance  was
    misplaced as Burnton LJ had made it very clear at paras  34ff  that  it
    was for an applicant to establish his case and that there was  no  duty
    on the respondent to carry out enquiries to assist him.  The judge  was
    accordingly not satisfied that the appellant had shown that his  former
    wife was exercising treaty rights at the time of the decree absolute in
    May 2014 and he therefore failed to show that he was  entitled  to  the
    issue of an EEA residence card under reg. 10(5) of the Regulations.

The Grounds and Submissions

8.   In the  grounds  it  is  argued  that  the  respondent  ought  to  have
    exercised her powers under s. 40 of the 2007 Act  to  request  evidence
    from HMRC, or in the alternative failed  to  consider  or  act  on  the
    policy guidance set out in "Family Members of  European  Economic  Area
    (EEA) nationals who have retained the right  of  residence  -  V  2.0".
    This guidance suggested that in such cases the respondent must  take  a
    pragmatic approach in assisting applicants unable to supply evidence of
    their former partner's exercise of treaty rights.  In  his  submissions
    Mr Lazar accepted that he could not rely on s. 40 of the 2007 Act as it
    simply provided that HMRC "may ... supply the Secretary of  State  with
    information" for various identified  purposes.   He  accepted  that  he
    could not support  an  argument  that  the  respondent  ought  to  have
    exercised such powers in the present case.  He also  accepted  that  in
    Amos v Secretary of State the onus was on the  appellant  to  establish
    his case.  However, he submitted that the respondent had failed to take
    into account her published guidance that it was open to her to  take  a
    pragmatic approach in cases where an applicant was unable to obtain the
    documents needed to support an application.  Had such  assistance  been
    given, so he argued, it might well be that there would be  evidence  to
    support the appellant's claim.

9.   Mr Harrison submitted that it was for the respondent to decide  whether
    and when to make enquiries on  an  applicant's  behalf.   The  guidance
    imposed no obligation  on  the  respondent  and  it  was  a  matter  of
    discretion in each particular case whether to make such inquiries.

Assessment of the Issues

10.  The only ground being pursued by the appellant is  the  assertion  that
    the respondent failed to follow her own policy guidance and should have
    made enquiries on his  behalf.   The  grounds  refer  to  the  Tribunal
    judgment in R (Singh) v Secretary of State  IJR  [2016]  UKUT  0058  as
    support  for  the  proposition  that  the  respondent's  discretion  is
    fettered by its own published policy.  In that case it  was  argued  on
    behalf of an applicant that the respondent failed to follow her  policy
    "Requests for Removal Directions"  which  applied  when  a  person  had
    requested in a letter before action in judicial review proceedings that
    a removal decision been made.  In fact, the  judge  was  not  satisfied
    that the applicant was able to show that any request falling within the
    terms of the policy had been made but I accept as a matter of principle
    that a discretion may be fettered by a subsequent published policy  and
    that discretion will need to  be  exercised  in  accordance  with  that
    policy.

11.  The policy relied on in the present case is set out at pages 31 and  32
    of the instructions relating to family members  of  EEA  nationals  who
    have retained the right of residence.  This indicates that regs. 16, 17
    and 18 of the Regulations put the responsibility on  the  applicant  to
    provide the necessary proof that they are eligible for  a  document  to
    confirm their right of residence  in  the  UK.   This  is  entirely  in
    accordance with the  judgment  in  Amos  v  Secretary  of  State.   The
    instructions go on to say  that  "In  cases  where  there  has  been  a
    breakdown in the relationship  between  the  applicant  and  their  EEA
    national sponsor, it may not always be possible to  get  the  documents
    that are needed to support their application".  Examples are  given  of
    such situations as  where  the  applicant  was  a  victim  of  domestic
    violence or where the  relationship has  ended  acrimoniously  but  the
    applicant has provided evidence to show every effort is being  made  to
    provide the required documents, for  example,  by  attempting  to  make
    contact with the EEA national during divorce proceedings.

12.  The instruction then reads:

         "When dealing with these cases you must take a pragmatic approach:

         .    consider each case on its merits and

         .    if you are satisfied the applicant  cannot  get  the  evidence
             themselves make enquiries on their behalf where possible.  You
             must get the agreement of your senior caseworker before  doing
             so."

13.  The instructions say that where it is agreed that additional  enquiries
    can be made the applicant must give as much detail as  they  can  about
    the EEA national sponsor and if they can give the name of the  employer
    or their place of study or existing records, the caseworker may contact
    the employer but adds that "you must base your decision whether  to  do
    so according to the facts of the individual case and with the agreement
    of a senior caseworker".  It continues that if the  caseworker  decides
    not to get the information directly from the EEA national's employer or
    because the EEA national is self-employed,  then  the  caseworker  must
    make enquires with HMRC to try and gather the necessary information.

14.  It is clear from these instructions that  this  is  a  matter  for  the
    caseworker to decide on the facts of each individual  application.   In
    the present case the appellant submitted documents in  support  of  the
    application which were regarded as insufficient by the  respondent  who
    in the Reasons for Refusal Letter identified the kind of documents  she
    would expect to see.  However, the appellant did not seek any help from
    the respondent at that stage, nor had he done so  previously.   At  the
    hearing of the appeal before the  judge  he  relied  on  the  documents
    previously submitted, but these were  rejected  for  clear  and  cogent
    reasons as given by the judge.

15.  I am not satisfied that  these  instructions  fetter  the  respondent's
    discretion in how an application should be assessed  save  to  indicate
    that a pragmatic approach must  be  taken.   It  is  a  requirement  to
    consider each case on its merits and if satisfied  that  the  applicant
    cannot get the evidence themselves,  make  enquiries  on  their  behalf
    where possible.  As I  have  already  said  in  the  present  case  the
    appellant never indicated that he could not get  the  evidence  himself
    nor did he seek the respondent's assistance. I am satisfied that on the
    information and evidence before her the respondent was  fully  entitled
    to determine the application on the evidence produced.  This is  not  a
    case  where  it  can  be  said  that  she  failed  to  follow  her  own
    instructions. The judge did not err  in  law  by  failing  to  consider
    whether the respondent had complied with these guidelines which in  any
    event were not produced or relied on at the  hearing  before  him.  Had
    they been, he would inevitably have come to the same conclusion.



Decision

16.  I am not satisfied that  the  judge  erred  in  law  and  his  decision
    stands.  His findings and conclusions were properly open to him for the
    reasons he gave.  No anonymity direction was  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


Signed   H J E Latter  Date: 13 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
