
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27013/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Reasons Promulgated |
|On 29 May 2019                                |On 05 June 2019              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                          md nazrul islam chowdhury
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Shah of Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 28 July 1977. He has
      been given permission to appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Khan dismissing his  appeal  against  the  respondent's
      decision to refuse his human rights claim.

   2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom in September 2007 with  leave
      to enter as a visitor valid until March 2008. He overstayed his  leave
      and  entered  into  an  Islamic  marriage  with  [LH],  a  citizen  of
      Bangladesh who had been naturalised on 3 March  2004.  On  2  November
      2011 they underwent a civil marriage and on 6 May 2012  the  appellant
      submitted a spouse application which he later withdrew. On 7 July 2012
      he submitted a further application for leave to  remain  as  a  spouse
      which was refused without a right of appeal on 26  February  2013.  He
      was issued with a removal decision and submitted a section 120  notice
      which was considered as a human  rights  claim  and  was  refused  and
      certified as clearly unfounded under section 94(1) of the Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  on  26  August  2014.  Following  the
      appellant's judicial  review  claim  challenging  that  decision,  the
      Respondent withdrew the decision and made a fresh decision on 14  July
      2015 refusing the application with an in-country right of appeal.

   3. In the decision of 14 July  2015  the  respondent  accepted  that  the
      appellant had a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a  British
      citizen but considered that there were no insurmountable obstacles  to
      family life continuing in Bangladesh.  The  respondent  noted,  in  so
      concluding, that the appellant's wife had lived in Bangladesh for most
      of her adult life before coming to the UK, that her children were over
      the age of 18 and were independent, that her medical  condition  could
      be treated in Bangladesh, that she was not working in the UK  but  was
      in receipt of benefits and that her  mother  was  in  Bangladesh.  The
      respondent considered that the appellant  was  unable,  therefore,  to
      meet the requirements of Appendix FM and that he could  not  meet  the
      requirements in paragraph 276ADE(1)  or  demonstrate  any  exceptional
      circumstances justifying a grant  of  leave  outside  the  immigration
      rules.

   4. The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was heard  on
      9 November 2018 by First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan. The judge heard
      from the appellant and his wife.  He  concluded  that  there  were  no
      insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in  Bangladesh  and
      that the appellant could not succeed within or outside the immigration
      rules. He dismissed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

   5. The appellant sought permission to appeal the decision  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal, on the grounds that the judge had failed to apply  the  EX.1
      test and had not considered the appellant's family life  and  that  he
      had confused the rules and the Article 8.

   6. Permission was granted and the case came before Deputy Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Chana who upheld the decision. However  Judge  Chana's  decision
      was subsequently set aside by the Court of  Appeal  on  the  basis  of
      procedural irregularity as she had mixed up different files in  making
      her decision, referring to the wrong judges who had made  the  initial
      decision and granted permission.

   7. The case was then remitted to the Upper Tribunal and came before me to
      revisit the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Khan and the grounds
      challenging his decision.

   8. Mr Shah submitted that Judge Khan's decision had to be set aside as he
      had confused the  different  tests  in  EX.1(b)  of  Appendix  FM  and
      paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and at [28] had applied the "very  significant
      obstacles" test rather than the test in EX.1(b).  Mr  Shah  relied  on
      the decision of Elayi (fair hearing - appearance) [2016] UKUT 00508 in
      submitting that justice  needed  to  be  seen  to  be  done.  Mr  Shah
      submitted further that the judge had failed properly to  consider  the
      appellant's wife's circumstances. The appellant had been deprived of a
      fair hearing and the decision could not stand.

   9. Mr Lindsay submitted that the judge had applied the  correct  test  in
      EX.1(b) and that his reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) at [28]  was
      neither here nor there and was probably just a  mistake.  It  was  not
      such as to vitiate his consideration of the correct test.  Mr  Lindsay
      submitted that even if the judge had erred  in  his  consideration  of
      EX.1(b) the appellant could not succeed on that basis on the facts and
      evidence before the judge. There was nothing capable of  demonstrating
      insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in Bangladesh.

  10. Mr Shah reiterated his previous submissions in response.

Consideration and findings

  11. I do not find any merit in the appellant's  grounds  of  challenge.  I
      agree with Mr Lindsay that the reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) at
      [28] of the decision was most likely a mistake and that the last  line
      of that paragraph had probably been added in error. Whilst  the  judge
      may have been somewhat careless in that  respect,  and  perhaps  could
      have set out his findings in a clearer and more logical fashion, it is
      plain that he applied the correct tests and applied the  law  properly
      in reaching the decision that he did. It is undeniably the  case  that
      the judge gave full  and  proper  consideration  to  the  question  of
      insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing  in  Bangladesh  in
      accordance with the  provisions  in  EX.1(b).  At  [26]  and  [27]  he
      considered the appellant's ability to find  employment  in  Bangladesh
      and his wife's ties to the UK and  to  Bangladesh.  I  agree  with  Mr
      Lindsay that on the evidence available to  him  the  judge  was  fully
      entitled  to  conclude  as  he  did  in  regard  to  the  question  of
      insurmountable obstacles and indeed could not have reached  any  other
      conclusion. Accordingly  the  judge's  findings  on  Appendix  FM  are
      unassailable.

  12. Likewise the judge, at [32],  properly  found  that  the  criteria  in
      paragraph  276ADE(1)  could  not  be  met  and  went  on  to  consider
      proportionality outside the rules on wider Article 8 grounds.  He  had
      full regard to the public interest factors in section 117B of the 2002
      Act and reached a proper conclusion on the evidence before him.

  13. I do not consider that the judge's reference to paragraph 276ADE(1) at
      [28]  gives  rise  to  any  issues  of  procedural   irregularity   or
      unfairness. The appellant had a full  and  fair  hearing.  He  had  an
      opportunity to provide evidence about his circumstances in the UK  and
      Bangladesh and those of  his  wife  and  the  judge's  decision  fully
      informed him of the reasons why his claim was unsuccessful.

  14. The remainder of the appellant's grounds take issue with  the  judge's
      findings on the evidence at [25].  The  judge  properly  recorded  the
      evidence before him and was  entitled  to  consider  that  there  were
      inconsistencies and discrepancies arising in that evidence. The  judge
      had full regard to all the evidence, he gave proper  consideration  to
      the appellant's and his wife's family and other circumstances  in  the
      UK and the circumstances to which they would return in Bangladesh  and
      he applied the relevant tests to the evidence. He was  fully  entitled
      to make the adverse findings that he did. There is no basis upon which
      his decision can be said to contain errors  of  law  and  I  therefore
      uphold his decision and dismiss the appellant's appeal.

DECISION

  15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.

Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  31 May 2019
