
[pic]

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27245/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th January 2015                          |On 12th January 2015          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                            master luvnish juggoo
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Hussain, of Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Myers)  allowing
    Master  Luvnish  Juggoo's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision of 13th June 2014 to refuse to issue him with  a  registration
    certificate as confirmation of his right of  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom under community law.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I shall refer  to  the  Secretary  of
    State as "the Respondent" and Master Luvnish Juggoo as "the Appellant",
    reflecting their positions as they were before the FtT.

 3. The Appellant is a citizen of Mauritius born 4th April 2005. He entered
    the UK on 16th November 2013 to live with his aunt who is his  Sponsor.
    She is an Italian national exercising Treaty  rights  in  the  UK.  The
    Appellant's father is dead and  it  is  claimed  that  his  mother  has
    transferred her parental right to the Sponsor.

 4. The Secretary of State gave the  following  reasons  for  refusing  the
    application. She was not satisfied that the Appellant is related to his
    Sponsor as claimed because there was not sufficient evidence  of  their
    relationship. Nor was she satisfied that he was dependent on  his  aunt
    before coming to the UK.

 5. The Appellant's claim is one  of  dependency  on  his  Sponsor  and  in
    summary his history is as follows.  He  lived  in  Mauritius  with  his
    parents and a sister (also a minor). His father sadly died  in  October
    2013 and after her  husband's  death,  the  Appellant's  mother  became
    seriously ill with depression. Consequently she was unable to work.  It
    is reported that she cannot look after herself, let alone the Appellant
    and his sister, and she is being cared for by her 70 year old mother.

 6. As there was no-one to care for the two children, it  was  agreed  that
    the Appellant and his sister would come to the United Kingdom  to  live
    with the Sponsor and her sister (another aunt) respectively.

 7. When the matter came before the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Judge  made
    findings in favour of the Appellant on the nature of  the  relationship
    between  the  Appellant  and  his  EEA  national  Sponsor  and  on  the
    dependency issue. Having done so she allowed the appeal outright.

 8. The grounds granting permission state as follows:

         "It is not arguable that Judge Myers erred in  her  examination  of
         the evidence as to the  nature  of  the  relationship  between  the
         Appellant and the EEA national  and  the  dependency  issue.  Judge
         Myers made findings on these matters that were open too her on  the
         evidence  including  the  documentary  evidence  and  there  is  no
         arguable error of law in her approach.

         It is arguable that Judge Myers made  an  error  of  law  when  she
         allowed the appeal rather than referring the  matter  back  to  the
         Secretary of State for the extensive examination of the Appellant's
         circumstances required by Regulation 17(5). The Secretary of  State
         had not had the opportunity to conduct that examination and  it  is
         arguable that following the guidance in Ihemedu (OFM's  -  meaning)
         Nigeria 2011 UKUT 340 the matter should have been remitted back  to
         the Secretary of State to  enable  her  to  conduct  the  necessary
         extensive examination."





The UT Hearing

 9. Before me Mr Hussain on behalf of the Appellant accepted that the Judge
    had erred in allowing the appeal outright,  rather  than  referring  it
    back to the Secretary of State as set out in ground 3 of the  grant  of
    permission.  It  was  agreed  by  both  parties  therefore   that   the
    appropriate course would be for the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge to be set aside for legal error and for the Secretary  of  States
    appeal to be allowed to the extent that the matter be remitted  to  her
    to enable her to conduct the necessary extensive  examination  required
    by Regulation 17(4) of the EEA 2006 Regulations.  That  appears  in  my
    judgment to be the correct course.

10.  Mr  Hussain  and  Mrs  Pettersen  both  asked  that  I  note   in   my
    determination, the fact that the Appellant travelled to the UK with his
    sister who is also a minor. It would seem that one aunt is taking  care
    of the Appellant and another aunt is taking  care  of  the  Appellant's
    sister.  Mr  Hussain  did  mention  that  he  does  not  represent  the
    Appellant's sister but quite properly is concerned that there should be
    consistency between the Appellant and his sister. I am aware  that  the
    Appellant's sisters  appeal  was  allowed  in  the  FtT  and  that  the
    Respondent has been granted permission to appeal to the UT on that case
    as well.  It may well be appropriate for the two appeals to  be  linked
    at some point.

Decision

11. So far as this appeal is  concerned  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is set aside for legal error. The Secretary of State's  appeal
    is allowed to the extent that the matter is remitted to her  to  enable
    her to conduct the necessary examination in accordance with  Reg  17(4)
    EEA Regulations.



Signed                              Date



Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

