
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/27725/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14 December 2015                  |On 22 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     O B
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R. Amarasingha, Counsel instructed by Mordi & Co.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

Background

2.    The  appellant  entered  the  UK  on  01  September  2003  with  entry
    clearance as a student that was valid  until  30  June  2004.  She  was
    subsequently granted further periods of leave to remain  as  a  student
    until 31 October 2009. In May 2006 she met her husband, [MH], and  they
    started a relationship.  She  says  that  they  moved  in  together  in
    February 2007. The  appellant  says  that  she  suffered  physical  and
    psychological abuse from her partner. Despite her doubts she went ahead
    with their wedding on 13 September  2008.  The  abuse  continued  after
    their marriage and the appellant recounts various  incidents,  some  of
    which  involved  the  police.  Her  husband  refused  to   support   an
    application for leave to remain as a spouse. The  relationship  finally
    broke down in May 2009. The appellant was  pregnant  at  the  time  but
    sadly miscarried in August 2009.

3.    On 08 October 2009 she applied for Indefinite Leave to Remain  as  the
    victim of domestic violence but  the  application  was  refused  on  22
    October 2009. The appellant made  further  applications  for  leave  to
    remain outside the immigration rules on 18 November  2010  (refused  20
    December 2010) and 29 September 2012 (refused 12 November 2013). On  23
    May 2014 she applied once again for Indefinite Leave to Remain  as  the
    victim of domestic violence. The application was refused in a  decision
    dated 11 June 2014.

4.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Napthine ("the judge")  allowed  the  appeal
    in a decision  promulgated  on  26  June  2015.  The  judge  found  the
    appellant and her sister to be  credible  witnesses  and  accepted  her
    account of events, which was consistent with the evidence  produced  in
    support of the appeal. He took into account the fact that the  domestic
    violence provisions were  supposed  to  address  exactly  the  type  of
    situation that the appellant had found herself in. The only reason  why
    she did not obtain leave to remain on the grounds of her  marriage  was
    because her husband refused to support an application. It  formed  part
    of the abuse [30]. The judge found that  after  the  breakdown  of  her
    marriage the appellant  formed  a  particularly  close  and  supportive
    relationship with her sister,  who  provided  her  with  practical  and
    emotional support. In turn the appellant also plays an active  role  in
    her sister's family [32]. The judge set out aspects of the law relevant
    to the proper assessment of  Article  8  of  the  European  Convention,
    including  the  statutory  provisions  relating  to  "public   interest
    considerations"  contained  in  section  117B   of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002") [34-39].

5.    The judge went on to consider the  appellant's  length  of  residence,
    the ties  she  has  established  in  the  UK  and  the  nature  of  her
    relationship with her sister. He  concluded  that  the  nature  of  her
    relationship with her sister was such that it had  additional  elements
    of dependency  over  and  above  those  normally  found  between  adult
    siblings and therefore constituted family  life.  The  judge  concluded
    that  there  would  be  a  sufficiently  grave  interference  with  the
    appellant's right to private and family life as to engage the operation
    of  Article  8  [41-47].  The  judge's   findings   relating   to   the
    proportionality of removal were as follows:

         "48.     I find these are all matters to be placed into the balance
         when  assessing  whether  the  SSHD  was  correct  in  finding  the
         Appellant's family and private life was not deserving of respect to
         the extent that her removal would be an excessive and  unreasonable
         act. For the reasons set out above, I find that the removal of  the
         Appellant would be an unwarranted interference with her  Article  8
         rights to respect for her family and private life.

         49.      Decisions  taken  pursuant  to  the  lawful  operation  of
         immigration control will be  proportionate  in  all  save  a  small
         minority of cases (Razgar [2004] UKHL 27). I have weighed  all  the
         competing considerations and given due and considerable  weight  to
         the considerations in favour of the decision appealed against and I
         find the decision of the SSHD  was  an  excessive  and  unwarranted
         interference with the Appellant's right to respect for  her  family
         and private life.

         50.      In the  light  of  the  facts  as  established  there  are
         substantial grounds for  believing  that  the  Appellant  would  be
         subjected to a flagrant disregard of her human rights under Article
         8 if returned to Nigeria."

6.    The respondent seeks to challenge the First-tier Tribunal decision  on
    the following grounds:

    (i)    The First-tier Tribunal erred in taking into  account  the  fact
         that the appellant's husband did not  support  an  application  for
         leave to remain as a spouse.  The  requirement  to  have  leave  to
         remain as a spouse was an eligibility requirement under paragraph E-
         DVILR of the immigration rules.

    (ii)   The First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to  make  any  findings
         relating to the public interest considerations outlined in  section
         117B of the NIAA 2002.

Decision and reasons

Findings relating to error of law

7.    After having considered the grounds of appeal  and  oral  arguments  I
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making  of
    an error on a point of law.

8.    I find that the fact that the judge took into account the  appellant's
    history of domestic violence, and in particular the fact that  part  of
    that abuse involved her husband refusing to support an application  for
    leave to remain as a spouse, does not amount to an  error  of  law.  It
    simply formed part of judge's findings  of  fact  in  relation  to  the
    claim. It is clear from the decision that the judge understood that the
    appellant did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  E-DVILR  of
    Appendix FM [36]. The appellant did not put forward her  case  on  that
    basis and the whole appeal  was  considered  under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention of Human Rights outside the immigration  rules.  As
    part of his overall assessment of the  factual  circumstances  in  this
    case it was open to the judge to take into account the reason  why  the
    appellant was unable to apply for leave to remain under the immigration
    rules relating to domestic violence, which he concluded was as a result
    of the same domestic abuse that may have founded such an application.

9.    The second ground  of  appeal  has  more  force.  The  judge  directed
    himself correctly to the fact that he had  to  take  into  account  the
    public interest provisions contained in section 117B of the NIAA  2002.
    He quoted the provision  [38].  His  finding  that  the  appellant  had
    established a relationship of sufficient closeness and dependency  with
    her sister has not been challenged. Nor has his finding that removal in
    consequence of the decision would amount to an  interference  with  her
    right to private and family life under Article 8(1) [41-47].

10.   The focus of the respondent's appeal relates  to  the  proportionality
    assessment carried out by the judge in the paragraphs quoted above [5].
    While many of the factors  that  he  was  required  to  consider  under
    section 117B were apparent on the facts of the  case  the  Tribunal  in
    Dube (ss.117A-D) [2015] UKUT 00090 made clear that it is incumbent on a
    judge to deal with those matters in substance. In this case  the  judge
    quoted section 117B but did not undertake an evaluative  assessment  of
    each of the  relevant  public  interest  factors  when  conducting  the
    balancing exercise  under  Article  8(2).   The  First-tier  Tribunal's
    failure to undertake that exercise amounts to an error of law.

Remaking the decision

11.   There is no challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's findings  of  fact.
    The judge heard and evaluated the evidence given by the  witnesses.  He
    considered the documentary evidence relating to the extent  and  nature
    of the domestic violence suffered by the appellant, and as a result  of
    those experiences, he accepted that the  appellant  had  forged  closer
    ties with her sister and her family  than  one  might  normally  expect
    between adult  siblings.  Those  findings  were  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence. For this reason I am satisfied that the findings of fact made
    by the First-tier Tribunal can be preserved.

12.   The appellant does not meet the requirements of  E-DVILR  of  Appendix
    FM relating to domestic violence because she did not last have leave as
    a partner. Indeed, at the date of the current application  she  had  no
    leave to remain. The appellant's familial relationship with her  sister
    does not engage any of the family life categories contained in Appendix
    FM of the immigration rules. The appellant does not  meet  the  private
    life requirements contained in paragraph 276ADE(1) of  the  immigration
    rules because she has not lived in the UK for the  required  length  of
    time and it is not argued that there are "very  significant  obstacles"
    to her reintegration in Nigeria. For these reasons the  appellant  does
    not meet the strict requirements of the immigration rules.

13.   The immigration rules are said to reflect  the  respondent's  view  of
    where a fair balance should be struck between the right to respect  for
    private and family life and public interest considerations relating  to
    the  maintenance  of  an  effective  system  of   immigration   control
    (paragraph GEN.1.1 Appendix FM).  The rules should be  read  in  a  way
    that reflects a proper interpretation of  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention. However, there may  some  cases  where  the  rules  do  not
    address relevant Article 8 issues. In such cases it may be necessary to
    consider whether there are compelling circumstances to justify granting
    leave to remain outside the immigration rules: Huang v SSHD [2007] 2 AC
    167 & SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  This should  be  assessed
    by reference to the five stage test outlined by the House of Lords in R
    v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] 3 WLR 58.

14.   The First-tier Tribunal gave sustainable and unchallenged reasons  for
    finding that the appellant has established a private and family life in
    the UK within the meaning of Article 8 of the European Convention.  The
    judge concluded that her removal in consequence of the  decision  would
    interfere with her Article 8 rights in  a  sufficiently  grave  way  to
    engage the operation of Article 8(1) (questions  (i)  &  (ii)  of  Lord
    Bingham's five stage approach in Razgar).

15.   Article 8 of the European Convention protects the right to family  and
    private life.  However,  it  is  not  an  absolute  right  and  can  be
    interfered with by the state in certain circumstances. It is trite  law
    that the state has a  right  to  control  immigration  and  that  rules
    governing the entry and residence of people into the  country  are  "in
    accordance with the law" for the purpose of Article 8. Any interference
    with the right to private or family  life  must  be  for  a  legitimate
    reason and should be reasonable and proportionate.

16.   In assessing whether removal in consequence of the decision  would  be
    a proportionate response I am required to take into account the  public
    interest considerations set out in section 117B of  the  NIAA  2002.  I
    take into account the fact that significant weight should be  given  to
    the public interest in maintaining an effective system  of  immigration
    control (s.117B(1)). The appellant does not meet  the  requirements  of
    the immigration rules and in such circumstances she would  normally  be
    expected to leave the UK.

17.   It is reasonable to infer from the fact that the appellant studied  at
    degree  level,  and  gave  evidence  without  the  assistance  of   the
    interpreter, that she speaks English. She is therefore better  able  to
    integrate in the UK. However, this is a neutral factor  that  does  not
    add to her case in any significant way  (s.117B(2)).  It  is  merely  a
    factor that does not lend additional  weight  to  the  public  interest
    considerations: see AM (S.117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT  260.  The  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal was that the  appellant  is  financially
    dependent on her sister. There is no suggestion that she is a burden on
    the taxpayer, and if permitted to work, there is no reason  why  should
    not be financially independent given the fact that she has degree level
    qualifications  (s.117B(3)).  Nevertheless,  this  is  also  a  neutral
    factor.

18.   The family life considerations contained in section  117B(4)  have  no
    bearing because they only relate to  family  life  with  a  'qualifying
    partner' and do not engage the particular  family  life  considerations
    that arise in this case.

19.   The appellant has lived in the UK for a period of 12  years.  She  had
    limited leave to remain as a student until 2009 and as such could  have
    no expectation of long term settlement. Although she married a  British
    citizen, which in time  might  have  led  to  settlement,  her  husband
    refused to support an application for leave to remain as a spouse.  The
    First-tier Tribunal found that this controlling behaviour  formed  part
    of the overall domestic abuse that the appellant  suffered  within  the
    marriage. Since her visa expired in 2009  the  appellant  made  several
    applications for leave to  remain  in  an  attempt  to  regularise  her
    immigration status. In these circumstances I find that she  established
    her private life in the UK at a time when it could not be said that her
    immigration status was anything  other  than  "precarious"  within  the
    meaning of section 117B(5). As such any private life that she formed in
    the UK must be given little weight.

20.   The appellant does not have children in the UK. Although she is  close
    to her sister's children there is no suggestion that she has a parental
    relationship with them or that they would be forced to leave the UK  if
    she returned to Nigeria. As such section 117B(6) does not appear to  be
    a relevant public interest consideration on the facts of this case.

21.   If the appellant entered and remained in the UK as a student  and  her
    marriage had broken down due to some other reason it is  unlikely  that
    her circumstances would be  sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the
    public interest considerations outlined above. However, the  First-tier
    Tribunal heard evidence from the appellant and her  sister.  The  judge
    took into account the nature of the abusive marriage and the fact  that
    the only reason why she had been unable to meet the requirements of the
    immigration rules was because of  the  very  nature  of  her  husband's
    controlling and abusive behaviour. He  took  into  account  the  public
    policy considerations that underpin the provisions for leave to  remain
    on the grounds of domestic violence,  which  are  broadly  speaking  to
    enable a non-British spouse or partner to  leave  an  abusive  marriage
    without fear of losing her immigration status in the UK.  In  assessing
    whether the circumstances were sufficiently compelling  the  judge  was
    entitled to take into  account  the  fact  that,  if  her  husband  had
    supported an application for leave to remain as a spouse, she would  in
    all likelihood have been on a route to settlement, either as a  spouse,
    or when the marriage broke down, would have met the requirements of the
    immigration rules relating to domestic violence. In other  words,  'but
    for' the domestic violence that underpins the intended purpose of  that
    part of the rules the appellant wouldn't  have  been  left  in  such  a
    precarious position in terms of her immigration status.

22.   I find that it was  also  open  to  the  judge  to  consider  how  the
    appellant's history of domestic abuse had strengthened and deepened her
    relationship with her sister. Her sister provided her with much  needed
    emotional and financial support after the breakdown of the marriage and
    her subsequent miscarriage.  After  having  heard  evidence  from  both
    women, who he found to be credible witnesses, the judge  was  satisfied
    that their familial relationship now had  the  additional  elements  of
    dependency required to engage the operation of Article 8.

23.   Although I was compelled to find that the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of an error  of  law  because  the  public
    interest considerations contained in section 117B of the NIAA 2002 were
    not adequately addressed it is quite clear that the judge came  to  his
    conclusions about the compelling nature of the  circumstances  in  this
    case with full awareness of the appellant's immigration history  [4-7].
    It is clear from his findings in paragraph 49 of the decision  that  he
    was  aware  of  the  correct  test  to  be  applied  in  assessing  the
    proportionality of removal because he noted that in the  vast  majority
    of cases removal in consequence of the lawful operation of  immigration
    control would be proportionate "in all save a small minority of cases".
    This is consistent with the principles outlined by the House  of  Lords
    in Huang and Razgar as well as the  Court  of  Appeal  decision  in  SS
    (Congo).

24.   No successful challenge has been mounted to the First-tier  Tribunal's
    reasoning or the judge's conclusion that compelling  circumstances  are
    disclosed on the particular facts of this case [43].  Another  Tribunal
    may have come to a different conclusion but the judge's  findings  were
    supported by evidence and could  not  be  described  as  irrational  or
    perverse. I have gone on to make an assessment of the  public  interest
    considerations contained in section 117B of the NIAA 2002 and  conclude
    that, although little weight can be placed on the  appellant's  private
    life, the particular set of circumstances identified by the  First-tier
    Tribunal are sufficiently  compelling  to  still  outweigh  the  public
    interest in maintaining an effective system of immigration control. The
    case involves a close and dependent family life situation that  is  not
    covered by the immigration  rules,  which  arises  from  a  history  of
    compelling and compassionate circumstances. In other words, I  come  to
    the same overall conclusion after having evaluated the public  interest
    considerations that were lacking in the First-tier Tribunal decision.

25.   For the reasons given above I find that removal in consequence of  the
    decision would amount  to  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the
    appellant's right to private and family life under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention (questions (iv) & (v) of Lord Bingham's five  stage
    approach in Razgar).

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

I re-make the decision and ALLOW the appeal


Signed      [pic]      Date 21 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
