
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/27722/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th July 2019                     |On 19th August 2019                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                             mr Md Joynul Abedin
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N. Ahmed
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Mills


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge J. L. Bristow, promulgated on 9th April 2018, following a hearing
    at Birmingham on 21st March 2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.





The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Bangladesh, and was born on  20th
    March 1990.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated
    20th July 2015 refusing the Appellant's application for a variation  of
    leave to remain in the UK, on the basis of paragraph 322(2) of HC  395,
    the basis of the decision being  that  the  Appellant  had  made  false
    representations,  or  had  failed  to  disclose  material  facts,  when
    undertaking a TOEIC English language test, where it  was  alleged  that
    the Appellant had used a proxy.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge adopted the well-established practice in a case of this kind,
    and determined at first that the Secretary of State had put  forward  a
    prima facie case for the allegation that the Appellant had  engaged  in
    fraudulent behaviour.  The next question was whether the Appellant  had
    discharged  the  "evidential  burden"  upon  him.   The  Appellant  had
    asserted that he did sit the tests for the TOEIC examinations  on  27th
    and 28th February 2013.  He had  attended  the  test  centre.   He  had
    passed the test.  He had no difficulty doing so because he had  studied
    English before coming to  the  UK  and  had  been  awarded  "excellent"
    grades.  He was sufficiently proficient in English, such  that  he  had
    been granted entry clearance when he came to the UK.  He had  completed
    two courses in the UK which were both taught in  English.   He  had  no
    reason to use a proxy or to cheat (paragraph 21).

 4. The judge concluded that

         "I am satisfied that the Appellant has  discharged  his  evidential
         burden.  He has asserted a plausible reason  why  the  Respondent's
         evidence that his tests result had been obtained  by  deception  is
         incorrect.  He had a sufficient grasp of English to  sit  and  pass
         the test without the assistance of a proxy" (paragraph 23).

 5. However, the judge then went on  to  consider  whether  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State, upon whom the burden had by now shifted,  was  able
    to discharge that burden at the requisite civil standard of proof.   To
    this extent, the Respondent had produced the ETS  spreadsheet  document
    for the Appellant, with his date of birth given.   This  recorded  that
    the Appellant had sat the tests of 27th February 2013 and that  it  was
    "invalid".  The judge went on to observe that "the term invalid is used
    to describe a test which has been sat by a proxy  or  where  there  has
    been impersonation.  In short, the attribution of 'invalid' means  that
    the result has been obtained by deception" (paragraph 25).

 6. Significantly, the judge did also then add that  "other  than  the  ETS
    spreadsheet the Respondent does not produce evidence which is  specific
    to this Appellant" (paragraph 26).  That, however, was not the  end  of
    the matter.  The judge had in that event, to consider "how reliable the
    invalid categorisation is" (paragraph 26).

 7. The judge went on to consider the report  of  Professor  Peter  French,
    dated 20th April 2016, which was not before the court in  Qadir  [2016]
    UKUT 00229.  Of course Professor French's report did not deal with  the
    Appellant specifically.  He had been asked only to give an  opinion  on
    whether on a balance of  probabilities,  the  methodology  employed  in
    determining whether a test was invalid, was likely to result  in  false
    positives.  His view was that "the methodology would have  resulted  in
    substantially more false rejections than false positives.  He estimated
    that the rate of false positives to be 'very small' after processed  by
    trained listeners had been applied" (paragraph 28).

 8. In the instant case, the  Appellant  had  also  admitted  that  he  had
    knowledge of the invalid test certificate.  As the judge observed  "the
    Appellant's credibility is also damaged by the account he  gave  to  me
    that he knew the TOEIC certificate  was  invalid  before  he  made  the
    September 2014 application" (paragraph  32).   The  judge  went  on  to
    repeat this at  the  end  of  the  determination,  observing  that  the
    Appellant could not succeed in the appeal because  "the  Appellant  was
    clear in evidence to me that he knew the certificate was not valid when
    he submitted the September 2014 application" (paragraph 36).

 9. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

10. The grounds of application state that the judge erred  with  regard  to
    the application of the burden of proof with regard to deception because
    he failed to have regard to the applicable law, and  in  particular  to
    the case of SM and Qadir and failed to give reasons why the  report  of
    Professor French should be given greater weight than the report  of  Dr
    Harrison, which had actually been considered by the Tribunal, and where
    Dr Harrison had in fact been subjected  to  cross-examination  in  live
    evidence.

11. Second, the judge fell into error in stating (at paragraph 32) that the
    Appellant's credibility was damaged by the fact that he  had  knowledge
    of an invalid  TOEIC  certificate  before  he  submitted  that  in  his
    September 2014 application.

12. On 14th August 2018, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

13. At  the  hearing  before  me  on  5th  July  2019,  the  Appellant  was
    represented by Mr Ahmed.  He relied upon the  grounds  of  application.
    He made two basic submissions.  First, once  it  was  accepted  by  the
    judge that the Appellant had discharged the burden of  proof  (see  the
    judge's comment at paragraph 23) that was the end of the matter and the
    appeal should have been allowed.  The judge had made it quite clear  by
    that stage that the Appellant "has asserted  a  plausible  reason"  and
    that "he had a sufficient grasp of English" and that he could pass  the
    tests "without the assistance of a proxy".

14. Second, the judge was factually wrong in stating (at paragraphs  27  to
    30) that "the Appellant did not adduce any expert evidence in rebuttal"
    because the expert evidence of Dr Harrison was tendered in rebuttal  of
    the report of Professor French.  Given that the legal burden  of  proof
    remained on the Secretary of State that the Appellant had obtained  his
    TOEIC test certificate by deception, it was difficult to  see  why  the
    Appellant had not succeeded in his appeal, and this was  especially  so
    because the judge had made  it  quite  clear  that  the  Appellant  had
    provided a "plausible reason" (paragraph 23).

15. Third,  the  report  by  Professor  French  was  not  specific  to  the
    Appellant.  It could give  no  rational  basis  on  which  an  innocent
    explanation could be rejected.  This was important  because  the  legal
    burden remained throughout on the Respondent Secretary of State.  Given
    that Professor French had accepted the  existence  of  false  positives
    (even at a lower rate than previously thought) it was clear that  there
    will be cases where  an  individual's  test  results  would  have  been
    invalidated wrongly.  This could be the case here.  Indeed, once it was
    accepted that the Appellant had provided a "plausible reason"  and  had
    "discharged his evidential burden" his  appeal  stood  to  be  allowed,
    given that the legal burden upon the Secretary of State had  still  not
    been discharged.

16. Finally, the judge referred to the fact  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    given details of his journey to Essex where he took the test,  did  not
    describe the test centre or the  examination  process,  and  failed  to
    corroborate his assertions about travelling and how an  associate  paid
    the fee on his bank card (paragraph 31).  However, Mr  Ahmed  submitted
    that the Appellant had not been cross-examined on these issues.  It was
    open to the Secretary of State to ask the Appellant about these  issues
    at the hearing.

17. For his  part,  Mr  Mills  submitted  that  the  judge's  decision  was
    sustainable.  When Dr Harrison had given evidence before the  Tribunal,
    what he had said was that the process that had been  gone  through  was
    one which, without knowing more about it, could not be said  to  be  an
    entirely reliable process.  Given this,  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    instructed  Professor  French  for  the  Tribunal  hearing  in   Qadir.
    However, the  evidence  of  Professor  French  arrived  late,  and  the
    Tribunal was unable to take it  into  account  and  rejected  it.   The
    subsequent attempts by the Secretary of State  to  have  this  evidence
    adduced in the Court of Appeal was also rejected.  However, Dr Harrison
    actually worked under Professor French, who was his senior.

18. Following the case of Qadir, there  was  the  decision  of  Mr  Justice
    Garnham in the case of Veronica Gaogalalwe [2017] EWHC 1709, where  the
    High Court had recognised the expert knowledge of Professor French.  It
    had been said that  "the  expertise  of  Professor  French  to  provide
    opinion evidence of this sort is not disputed; it is clear from his  CV
    that he is a singly well-qualified expert" (paragraph 57).   What  this
    meant was, submitted Mr Mills that the reference to the "frailites"  in
    Qadir in 2016  had  now  been  explained  away  by  Professor  French's
    subsequent report, and with his standing being openly  acknowledged  by
    the judicial Tribunals after that, there was no reason why his evidence
    could not be taken into account.

19. That being so, the judge was entirely correct in this case to say  that
    Professor  French  had  "concluded  that  the  methodology  would  have
    resulted in substantially more false rejections than  false  positives"
    (paragraph 28) and that the Respondent "has discharged the  burden  and
    proved to the civil standard that the invalid categorisation applies to
    this Appellant" (paragraph 30).



Error of Law

20. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007).  My reasons are as follows.

21. First, it is important to bear in mind that in an appeal arising  under
    paragraph  322(2)  of  HC  395,  where  the  allegation  is  that   the
    Appellant's application for leave to remain is to be refused on account
    of  his  or  her  "making  of  false  representations",  that  such  an
    allegation of dishonesty means that the legal  burden  of  proof  rests
    upon the Respondent Secretary of State.   The  Appellant  only  has  an
    evidential burden of proof.  The Appellant does not ever have the legal
    burden to discharge.

22. In this case, the judge proceeded in an entirely appropriate manner  by
    noting that the burden to begin with did lie with the Respondent.  That
    burden was discharged by the Respondent Secretary  of  State  providing
    initial evidence of the  TOEIC  certificates  being  falsely  produced.
    After that, the burden shifted to the Appellant.  This burden, however,
    was only an evidential burden.  The judge considered that  evidence  on
    behalf of the Appellant.  It is well-known that the Appellant only  has
    the task of "raising an innocent explanation" (see  Qadir  [2016]  UKUT
    00229 at  paragraph  68).   There  is  then  the  "legal  burden"  (see
    paragraph 69) on the Secretary of State.

23. This includes an analysis of such matters as "what the  person  accused
    has to gain from being dishonest;  what  he  has  to  lose  from  being
    dishonest; what is known  about  his  character;  and  the  culture  or
    environment in which he operated".  Other factors  which  are  included
    are "the Tribunal's assessment of their English language proficiency is
    commensurate  with  their  TOEIC  scores  and  whether  their  academic
    achievements are such that it was necessary or illogical  for  them  to
    have cheated" (paragraph 69).  These matters are in fact  fundamentally
    in favour of the Appellant.  As  the  Appellant  himself  said  he  had
    nothing to gain from being dishonest given that he spoke English  well,
    had studied it in Bangladesh, and had undertaken two courses in the  UK
    upon arrival here.

24. Second, the evidence would also indicate  that  it  was  illogical  and
    unnecessary for the Appellant to have cheated.  This is clear from  the
    judge's own acceptance that "I  have  borne  in  mind  the  Appellant's
    assertion that he did  sit  the  tests  personally  and,  perhaps  more
    importantly, that he did not need to cheat as his grasp of English  was
    sufficient" (paragraph 31).  Insofar as then said,  however,  that  the
    Appellant's assertions about sitting the test "lacked  detail"  because
    he did not give details of the journey or of the building, he  was  not
    cross-examined about these matters (at paragraph 31) and  any  lack  of
    detail in this respect can hardly therefore be laid at his door.

25. Third, the judge considered the  expert  evidence  of  Professor  Peter
    French, dated 20th April 2016, whilst noting that this was not in fact
    before the court in Qadir [2016] UKUT  00229.   Nevertheless,  credence
    was given to this expert's report.  Whilst the judge is entitled to  do
    that, it was factually not correct to state that "the Appellant did not
    adduce any expert evidence in rebuttal" (paragraph 29), given that  the
    expert evidence of Dr  Harrison  had  been  expressly  put  before  the
    Tribunal.  This was not assessed by the judge.

26. Finally, insofar as it is the case that the judge has at  two  separate
    occasions stated (see paragraph 32 and paragraph 36) that the Appellant
    "knew the certificate was not valid when  he  submitted  the  September
    2014 application", this matter was disputed by  Mr  Ahmed.   He  stated
    that he had represented the  Appellant  at  the  Tribunal  below.   The
    Appellant had made no such admission.  What he had said was that he was
    aware that the college was no longer accepting  the  ETS  certificates.
    This was confirmed by Mr Mills, who observed that his notes  also  made
    it clear that what the Appellant was doing was that "he  was  aware  it
    had been invalidated because the ETS had said so".

27. In these circumstances, the submission by Mr Ahmed that something  more
    was required before the Secretary  of  State  could  be  seen  to  have
    discharged  the  legal  burden  of  proof  upon  him  has  merit.   The
    Respondent Secretary of State had not produced evidence specific to the
    Appellant.  Professor French's report also  was  not  specific  to  the
    Appellant.  As the judge below very correctly stated, "the term invalid
    is used to describe a test which has been sat by a proxy or where there
    has been impersonation" (paragraph 25).  The issue nevertheless remains
    whether such a "invalid" test relates to the  particular  Appellant  in
    question.  In that respect, the legal burden remains on  the  Secretary
    of State.

28. On the facts of this case, it had not  been  discharged.   Indeed,  the
    judge had half way through the determination made it quite  clear  that
    "I am satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had  discharged  his  evidential
    burden" (paragraph 23) noting how he had provided a "plausible  reason"
    that the allegation against him that  the  test  certificate  had  been
    attained by deception was incorrect.  This was especially so given  his
    "sufficient grasp of English".

Remaking the Decision

29. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am remaking the decision by allowing this appeal.

Decision

30. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  The decision shall be  set  aside.   I  remake  the
    decision.  This appeal is allowed.

31. No anonymity direction is made.

32. This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 17th August 2019
