
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/27788/2015
                                                IA/27793/2015, IA/27796/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th December 2016                |On 18th January 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Mohammad [K]
                                  Kazi [K]
                                    [J A]
                                                       Claimants/Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Claimants/Respondents:  Mr S Bellara, Counsel instructed by Legend
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The claimants are citizens of Bangladesh, being a married  couple  with
    their minor son.  The first claimant is the primary party in this case.
     He seeks leave to remain as Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant with  his
    family as dependants.

2.   The first claimant arrived in the United Kingdom on 28th  October  2009
    upon a student visa and had his leave extended  to  19th  August  2014.
    His wife and son entered the United Kingdom in December 2010  and  were
    granted leave in line with his.

3.   A further application made was, however, refused on 20th July 2015,  on
    the basis that the first claimant exercised deception in the  obtaining
    of his TOEIC certificate which  was  submitted  in  the  course  of  an
    earlier application.  The refusal was made under  paragraph  322(2)  of
    the Immigration Rules.  In addition, no CAS was submitted.   That  also
    was a discrete ground of refusal.  The first claimant sought to  appeal
    against that decision, which appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge James on 14th  April  2016.   In  effect  the  Judge  found  that
    deception had not been  employed  by  the  first  claimant,  such  that
    paragraph 322(2) should not apply.  It was also noted  that  the  first
    claimant was unable to obtain a CAS without a  permission  letter  from
    the respondent and none was forthcoming in this case.   Such  therefore
    raised the matter of fundamental fairness in refusing on that basis.

4.   There was also an issue of financial support, but the  bank  statements
    have not been examined by the respondent.

5.   Overall it was the finding of the  Judge  that  the  appeal  should  be
    allowed on the basis that the decision was not in accordance  with  the
    law.  In effect a fresh decision was called for.

6.   The Secretary of State sought to challenge that  finding,  particularly
    contending that the wrong standard and burden of proof had been applied
    to the issue of deception.  It was on that basis that leave  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal was granted.

7.   The burden of the challenge lies in the way  in  which  the  judge  has
    approached the decision in Qadir v The Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department (ETS evidence - burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC).

8.   Comment is made in paragraph 19 of the determination that the  onus  is
    on the respondent to prove its allegations and that the Qadir case  had
    shown the frailty of the evidence relied upon, there being little  more
    than assertion.

9.   That of course is not what was found in  that  decision.  Although  the
    merits of the evidence, as presented  at  the  hearing  of  Qadir,  was
    deemed to be insufficient for the purposes of the  substantive  appeal,
    it was made entirely clear in that  decision  that   the  Secretary  of
    State's generic evidence, combined with her evidence particular to  the
    two appellants, would generally suffice  to  discharge  the  evidential
    burden of proving that the TOEIC  certificates  had  been  procured  by
    dishonesty. However, in the light  of  the  actual  evidence  that  was
    adduced at the hearing, the Secretary of State failed to discharge  the
    legal burden of proving dishonesty on the part  of  the  appellants  in
    that case.

10.  It was made clear in the case of MA (ETS - TOEIC testing)  [2016]  UKUT
    450 (IAC), that the question as to whether a person engaged in fraud in
    procuring  a  TOEIC  English  language  proficiency  qualification  was
    intrinsically fact-sensitive.  The Tribunal in MA drew attention to the
    shifting burden of proof as set out in paragraphs 57 to 58 of Qadir.

11.  At the end of the day the Secretary of State bears the  overall  burden
    of proof in showing that deception  was  used  to  obtain  the  English
    language certificate.  If the evidence is of  sufficient  cogency  then
    the evidential burden of disproving that evidence  may  fall  upon  the
    claimant but the overall burden remains upon the Secretary of State.

12.  In the case of MA the Tribunal found the  explanation  offered  by  the
    appellant to be a fabrication.

13.  The Judge at paragraph 19 of the determination, has made  reference  to
    the frailties of the evidence.  The distinction of course  to  be  made
    between MA and this case is that in  MA  other  evidence  was  adduced,
    particularly expert evidence which is not particularly relied  upon  in
    this case.  Nevertheless, it  is  to  be  perceived  that  the  generic
    evidence which is generally relied upon is of such a nature as to  call
    for some explanation from the appellant.

14.   The  Tribunal  in  MA  emphasised  in  particular  the  importance  of
    considering factors that are presented on behalf of the appellant  with
    some care.  For example, that an appellant was able to speak and  write
    English at the time of the examination does not necessarily dispose  of
    the matter that he or she attended  to  take  the  examination.   Other
    reasons might have arisen why someone else would have  taken  the  test
    for them, as for example pressure of work or shortage of time or simply
    convenience.  Decision makers were cautioned against simply  accepting,
    without more clarification or  a  contextual  examination,  the  simple
    statement that the applicant took the exam.

15.  In this particular case there was the evidence of the  claimant  before
    the judge that he had indeed taken the  test,  he  was  well-versed  in
    English and therefore did not need to employ  deception.  Reliance  was
    also placed upon the fact that he had taken an MBA in his home country,
    taught in the medium of English prior  to  entry.   It  was  of  course
    entirely a matter for the judge, having heard the  explanation,  as  to
    whether it was accepted, to the extent that the evidential burden  upon
    the claimant had been discharged and accordingly  that  the  respondent
    failed overall in her  underlying  burden  to  show  deception  on  the
    balance of probabilities.

16.  Mr Bellara, who represents the claimant, reminds me to have  regard  to
    the determination as a whole in the light of paragraphs 15, 16,  17  to
    19 of the determination.  It was  entirely  clear  that,  whatever  the
    subtleties of a shifting burden  of  proof  might  be,  the  Judge  was
    accepting the evidence of the claimant as evidence of truth,  with  the
    MBA perhaps weighing heavily in that  favourable  regard.   He  submits
    that even were it to be the case that the evidential burden was wrongly
    set out, nevertheless even had that  burden  been  properly  shown  and
    balanced, the outcome would have been the same.   He  reminded  himself
    clearly of the directions in Qadir could  nevertheless  have  found  in
    favour of the appellant upon the evidence as presented due to a careful
    consideration as to whether it is sufficient to discharge the burden.

17.  In MA regard was had  to  the  nature  of  the  tests  themselves,  the
    questioning of the appellant in that case and the degree of analysis of
    what the appellant had to say was extensive.  The court in MA indicated
    that they had heard and observed the appellant during some two-and-half-
    hours  and  scrutinised  in  particular  response  times,  hesitations,
    spontaneity and  engagement  with  the  Tribunal  generally.   In  that
    assessment the appellant's  credibility  differed  radically  from  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

18.  In granting leave to appeal  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Macleman,  in  his
    decision of 16th November 2016, raises the  issue  as  to  whether  the
    first claimant's ability to speak English and his emphatic  denial  are
    adequate reasons for finding in his favour, particularly in  the  light
    of the comments made in MA.  An additional factor in this case was  the
    taking of the MBA qualification.  The challenge  by  the  Secretary  of
    State in this case is, however,  not  so  much  on  the  inadequacy  of
    reasoning, but on the incorrect application of the standard and  burden
    of proof and perhaps the undue dismissal of the evidence relied upon by
    the Secretary of State.  It seems to me that the  Judge  was  entitled,
    upon the nature of the evidence as then  presented,  to  come  to  that
    conclusion made. It is clear that the Judge would have arrived at  that
    conclusion, even had  the  correct  balance  been  applied.   In  those
    circumstances I would not  seek  to  interfere  with  the  findings  or
    interfere with the decision that is made, namely  that  the  appeal  is
    allowed on the basis that the decision was not one that can be lawfully
    maintained.  There are issues in relation to the fairness  of  the  CAS
    and of the consideration of the bank statements to which no  particular
    findings have been made.

19.  Clearly, although the Secretary of State must give due  regard  to  the
    findings of the judge as to 322(2), such does not preclude  relying  on
    further or more particularised evidence in due course.

20.  In the circumstances the appeal by the Secretary of State is  dismissed
    and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall  stand,  namely
    that the appeal be allowed on the limited basis that it is defective by
    reason of error of law.

21.  No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed   Date 16 Jan 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

