
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia278382014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 February 2017                    |On 4 May 2017                        |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     a v
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Shaw of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr F Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

1.   In this appeal, I will continue  to  refer  to  the  parties  by  their
    designations before the First-tier Tribunal (FtT).

2.   This  is  a  respondent's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  (UT)  with
    permission of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Parkes  on  18  January  2016.
    Having reviewed the grounds submitted  on  behalf  of  the  respondent,
    Judge Parkes concluded that First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Manyarara  (the
    Immigration Judge) may have erred in law in the way she dealt with  the
    fact that the appellant was in the UK under discretionary leave  rather
    than under the Immigration Rules. Judge Parkes pointed  out  that  this
    situation had been considered in the case of Guzman Barrios [2011] UKUT
    352 (IAC), where the appellant satisfied the requirements for leave  to
    enter or remain. The appellant, who had been granted leave to remain in
    the UK on a discretionary basis, should not, it was submitted, be in  a
    more favourable position vis-a-vis their immigration status than  those
    who had a right to be here under the Immigration  Rules.   This  ground
    was thought by Judge Parkes to be arguable.

Background

3.   The appellant first came to the UK as a student  in  2008.   Her  leave
    was subsequently extended but she overstayed.  On 20 December 2011, the
    appellant  made  an  application  to  remain  in  the  UK  outside  the
    Immigration Rules  based  on  her  relationship  with  a  British  man.
    However, that application was unsuccessful. I was told at  the  hearing
    before the UT that this was because she did not meet  the  spouse  visa
    requirements.  Nevertheless, the appellant was  given  three-and  years
    discretionary leave to remain.  Before the three years expired in April
    2014, the appellant applied  for  further  leave  to  remain  based  on
    domestic  violence.   This  was  considered  under  Rule  289A  of  the
    Immigration Rules which allows a person who is  a  victim  of  domestic
    violence to seek ILR in the UK if they satisfy certain criteria.

4.   The respondent rejected that application on 6 May  2014.   The  refusal
    was said to carry no right of appeal, but  the  appellant's  solicitors
    applied for a review of the refusal and on 18 June 2014 she was assured
    that the decision would be reviewed.  She also received a letter on  25
    June 2014 informing  her  that  the  refusal  decision  resulted  in  a
    curtailment of her leave with effect from 25 June 2014.

5.   At the subsequent appeal hearing before the Immigration Judge,  sitting
    at Hatton Cross on 5 August 2016, the  appellant  was  treated  on  the
    basis that since 2008 the appellant's relationship had broken down. The
    appellant  therefore  relied  solely  on  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention of Human Rights (ECHR).

The Appeal Proceedings

6.   The appeal before the Immigration Judge followed an earlier hearing  in
    which the  appellant  had  been  unsuccessful  before  the  FtT  but  a
    subsequent appeal before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer resulted in
    the matter being remitted to  the  FtT  for  a  further  hearing.   The
    hearing before the Immigration Judge, was thus that remitted hearing.

7.   After she heard the evidence, the Immigration Judge  decided  the  case
    on the basis that there were compelling circumstances for deciding  the
    case under Article 8.  There are a small number of cases where a person
    falls outside immigration policies  or  the  Immigration  Rules.   This
    appellant had been the victim of domestic violence  from  her  husband,
    [SR].  The implementation of the  family  and  private  life  Rules  in
    Appendix FM allowed exceptions. The Immigration Judge accepted that the
    respondent was entitled to lay down rules to prevent persons coming  to
    the UK to set up home without regard to immigration  control.  However,
    the respondent was bound to respect private and  family  life.   Having
    regard to the circumstances of this case, the public interest  did  not
    outweigh the requirement on the respondent to respect  the  appellant's
    human  rights.   Accordingly,   the   Immigration   Judge   found   the
    interference to be disproportionate and allowed the appeal on Article 8
    grounds, having dismissed it under the Immigration Rules.

The Hearing in the UT

8.   At the hearing, I heard oral submissions by both  representatives.   Mr
    Walker did not seek to go any  further  than  the  grounds  of  appeal,
    pointing out that he had appeared at the hearing before  Judge  Mailer.
    I was reminded that paragraph 9 of  the  Immigration  Judge's  decision
    suggested that she had considered  "all  aspects"  of  the  appellant's
    private and family life.  Mr Walker did not seek to argue that domestic
    violence was not a relevant factor  for  the  judge  to  consider  when
    assessing the appellant's Article 8 rights.

9.   Ms Shaw referred me to numerous paragraphs within the decision  of  the
    FtT, pointing out that the Immigration Judge had done exactly what  had
    been asked of her by the UT  when  Judge  Mailer  pointed  out  it  was
    necessary to carry out an analysis of the competing public interest  at
    play.  Mr Walker had accepted before the UT  that  there  had  been  an
    error of law in the approach taken by the original FtT Judge (Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Wylie (Judge Wylie)).  Contrary to the grant of
    permission, the Immigration Judge had not  misunderstood  the  case  of
    Bossade.  The Immigration Judge had not allowed the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules but under the ECHR.  I was particularly  referred  to
    paragraph 9 of Bossade where the UT (Lord Matthews and  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge McKee) decided that domestic violence is a relevant  factor  when
    carrying out an Article 8 assessment but it does not  necessarily  lead
    to an appeal being  allowed.   There  is  no  difference  in  principle
    between a case where domestic violence is considered within the context
    of Article 8 to one where it is considered within the paragraphs 289A-C
    of the Immigration Rules.  However, the Immigration Judge in that  case
    went on to say that the discretionary leave did  not  confer  the  same
    benefits as leave under the Rules.  Discretionary leave did not  confer
    the same benefits and it was not unfair or discriminatory for the First-
    tier Tribunal in that case to treat the matter as  one  which  did  not
    give rise to the same considerations as an application under the Rules.





Discussion

10.  The appellant was an  illegal  overstayer  and  subsequent  grantee  of
    discretionary leave to remain.  She  was  not  therefore  in  the  same
    category as a person who satisfied the requirements of the  Immigration
    Rules for leave to enter or remain. I find that this  is  a  difference
    which ought to materially affect  the  outcome  of  this  appeal.   The
    appellant's application was considered by the Immigration  Judge  under
    the  ECHR.   The  Immigration  Judge,  gave  a  detailed  and  thorough
    decision, in which  she  considered  the  relevant  authorities  before
    reaching her own evaluation of the significance  of  domestic  violence
    allegations.  She had regard to the need to  respect  for  private  and
    family life weighed up against  the  respondent's  need  for  effective
    immigration control.  The Immigration Judge had heard the oral evidence
    and considered the  argument  that  the  private  or  life  family  the
    appellant had established in the UK was "precarious" in  the  terms  of
    Sections 117A-C of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.
    The Immigration Judge also considered the impact of Section 289A of the
    Immigration Rules and the fact that this application failed under  that
    Rule.  She claimant to be aware of the case of the case of the case  of
    BOSSADE and it followed that she  ought  to  have  been  aware  of  the
    distinction between those present in the UK with substantive leave  and
    those merely discretionary leave to remain. She, nevertheless, went  on
    to find that the appellant qualified under Article 8.

11.  Article 8 of the ECHR is an instrument which  is  prone  to  subjective
    and widely differing interpretations by different judges, it is not the
    function of this Tribunal to interfere with a decision if it  has  been
    reached following a proper assessment of the evidence  and  application
    of the law to the facts as found.   I  bear  in  mind  the  matter  has
    already been remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, in the  form  of  the
    hearing before Judge Mailer. The Immigration Judge asked to assess  the
    competing public interests with the appellant's claimed  circumstances.
    However, the problem with the Immigration Judge's decision is that  she
    exceeded the ambit of what was required of  her  by  finding  that  the
    relevant rules (289 A of the Immigration Rules) "unfair"  and  did  not
    adequately deal with the circumstances appellant found herself in.  The
    Immigration Judge failed to consider adequately or at all  whether  the
    domestic violence rule already provided for the correct balance  to  be
    struck between the protection of individuals  and  the  enforcement  of
    effective immigration controls. As the respondent's grounds  of  appeal
    state,  there  seems  little  justification  for   finding   that   the
    respondent's  decision  was   disproportionate.   There   was   nothing
    irrational or unreasonable about confining domestic violence  rules  to
    those with leave to remain.  The  Immigration  Judge  appears  to  have
    objected to the Immigration Rule which she was considering without  any
    proper justification.

12.  Since the hearing before the Immigration  Judge  the  case  of  Agyarco
    [2017] UK SC 11 has been  decided  by  the  Supreme  Court.  The  court
    emphasised  the  need  for  proper  respect  to  be  accorded  to   the
    Immigration Rules. This appellant here had no legal right to be in  UK.
    It would not be accurate to characterise her circumstances  as  falling
    within a "lacuna" created by the Immigration Rules. Indeed,  there  was
    nothing particularly exceptional about her circumstances. It appears to
    be accepted that the appellant  could  safely  return  to  Philippines,
    where she has a supportive family. I  can  find  no  evidence  that  to
    require her to do so would cause an excessive  degree  of  hardship  or
    disruption to her.

Conclusions

13.  I am satisfied that for the reasons given above the  Immigration  Judge
    materially erred in law. Accordingly, it is necessary to set aside  her
    decision.

14.  No party dissented from  the  suggestion  that  I  should  re-make  the
    decision, which is to  dismiss  the  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    refusal to grant her further leave to remain in the UK. The  appeal  is
    dismissed under both the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

15.  The respondent's appeal against the decision of the FtT  to  allow  the
    appeal on human rights grounds is allowed.  Accordingly,  the  decision
    of the FtT he set aside and I remake the decision which is  to  dismiss
    the appeal against the respondent's refusal of further leave to remain.

Direction regarding Anonymity

An anonymity direction was made by the FtT and  I  continue  that  anonymity
direction in an absence of  any  direction  or  new  representation  to  the
contrary.


Signed                                  Date 20 April 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Fee Award

No fee award was made by the FtT and I make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 20 April 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

