
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/27546/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On July 22, 2015                     |On July 23, 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR ATIKAN CONTEH
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Walker (Home Office Presenting Officer)
Respondent  Mr Balroop, Counsel, instructed by Greenland Lawyers LLP


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Gambia and is  now  thirty-one  years  of
    age. He applied on April 23, 2014 for further leave to  remain  as  the
    spouse of a person  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  respondent
    refused this application on June 17, 2014 because she found the correct
    English language test  certificate  had  not  been  submitted  and  the
    respondent was therefore not  satisfied  he  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 284 HC 395.

 3. The appellant appealed that decision on  July  2,  2014  under  section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 4. The matter came before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Abebrese  on
    March 20, 2015 and in a decision  promulgated  on  March  30,  2015  he
    allowed the appellant's appeal finding  he  had  provided  the  correct
    documentation.

 5. The respondent applied for  permission  to  appeal  on  April  2,  2015
    submitting the Tribunal had erred because the certificate submitted was
    not from a provider on her approved list.

 6. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Foudy gave  permission  to  appeal  on
    June 1, 2015 finding it arguable the Tribunal  had  arguably  erred  by
    accepting as valid an English language test that had been  provided  by
    an organisation that was no longer approved by the respondent  and  had
    also misdirected itself as to the law on the PBS Rules.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction pursuant to
    Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and I see
    no reason to make an order now.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUE

 8. Permission to appeal had been given because  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Foudy found it arguable that the Tribunal had  erred.  It  was
    recognised by both representatives that this was not a PBS  application
    but is in fact an application to  extend  leave  as  the  spouse  of  a
    settled person.

 9. Mr Walker also acknowledged that the  appellant's  representatives  had
    written to the Home Office on January 23, 2015 requesting his  passport
    to enable him to obtain a replacement for  his  ESOL  certificate  from
    City and Guilds.  Mr Walker also accepted  that  this  certificate  was
    from an approved provider and that the appellant appeared  to  have  an
    approved certificate that had no expiry date.

10. Both representatives  agreed  that  the  certificate  did  satisfy  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

11. In those circumstances Mr Walker saw no merit to the grounds of  appeal
    and invited me to  dismiss  the  appeal  and  to  uphold  the  original
    decision.

    DECISION

12. There was no material error. I  uphold  the  original  decision  and  I
    dismiss the appeal.

Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I uphold the original fee award.

Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
