
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/28043/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 8th May 2017                       |On 17th May 2017                      |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                          Mr MICHAEL KWAME AMPONSAH
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Siaw instructed by KIP Oplex
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a citizen of Ghana, born on 24th  April  1971,  appealed
    the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J  K  Swaney  dated  21st
    September 2016 dismissing the appellant's appeal against the  Secretary
    of State's decision of 23rd January 2015 to refuse to issue him with  a
    residence permit pursuant to the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the EEA Regulations).

 2. The appellant applied for a residence card as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
    national pursuant to Regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations on 3rd January
    2015.

Grounds for Permission to Appeal

 3. The grounds of  appeal  were  granted  on  the  basis  that  the  judge
    materially erred in the light of Awuku v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 1303.

 4. The grounds for permission to appeal noted that the respondent accepted
    that the marriage certificate was legalised by the Spanish  authorities
    in Accra.  All parties including the Immigration  Judge  accepted  that
    the marriage certificate was legalised by the Spanish  authorities  and
    therefore  there  was  a  statutory  presumption  that   the   marriage
    certificate was a document which the Spanish authorities  had  verified
    and endorsed. The Spanish authorities accepted the marriage certificate
    as evidence of marriage between the appellant and his sponsor.

 5. The judge erred in  failing  to  accept  a  document,  which  had  been
    legalised by the Spanish authorities, should be treated in the same way
    that would have been accepted a  marriage  certificate  issued  by  the
    United Kingdom authorities.  This was discrimination and  an  error  of
    law.   Specifically  the  judge  failed  to  give   reasons   why   the
    legalisation of the marriage certificate by the Spanish authorities had
    no significance in law to him.

The Hearing

 6. At the hearing before me Mr Kotas conceded that there had been an error
    of law, accepted that Awuku was now good law  and  that  there  was  no
    reason why I should not make a decision in favour of the appellant  and
    contrary to the conclusion of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 7. Specifically at paragraph 19, which I preserve, the judge found that:

         "I find on the balance of probabilities that the registrar  of  the
         Accra  Metropolitan  Assembly  Marriage  Registry  is  a  competent
         authority that has the  power  to  issue  a  marriage  certificate.
         There is no suggestion that the marriage certificate is not genuine
         and I find on the balance of probabilities that it is".

 8. The judge from paragraph 20 of  the  decision  onwards  applied  Kareem
    (proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 24 and  TA  and  Others  (Kareem
    explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT  00316  (IAC).   He  noted  that  where  a
    marriage certificate is issued by a competent authority  in  accordance
    with the registration laws of  the  country  where  the  marriage  took
    place, that will usually be sufficient but 'that was not the end of the
    matter' and it needed to be held to be valid under Spanish  law,  Spain
    being the country of nationality of his wife.

 9. The judge appeared to find at paragraph 22 that the issue  was  whether
    or not legalisation by the Spanish  Embassy  confirmed  the  marriage's
    validity under Spanish law.

10. In fact, the case law now confirms, paragraph 15 of Awuku, that in  the
    law of England and Wales, the general rule is that the formal  validity
    of a marriage is governed by the law of the country where the  marriage
    was celebrated ("the lex loci celebrationis")  and  that  the  marriage
    celebrated in the mode or according to the rites or ceremonies required
    by the law of the country where the marriage takes place is as  far  as
    formal requisites go, valid.  And further:

         "In general the law of a country where  a  marriage  is  solemnised
         must alone decide all questions relating to  the  validity  of  the
         ceremony by which the marriage is alleged to have been  constituted
         ... A  marriage by proxy will be treated as  valid  in  England  if
         recognised by the local law even if one of the parties is domiciled
         and resident in England and the power of attorney  authorising  the
         proxy to act is executed in England".

    It was also noted under  CB  (Validity  of  marriage:  proxy  marriage)
    Brazil [2008] UKAIT 00080 the Upper Tribunal rejected a submission that
    different rules should be applied  to  the  legal  framework  governing
    validity of marriage when the issue arose in the context of immigration
    law and that the Tribunal reaffirmed the formal validity of a  marriage
    governed by the lex loci celebrationis.  If  Brazilian  law  recognised
    proxy marriages, the marriage of the appellant and his wife  was  valid
    under the law of England and Wales and as a  consequence  the  relevant
    requirements of the EEA Regulations were met.

11. As such, the conclusions of  Kareem  and  TA  (Kareem  explained)  were
    considered to have attempted to create a new private international rule
    for the purposes of EU law and that the  substantive  law  relating  to
    marriage was outside  EU  competence  and  the  formal  validity  of  a
    marriage should be determined by the private international law  of  the
    host state, and in this case it would be Ghana.  As such, the reasoning
    of the Tribunal in Kareem and TA (Kareem) was flawed.

12. It is clear in relation to the First-tier Tribunal decision that  Awuku
    must be declaratory.  Kareem was contrary to the  freedom  of  movement
    and residence within the EU and did not apply.

13. I therefore set the decision  of  Judge  Swaney  aside,  retaining  and
    preserving  the  essential  paragraphs  at  19  in  relation   to   the
    registration of the marriage by a competent authority, and I allow  the
    appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Helen Rimington                  Date signed 15th May 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
because of the complexities involved in the  decision  and  the  declaratory
nature of Awuku.




Signed                                             Date 15th May 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

