
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/28894/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5 December 2014                       |On 2 January 2015                 |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  MS ELIZABETH STANISLOVE KWARTENG AMANING
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Otchie, Counsel instructed by Gromyko Amedu
Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a determination
         of First-teir Tribunal Judge Herbert OBE promulgated  on  the  17th
         September  2014,  following  a  hearing  at  Taylor  House  on  3rd
         September 2014, in which the Judge allowed the appeal  against  the
         refusal of leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,  under  the
         provisions of EX.1 of the Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR.


      2. The Judge started off strongly in terms  of  the  relevant  points,
         ages and dates of birth in  the  determination.  There  is  even  a
         record at paragraph 10 of the Secretary of States case.  The Judge,
         however then made a mistake with regard to paragraph EX.1 which  is
         a simple misdirection of law the Judge should not  have  made.  The
         Judge finds that the appellant before him  was  unable  to  succeed
         under the Immigration Rules  save  for  EX.1.  This  provision  is,
         however, not a freestanding provision. In Sabir (Appendix FM - EX.1
         not free standing) [2014] UKUT  63  (IAC)  it  was  held  that  the
         architecture of the Rules as regards partners is such that EX.1  is
         "parasitic" on the relevant Rule within Appendix FM that  otherwise
         grants leave to remain. If EX.1 was intended to be a free- standing
         element some mechanism of identification would have been used.  The
         structure of the Rules as presently drafted requires  it  to  be  a
         component part of the leave granting Rule. This is now  made  plain
         by the respondent's guidance dated October 2013.


      3. As the eligibility requirements for leave to remain as a parent  or
         those necessary to succeed under the 'partner' route could  not  be
         met, it was not open to Ms Amaning to rely upon EX.1.


      4. Accepting that Ms Amaning could not satisfy the requirements of the
         Immigration Rules but finding she could  succeed  under  EX.1,  the
         Judge went on to look at Article 8 ECHR  outside  the  Rules.   The
         Judge was required to take into account the position of all parties
         to the proceedings, but what the Judge seems to have said  is  that
         the eldest son has been in the United Kingdom for nine  years,  not
         spent time outside the UK, has adapted and settled to life  in  the
         UK, weighs up education and language issues, and  at  paragraph  38
         finds the family may or may not have access to  accommodation,  and
         engages in a degree of speculation.  At  paragraph  40  we  find  a
         potentially contradictory finding that the eldest child  has  never
         attended school and does not speak the language  commonly  used  in
         Nigeria, yet in paragraph 37 that  the  language  of  education  is
         English and the child speaks English.  The Judge  at  paragraph  41
         finds this 'falls short of an ability  where  that  member  of  the
         family could reasonably be expected to leave the  United  Kingdom'.
         It may be that that is the proper test that the Judge  should  have
         been considering but whether it is reasonable or not to do  so,  or
         proportionate to the issue, requires the Judge to make (a) a proper
         analysis of the  facts  and  (b)  a  properly  conducted  balancing
         exercise  if  the  issue  is  Razgar  (5)  and  the  case  one   of
         proportionality.


      5. Mr Otchi handed up the Appendix FM guidance and  it  has  not  been
         suggested this differs materially from that in force at the date of
         the decision.  Section (d) states that the child is  likely  to  be
         able to reintegrate readily into life in another country  and  sets
         out various relevant factors some of which the Judge did  look  at.
         This point is  in  Ms  Amaning's  favour  but  the  exercise  being
         conducted was an Article 8 point, Razgar (5).  Both parties'  cases
         must be considered. The decision of the Supreme  Court  in  Zoumbas
         [2013] UKSC 74 is particularly important as is the other  case  law
         referred to in the Secretary of States  grounds.   In  Zoumbas  the
         children had been here longer than the applicant's family  in  this
         appeal.  They were Congolese and not British citizens, it was found
         they have no right to future education and  healthcare,  they  were
         part of a close-knit family, with no evidence of serious  detriment
         to their wellbeing.  These are the type of issues the Judge  should
         have taken into account but failed to do so.  I understand why  the
         appellant before the Judge won but I  do  not  understand  why  the
         Secretary of State lost.  That  means  we  have  a  proportionality
         exercise  that  has  not  been  properly  conducted  or  adequately
         reasoned.


      6. Mr Otchi submitted the error is not material  but  until  a  proper
         proportionality balancing exercise is conducted we cannot say this.
          I find the error to be material to the  decision  to  dismiss  the
         appeal especially if the Judges' mind was influenced by his finding
         the requirements of EX.1 could be met. The parties have not had the
         benefit of a properly conducted Article  8  assessment  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal. The determination  shall  be  set  aside.  The
         findings in relation to the inability to meet the  requirements  of
         the Immigration Rules shall be preserved findings and shall include
         a finding of an inability to succeed under  EX.1  too.  The  appeal
         shall be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Taylor
         House for a comprehensive  assessment  of  the  positions  of  both
         parties  in  relation  to   the   Article   8   element   and   the
         proportionality of the decision.


      7. The following directions shall apply to the future conduct of  this
         appeal:


     i.  The appeal in relation to Article 8 ECHR  outside  the  Rules  only
    shall be      remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Taylor
    House to be heard by a     salaried judge of that Tribunal nominated by
    the Resident Judge on the 9th May   2015.    Time estimate 2 hours.

     iii.     The Appellant must file and serve a consolidated  indexed  and
    paginated     bundle containing all the evidence she  intends  to  rely
    upon no later than 13th     April  2015.   Witness  statements  in  the
    bundle must be signed, dated, and   contain a statement  of  truth  and
    shall stand as the evidence in chief of the  maker.

     iv. No interpreter shall be provided unless specifically  requested  by
    the Appellant,    with reasons.



Signed                                  Date 31st December 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson


