
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28860/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 June 2014                               |On 2 September 2014          |
|                                              |                             |



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     AND

                                                 MS SOOK FUN CHOONG

                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Maka (Counsel instructed by Southbridge
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge I Howard promulgated on 21 May 2014 in which he  allowed
    the appeal outside of the Immigration Rules and under Article 8.

2.   The appellant in this matter is the Secretary of State.   For  ease  of
    reference I shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  the  claimant  and  the
    Secretary of State.

Background

3.   The claimant whose date of birth is 23  April  1967  is  a  citizen  of
    Malaysia.  She appealed against a decision made by the respondent on 15
    November 2012 to remove her pursuant to Section 10 of  the  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999.  The claimant previously made an  application  for
    leave to remain outside the Rules which  was  refused  on  15  November
    2012.  Following a hearing before the Tribunal on 13 February 2013, the
    appeal was allowed to the extent that the matter was  remitted  to  the
    Secretary of State for a decision to be made under paragraph 134.   The
    decision made on 21st June  2013  included  the  Secretary  of  State's
    reasons for refusing to vary leave.  Notice and grounds of appeal  were
    submitted on 10 July 2013.

4.   The Secretary  of  State's  decision  dated  21  June  2013  found  the
    claimant  to be liable for administrative removal because her leave  to
    enter expired on 4 September 2011 and she continued to remain in the UK
    without lawful leave.  In a supplementary letter the Secretary of State
    set out her reasons for refusing the application  under  paragraph  134
    having regard to the fact that the claimant remained unlawfully in  the
    UK since 4 September 2011 and therefore  had  not  spent  a  continuous
    period of five years lawfully residing in the UK (paragraph  134(i)  of
    the Immigration Rules).  In addition the Secretary of State  relied  on
    paragraph 134(vi)  that  the  claimant   failed  to  meet  the  English
    language certificate requirements.  The Secretary of  State   proceeded
    to consider the claim on the basis of  private  or  family  life  under
    paragraph A277C and Appendix FM.   The  claimant  failed  to  meet  the
    requirements of those Rules.  The claim  was  considered  exceptionally
    outside the Rules with  regard  to  her  employment  interests  but  no
    sufficiently compelling circumstances to warrant leave to remain in the
    UK were found.

5.   In a determination FTJ Howard allowed the appeal  notwithstanding  that
    it had been accepted that the claimant did  not  meet  the  Immigration
    Rules under paragraph 134 and having regard to the fact that  the  most
    recent grant of leave as a work permit holder had been  for  48  months
    (the Rule requiring 60 months), and as at the time of  the  application
    for leave the work permit holder leave had  expired.   The  appeal  was
    pursued on a discretionary basis for a grant of leave  outside  of  the
    Rules  and  under  Article  8.   The  determination  [15]  cited   Ukus
    (Discretion: when reviewable) [2012] UKUT  00307  (IAC)  and  Philipson
    (ILR - not PBS:evidence . India [2012]).

 6.  The Judge applied principles with reference to the  headnotes  in  Ukus
    and concluded that Section 86(3)(b) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 was applicable.  He accepted  that  the  claimant's  employers
    were responsible for errors in her immigration applications.  [18]

7.   The Judge proceeded to consider Article 8 ECHR having  found   at  [29]
    the principles in Gulshan were met.   He  followed  the  step  by  step
    Razgar approach. He placed  considerable  weight  on  Philipson  having
    regard to the public  interest  and  concluded  that  the  interference
    cannot  be  justified  in  light  of  the  appellant's  employment  and
    contribution in the UK.

Grounds of Appeal

8.   The Secretary of State appealed on the grounds that the Tribunal  Judge
    failed to give reasons or adequate reasons  for  findings  on  material
    matters.  The Tribunal Judge erred in his approach  to  the  Article  8
    assessment.  He did not consider the Rules prior to  embarking  on  the
    Article 8 assessment.  He failed to identify  compelling  circumstances
    as identified in Gulshan [2013] UKUAT 00640(IAC).  The Judge failed  to
    identify exceptional circumstances, leading to an  unjustifiably  harsh
    outcome (Gulshan and Nagre [2013]EWHC 720 Admin).  It was arguable that
    the claimant could  establish  private  life  in  Malaysia  and  obtain
    employment there or return to Malaysia from where  she  can  apply  for
    entry clearance to return.

Permission to Appeal

9.   First-tier Tribunal Judge P J G White granted permission to  appeal  on
    9 April 2014 on the grounds that;

         "(a) While the judge refers to the guidance in  Gulshan  (paragraph
             28) it is arguable that in coming to his conclusion in  regard
             to Article 8 the judge failed to follow the guidance in regard
             to 'arguably good grounds' and 'compelling circumstances'.


           (b)    It is  arguable  that  the  judge's  conclusion  that  the
             exercise of the respondent's discretion fell to be dealt  with
             under Section 86(3)(b) of  the  NIAA2002  (paragraph  16)  was
             erroneous given that  the  grounds  of  appeal  under  Section
             84(1)(f) are  confined  to  a  'discretion  conferred  by  the
             Immigration Rules'.  See Ukus at paragraphs 21 and 22."


Error of Law Hearing

10.  I heard submissions from both  representatives  dealing  with  the  two
    main issues, namely the exercise of a discretion under the 2002 Act and
    the Article 8 assessment.   I  was  assisted  by  a  skeleton  argument
    produced by Mr Maka raising the point (for the first  time)  that   the
    old Rules under Article 8 were applicable as this was  a  pre  9.7.2012
    decision.  Mr Deller made submissions firstly dealing with  the  powers
    under Section 86 NIAA 2002  (2002  Act)   Mr  Maka  conceded  that  the
    Tribunal erroneously applied Section 86(3)(b) 2002 Act.  On  the  first
    ground I am satisfied that there was an error of law as a result of the
    judge's misinterpretation of section  86(3)(b)  2002  Act  and  of  the
    principles  in Ukus (cited above).  The claimant was unable to meet the
    requirements of the Rules in paragraph 134 and there was no  basis  for
    the Tribunal to intervene, in the absence  of  a  statutory  power,  to
    decide that the discretion should have been exercised differently.

11.  As to the second ground of appeal Mr Deller accepted that the  original
    application was made prior to 9  July  2012  and  that  the  claimant's
    skeleton argument  correctly  relied  on  Edgehill  &  another  v  SSHD
    [2014]EWCA  Civ  402  CA.   Nevertheless  the  transitional  provisions
    allowed the Secretary of State to consider applications under  the  new
    Rules.  He emphasised that  this  was  an  area  where  arguments  were
    developing.  Edgehill was a case where the old  and  new  Rules  whilst
    being similar were not the same.   Accordingly  the  Gulshan  test  was
    applicable in  the  event  that  the  new  rules  applied.   Mr  Deller
    submitted that the judge placed too great weight on  Philipson  (ILR  -
    not PBS :evidence) India [2012]  in  concluding  that  factors  in  the
    present appeal were capable of meeting the Gulshan test.  There was  no
    consideration  of  compelling  or  exceptional  circumstances  and  the
    Secretary of State's position  was  that  the  circumstances  were  not
    strong enough to pass the Gulshan threshold to justify consideration of
    Article 8 outside of the Rules.  Mr Deller sought  to  distinguish  the
    present facts from those in  Philipson  to  the  extent  that  in  this
    instance, whilst it was unfortunate that  the  appellant  received  bad
    advice from her employers on two occasions,  it  nevertheless  remained
    the position that she did not have lawful leave  since  2011  and  that
    this was a factor weighing in favour of the public interest.

12.  Mr Deller further submitted that in assessing Article  8  the  Tribunal
    Judge relied disproportionately  on  Philipson.   The  claimant  was  a
    student and working in the UK and her position could not be encompassed
    as a legitimate expectation rather as a reasonable  belief  as  to  her
    future position.  However, the judge's  assessment  of  proportionality
    was flawed and given concerns as to  the  judge's  initial  error  with
    regard to discretion and whether or  not  the  appeal  was  capable  of
    passing  the  Gulshan  threshold,  Mr   Deller   submitted   that   the
    determination was not safe and should not stand.

13.  Mr Maka urged a different approach.  In  summary  his  main  submission
    was that the old Rules were applicable and should  have  been  applied.
    The decision made by the  Tribunal  Judge  under  Article  8  ECHR  was
    reasonably open to him.  Whilst the judge may have erred in  law,  such
    errors were not material as his ultimate Article 8 findings were  sound
    and applicable under the old Rules.

14.   Mr  Deller  raised  (with  some  caution)  a  new  matter;  that   the
    proportionality issue was flawed as a result of the judge's failure  to
    consider the public interest argument of the absence of lawful leave.

15.  Mr Maka opposed the inclusion of this new argument as the Secretary  of
    State  failed to apply for appropriate leave to amend  the  grounds  of
    appeal and it was unfair to raise a point such  as  this  at  the  late
    stage of the hearing.   In  any  event  the  judge   considered  public
    interest appropriately.

Findings and Conclusions

16.  I find that there was an error of law in the  determination  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge I Howard insofar as  he  purported  to  exercise  a
    discretion under Section 86(3)(b)  Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002, where there  was  no  statutory  power  to  decide  that  the
    discretion should have been exercised differently.  I do not propose to
    discuss this further, it being quite clear that the claimant failed  to
    meet the Immigration Rules and there was no discretion to be  exercised
    outside of those Rules.

17.  With regard to the Article 8 ground of appeal, I am satisfied  that  as
    at the time the decision under appeal was made (21 June 2013)  the  new
    Rules introduced on 9 July 2012 were in force.  The claimant's original
    application was made on 23 April 2012 and refused on 15  November  2012
    following which it was reconsidered by the Secretary of  State  in  the
    decision dated 23 June 2013.  I have some sympathy for the argument put
    forward by Mr Maka that the private and family  life  issues  ought  to
    have been considered under  the  "old  Rules",  however  I  would  have
    expected that this point should have been raised in the course  of  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  It was  conceded  by  Mr  Maka
    that it was not.  I find no reference in the determination to any  such
    point made on behalf of the claimant nor was it specifically raised  in
    the grounds of appeal dated 8 July 2013, although I accept that  ground
    3 relies  on  a  breach  of  Article  8  ECHR.   There  is  equally  no
    consideration by the Tribunal Judge of the  provisions  under  the  new
    Rules save for a reference at [28],  "It  is  common  ground  that  the
    appellant does not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE."

18.  I have decided to take a somewhat pragmatic approach  to  this  appeal.
    It seems to me that there is no strong arguable basis for the  claimant
    to complain about the application of the new Rules in light of the fact
    that this was not raised at the time of the hearing nor specifically in
    grounds of appeal. The Tribunal Judge can only be expected to deal with
    issues that are raised before him and whilst I  have  support  for  the
    view put forward by  Mr  Maka  in  his  skeleton  argument  relying  on
    Edgehill and Another v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 402  CA,  this  was  not  a
    matter raised before the judge. In any event  the  new  rules  were  in
    force at the date of decision and therefore applicable.

19.  As the new Rules were applicable so too is consideration  the  guidance
    in Gulshan. I find that the Tribunal  failed to give  adequate  reasons
    to show that the Gulshan test was met.  I  find that the Tribunal Judge
    placed considerable weight on the Upper Tribunal decision of  Philipson
    which he found to be  comparable.   That  was  a  case  where  all  the
    requirements of the Rules were met except for the level of wages  which
    was subject to a change (an increase) since the time that appellant was
    granted a work permit. I find  no  consideration  of  or  reference  to
    compelling or exceptional circumstances. I further find  that  reliance
    on  Philipson  was  misconceived  as  the  facts  in  this  appeal  are
    distinguishable.  Philipson  centred  on  a  argument  concerning   the
    relevant time at  which  evidence  could  be  admitted  and  Article  8
    arguments as to legitimate expectation. I find an error of law  in  the
    Tribunal's consideration of Gulshan principles.

20.  Having regard to the assessment of Article 8 ECHR,  I   take  the  view
    that there is an overemphasis on the decision of  Philipson  such  that
    the judge  failed to carry out a proper assessment having regard to the
    specific facts of the case before him which most  notably  include  the
    fact that the appellant was without leave for  a  period  of  time  and
    there was no consideration as to the reasonableness  of  the  appellant
    returning to Malaysia and the potential interference with  her  private
    life there.  I cannot accept the argument put by Mr Maka that any error
    was not material.  I find an error of law in the assessment of  Article
    8 ECHR.

21.  In  light  of  the  fact  that  I  find  a  number  of  errors  in  the
    determination, I cannot be satisfied that the Tribunal properly engaged
    with the relevant issues and relevant law. I find  material  errors  of
    law in the determination having regard to both grounds of appeal.

Decision

22.  There is a material error of  law  in  the  Tribunal's  decision  which
    shall be set aside.

23.  The main findings of fact  are  unchallenged  and  are  preserved.  The
    decision stands to be remade. I direct both representatives to  produce
    and serve written submissions on the Gulshan  guidance  and  Article  8
    ECHR within 10  days  of  the  date  of  issue  of  this  decision  and
    direction.







Signed                                  Date 27.6.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


