
IAC-PE-AW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28143/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th February 2015                |On 18th February 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                         mrs Vanitha Sundaramoorthy
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Karnik, Counsel instructed by Adamsons Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, Mrs Vanitha Sundaramoorthy date of  birth  31st  October
    1982, is a citizen of India.

 2. I have considered whether any of the parties to the present proceedings
    requires the protection of an anonymity direction.  Taking  account  of
    all the circumstances I  do  not  consider  it  necessary  to  make  an
    anonymity direction.

 3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Edwards promulgated on 9th October 2014.  The judge
    dismissed the appeal of the Appellant  against  the  decisions  of  the
    Respondent to refuse the Appellant  further  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom and thereupon to make a decision to remove the Appellant
    from the United Kingdom.  By permission granted on 10th  December  2014
    leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Deans.

 4. In granting leave to appeal it was noted that in the first instance the
    Appellant  had  failed  to  produce  a  valid  English  language   test
    certificate.  However in  considering  that  issue  Judge  Edwards  had
    applied Section 85A of the 2002 Act and indicated that he  was  limited
    to considering the circumstances appertaining at the date  of  decision
    and the evidence relevant thereto.  Whilst  it  was  acknowledged  that
    that was an error of law in the leave it was noted that that of  itself
    may not have resolved the issue as even the post decision evidence,  it
    was submitted, did not meet the requirements of the Rules.

 5. The central issue with regard to the matter was that whether or not the
    Appellant's English language test certificate had been provided  by  an
    approved provider.  The Appellant's case as can be gathered  from  page
    25 of her bundle was that she had submitted a  valid  English  language
    test certificate authorised by Edexcel and the Community  Support  Plus
    Ltd.  The certificate itself appears at pages 23 and 24 and  refers  to
    Edexcel but also refers to the certificate being issued by Pearsons.

 6. According to the Register Pearsons were on  the  Register  of  Approved
    Providers and the issue was whether or not  the  certificate  had  been
    genuinely issued by  Pearsons.   The  Register  itself  indicated  that
    Pearsons did not issue paper  certificates  but  rather  issued  online
    certificates and provided the same to  the  Respondent.   The  argument
    being that the paper  certificate  therefore  cannot  be  genuine.   It
    appears to me that it is a simple matter that once one receives such  a
    certificate one prints it off and produces it.  It may be that that  is
    what has happened here.  It would have been a simple  matter  to  check
    with Pearsons whether or not this was a  valid  certificate  issued  by
    them and authorised by them.

 7. It does not appear that anybody has checked that  detail.  If  Pearsons
    confirm that it is a certificate issued by an  organisation  that  they
    run, therefore is a genuine certificate.  It  does  not  appear  to  be
    challenged that otherwise the Appellant would meet the requirements  of
    the Rules.  It should be a simple matter for those instructed on behalf
    of the Appellant to provide such details.

 8. Further with regard to this matter the judge  went  on  to  refuse  the
    matter under Appendix FM EX.1 and EX.2 on the basis that there were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant and her family  returning  to
    India.  There was no evidence that was  submitted  to  the  judge  that
    there were insurmountable obstacles.  Whilst Mr  Karnik  does  indicate
    that the Appellant's  spouse  was  settled  here  and  had  been  given
    indefinite leave and that a child of the family was settled  here  with
    indefinite leave, that of itself would  not  constitute  insurmountable
    obstacles.  Further whilst the Appellant was pregnant  and  indeed  now
    has given birth in November to a second child, that  itself  would  not
    have prevented family life continuing within India.  It may be that the
    analysis with regard to EX.1 and EX.2, provided the issue  with  regard
    to the English  language  test  certificate  is  made  out,  cannot  be
    challenged.

 9. However with regard to the issues under Article 8 the judge has applied
    the principles set out in the case  of  Gulshan  [2013]  UKUT  640  and
    Shahzad (no citation given by the judge in either case).  However since
    the date of those cases further authority of MM [2014] EWCA Civ 985 has
    indicated that there is no justification  for  an  additional  step  of
    whether or not there are exceptional circumstances being imposed within
    an Article 8 assessment.  That has recently been endorsed in  the  case
    of Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74 that there is to be a  two  stage  test  in
    applying the requirements of the Rules  and  thereafter  proceeding  to
    approach the issue of Article 8 on the basis  of  the  case  of  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27 and Huang [2007] UKHL 11.

10. It is clear from the determination by Judge Edwards that  in  paragraph
    21 he does impose an exceptionality test in considering  the  issue  of
    Article 8.  Whilst it would be correct to say  that  if  the  Appellant
    does not meet the requirements  of  the  Rules  Article  8  has  to  be
    considered in accordance with the case of Razgar and Huang.  Clearly by
    imposing an exceptionality test the judge has not done so.  It  may  be
    that little criticism could be made of the judge as the cases of MM and
    Singh were only recently issued, it does follow however that  the  fact
    that he did apply those cases results in the  fact  that  there  is  an
    error of law in his approach.

11. In the circumstances the appropriate course  would  be  for  it  to  be
    considered afresh.  Prior to this matter being considered  further  the
    Appellant's representative will have to obtain evidence  from  Pearsons
    to show whether or  not  this  is  a  valid  certificate.   It  is  not
    challenged that Pearsons  were  on  the  Register  at  the  time.   The
    alternative being that the Community Support Plus Ltd were  alleged  to
    have been an authorised provider but they do not appear to  be  on  the
    Register at the moment and if the Appellant's representative is seeking
    to continue with that assertion they would have to produce  a  copy  of
    the relevant Register.

12. However for the reasons set out I find that there is an  error  of  law
    within the original determination.  The appropriate course  to  dispose
    of this matter is for the matter to be remitted back to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a hearing afresh.   None  of  the  findings  of  fact  are
    preserved, the hearing afresh  will  determine  all  the  issues.   The
    parties have 28 days to provide such further evidence as  is  necessary
    to substantiate their case including such evidence about the new  child
    of the family of the Appellant, which may be material as that child  is
    now a British citizen.

Notice of Decision

I rule that there is a material error of law in the original  determination.
 I set aside the decision and  remit  the  matter  back  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for a hearing afresh.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 13th February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
