
IAC-TH-CP-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28670/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 26 March 2015 and 20 May 2015          |On 28 May 2015                   |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Shanna Ann-Marie Williams
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     (On 26 March 2015) Mr  S  Whitwell  and  (on  20  May
                    2015) Ms L Kenny, both of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    (On 26 March 2015) Mr A Alhadi of Stevjeme & Co and
     (On 20 May 2015) Dr V Onipede of Counsel instructed by Stevjeme & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent to whom I shall refer as "the Applicant" is a citizen of
    Jamaica born on 5 February 1974.  On 21 September 1999 she  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom.  Her leave to enter was extended  on  a  number  of
    occasions, finally expiring on 3 May 2014.

 2. On 28 April 2014 she lodged an application for further leave to  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules.  On 23  June  2014  the  Appellant  (the
    SSHD) refused to vary her leave and decided to remove the Applicant  to
    Jamaica by way of directions  under  Section  47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  On 11 June 2014 the Applicant  lodged
    notice of appeal under Section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 as amended (the 2002 Act). The  Grounds  are  that  the
    Applicant  has  been  working,  paying  taxes  and  National  Insurance
    contributions and has no criminal record nor any  pending  prosecution.
    She asserted the decision did not respect her right to a  private  life
    protected by Article 8 of the European Convention and that she  had  no
    family in or social ties with Jamaica.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 3. By a decision promulgated on 27 November 2014 Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Sweet found the Applicant met the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  additionally  that  the
    decision to remove her to Jamaica would place  the  United  Kingdom  in
    breach of its obligations under Article 8 of the European Convention.

 4. The SSHD sought permission to appeal on the basis that  the  Judge  had
    failed adequately  to  consider  whether  the  Applicant  had  no  ties
    (including social, cultural or family) with Jamaica and had  failed  to
    carry out  a  sufficient  balancing  exercise  to  assess  whether  the
    decision  was  proportionate  to  the   legitimate   public   objective
    identified in Article 8(2) of the European Convention.

 5. On 17 January 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McDade granted  the
    SSHD permission to appeal, finding that  the  two  grounds  for  appeal
    raised by the SSHD disclosed arguable errors of law.

The Error of Law Hearing

 6. The Applicant attended but it was not necessary for  her  to  take  any
    active part in the proceedings.

 7. Mr Whitwell for the SSHD relied on the grounds for appeal.  The Judge's
    findings in paragraph 13 of her  decision  were  inadequate.   She  had
    failed to note the Applicant had spent her formative years  in  Jamaica
    and to consider what cultural, linguistic and other ties she might have
    maintained during her presence in the United Kingdom.   The  Judge  had
    failed to  make  a  holistic  assessment  reflecting  the  learning  at
    paragraphs 123 and 124 of the determination in Ogundimu  (Article  8  -
    new Rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC).   The  Upper  Tribunal  had
    found the test under the Immigration Rules is an exacting one and  that
    consideration of whether a person has  "no  ties"  to  her  country  of
    origin  must  involve  a  rounded  assessment  of  all   the   relevant
    circumstances and is not to be limited to "social, cultural and family"
    circumstances.  The Judge had given inadequate reasoning to support her
    findings.

 8. Turning to the second ground for appeal, Mr Whitwell, accepting that no
    mention had been made in the grounds,  submitted  that  the  Judge  had
    erred in failing to take account of the matters referred to in Sections
    117A-117D of the 2002 Act as amended by Section 19 of  the  Immigration
    Act 2014 which Sections had come into effect some four weeks before the
    hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Failure  to  refer  to  the
    matters amounted to an error of law although there was  no  requirement
    expressly to refer to  the  Sections:  see  Dube  (Sections  117A-117D)
    [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC).

 9. The grounds for appeal had expressly raised  the  Judge's  insufficient
    reasoning to support her finding that the  decision  under  appeal  was
    disproportionate.  She  had  failed  to  take  into  account  that  the
    Applicant had a brother in the United Kingdom and whether he  would  be
    able to care for their mother in the event the  Applicant  returned  to
    Jamaica.

10. He concluded the Judge's decision should be set aside, re-made and  the
    appeal dismissed.

11. He informed me the SSHD's records disclosed the Applicant's son had not
    appealed the deportation order made against him  but  had  now  claimed
    asylum on the basis of his sexual orientation upon which the  SSHD  had
    yet to make a decision.

12. For the Applicant, Mr Alhadi referred to paragraph 13  of  the  Judge's
    decision in which she had found the Applicant met the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  She had given adequate reasons by way of  her
    findings in paragraph 12 of the decision.  The Applicant had lived with
    her mother since she came to the United Kingdom and the fact  that  her
    mother was dependent on the Applicant had been accepted  by  the  Judge
    and this made it disproportionate to require the Applicant to return to
    Jamaica.  He accepted the Judge had failed to conduct any assessment of
    the proportionality of the SSHD's decision but there  was  no  material
    error of law in her treatment of the Applicant's claim under  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

13. I pointed out there was no mention  of  the  Applicant's  situation  in
    relation to Jamaica contained in paragraph 12 of the  Judge's  decision
    upon which Mr Alhadi had relied and he then sought to rely additionally
    on the contents of paragraph 11.  Again in paragraph 11 of the decision
    there is no consideration of the relationship or ties of the  Applicant
    to Jamaica.  In response Mr Alhadi  then  pointed  to  the  Applicant's
    witness statement which  was  before  the  Judge  submitting  that  the
    Applicant had in her statement given reasons why she  had  no  ties  to
    Jamaica.  I considered the statement and noted that the matter  of  the
    Applicant's relationship to Jamaica was addressed  at  paragraph  4  in
    which she stated she could  not  return  to  Jamaica  because  she  was
    accustomed to life in the United Kingdom  where  she  had  lived  since
    1999.  She also referred to Jamaica in paragraph 5 of her statement  in
    which she simply asserted she had no family living in Jamaica.

14. In response Mr Whitwell submitted the Applicant had accepted there  was
    a material error of law in the Judge's consideration of the claim under
    Article 8 and that the Judge had not fully set out the reasons  in  her
    decision for allowing the appeal  by  way  of  reference  to  paragraph
    276ADE.  She had not made any finding of a dependency of  necessity  of
    the Applicant's mother upon the Applicant.   The  Applicant's  evidence
    had been limited to her comparatively short  statement.   Even  if  the
    Judge's reasoning was adequate her finding  had  related  only  to  the
    absence of "residual ties" and this was not  the  same  as  having  "no
    ties" as mentioned in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

Error of Law Finding

15. The Judge in her consideration of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  had  taken
    account only of the evidence of  the  Applicant's  lack  of  family  in
    Jamaica but had not considered the extent and nature, if  any,  of  her
    cultural or social or any other ties with Jamaica.  It was an error  of
    law to base a finding that the Applicant had no ties to Jamaica only on
    the length of her absence from Jamaica and the lack of  any  family  in
    Jamaica.

16. The Judge had failed to make any assessment of the  proportionality  of
    the SSHD's decision under  appeal  with  reference  to  any  legitimate
    public objective.  This was perhaps unsurprising because she had failed
    to adopt the recommended five step procedure described in R (Razgar)  v
    SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.  Additionally, she had failed to take  account  of
    primary legislation, namely the introduction of Sections 117A-117D into
    the 2002 Act.

17. For these reasons, I found the First-tier Tribunal's decision contained
    material errors of law and must be set aside.  I enquired  whether  the
    parties were in a position to proceed in compliance with the second  of
    the Upper Tribunal's directions  of  11  February  2015.   Mr  Whitwell
    confirmed the SSHD was ready to proceed.  Mr Alhadi  explained  he  had
    been away from work recently due to illness and  had  returned  to  his
    office only the day before when he had come across a  letter  from  the
    Applicant confirming that she wished to proceed and instruct  his  firm
    in connection with  the  Upper  Tribunal  hearing.   She  had  put  off
    contacting his office until late for reasons of cost.

18. I noticed throughout the hearing that Mr Alhadi appeared not to  be  in
    the best of health because he was coughing.  I was persuaded  that  the
    substantive re-hearing should be adjourned to a  later  date  but  only
    because of Mr Alhadi's ill-health.

Preliminaries at substantive re-hearing

20.  The Applicant attended the hearing with her  mother  and  brother.   Dr
    Onipede for the Applicant confirmed the sole issue for  the  re-hearing
    was the Applicant's claim under Article 8 of  the  European  Convention
    outside the Immigration Rules.  Ms Kenny confirmed that  a  deportation
    order  had  been  made  against  the  Applicant's  son  but  that   the
    proceedings had been stayed pending the Secretary of  State's  decision
    on his asylum claim.

Standard and Burden of Proof

22.  The standard of proof is the civil standard; that is on the balance  of
    probabilities.  The burden of proof is on the Applicant.   Evidence  of
    matters subsequent to the date of the  decision  under  appeal  may  be
    taken into account.

Documentary Evidence

23.  In addition to the documents before the First-tier Tribunal Judge,  the
    Applicant filed:

    (1)  a supplementary statement signed by her on 18 April 2015;

    (2)  an undated statement signed by her mother, Cordelia Christian;

    (3)  a letter of  24  April  2015  from  the  Applicant's  mother's  GP
         together with a copy of the record of her medication;

    (4)  documents evidencing the residence of members of  the  Applicant's
         family in the United States and Canada.

The re-hearing in the Upper Tribunal

24.  The Applicant gave oral testimony.  Her brother was present  and  would
    give evidence in her support.  He worked in the building  industry  and
    much of his work was out of London.  He rarely  saw  the  Applicant  or
    their mother.  Her son who is the subject of deportation proceedings is
    21 years old this year.  She had been in the United  Kingdom  for  some
    sixteen years and had no contact with any friends from before she  left
    Jamaica.  There were no family members  in  Jamaica  to  whom  she  any
    longer had any ties.  She now spoke English rather  than  Patois  which
    she could not write and could not now  speak.   Her  diet  was  British
    rather than Jamaican.  Her mother was diabetic and the Applicant had to
    check her blood/sugar levels four times a day. If they were too low she
    had to make sure her mother had food or drink and then she had to check
    they had returned to an appropriate level.   Additionally,  her  mother
    had a hip problem and stage 3 chronic kidney  disease.   She  was  very
    unstable on her feet and needed help.

25.  The Applicant worked as a care assistant  at  Homerton  Hospital.   The
    position was not a permanent one and there were  no  guaranteed  hours.
    This suited her because if her mother needed additional  care  she  was
    able to stay at home and not go to work.  Her mother's health would  be
    badly affected if the Applicant were removed.  Her mother was dependent
    on her.

26.  The Applicant had visited Jamaica  once  since  she  had  come  to  the
    United Kingdom, in 2003 to attend the wedding of the sister of her then
    partner.  They were no longer together and she had no contact with  her
    erstwhile partner's family.

27.  The Applicant was certain she  would  not  be  able  to  find  work  in
    Jamaica because she did not have  a  qualification  although  Ms  Kenny
    noted there were a number of certificates  evidencing  the  Applicant's
    qualification in the healthcare field.  Additionally, Ms Kenny  pointed
    out the Applicant had had some twelve years' experience as a  carer  in
    the United Kingdom.  The Applicant accepted she  had  certificates  and
    went on to suggest there was a different culture in Jamaica and  either
    she did not have the relevant  qualifications  to  seek  employment  in
    Jamaica or she did not know  what  qualifications  were  required:  see
    hearing replies 30-36.

28.  The Applicant lived with her mother in accommodation  rented  from  the
    local authority.  She had extended family in the United Kingdom but did
    not see them because they had been born in the United Kingdom  and  she
    did not know them.  Her brother lived  in  Tottenham  and  worked  long
    hours.  Her son lived with her and her mother.

29.  The Applicant was adamant that the  care  which  she  gave  her  mother
    could not be replicated by social services because her mother would not
    trust anyone else coming into her home  to  supply  personal  services.
    The Applicant washed and dressed her mother as well as cooking for her.
     She did leave her mother alone when she went to work.  Her mother  was
    mobile if not in pain and went out to see friends, or attend the gym or
    attend church.  She went to the gym about twice  a  week:  see  hearing
    replies 47-52.  She travelled by mini-cab.

30.  The Applicant stated she suffered from high blood pressure  and  sickle
    cell anaemia but explained that she had  not  brought  any  documentary
    evidence because she did not know any was  required.   Both  complaints
    had been diagnosed while she had been in the  United  Kingdom  and  she
    attended  hospital  every  two  or  three  months.   She  had  been  on
    medication for some five years but had no details of  it:  see  hearing
    replies 56-60.  The Applicant's medication comprised four tablets  each
    one taken once a day: see hearing reply 69.

31.  She was in touch every week by telephone with various  members  of  her
    family in the United States and Canada but did not think she  would  be
    able to maintain contact with her mother in the United Kingdom  if  she
    were removed to Jamaica because of the expense both of telephone  calls
    and of internet access: see hearing replies 61-64.

32.  The Applicant's mother gave evidence.  She  relied  on  her  statement.
    Her daughter did everything for her,  that  is  washing,  shopping  and
    cooking.  She would be scared if any stranger came into the  house  and
    feared they might abuse her: see hearing reply  84.   Her  son  visited
    only on special occasions such as birthdays and Christmas.   He  worked
    seven days a week, leaving home early and coming back  late  at  night.
    He  himself  had  difficulty  looking  after  himself  because  he  was
    overweight and suffered from back pain: see hearing reply 86.

33.  She had been in the United Kingdom since 1992.  In  the  past  she  had
    tried to visit Jamaica every other year on holiday.  Her last visit had
    been two years before the hearing.  Part of the time she had stayed  in
    a hotel and part with a friend.  She was  in  occasional  contact  with
    friends in Jamaica with whom she spoke in Patois.  The Applicant's son,
    her grandson, did not make any real contribution to the running of  the
    household save that sometimes  he  took  out  the  rubbish  and  vacuum
    cleared the floor.  He took no part in any aspect  of  her  care.   She
    explained the Applicant worked some thirteen hours a day and made a cup
    of tea and gave her a biscuit in  the  morning.   She  made  lunch  for
    herself, usually a slice of toast, and in  the  evening  the  Applicant
    cooked for her.  Often it was steamed fish and chips or chicken.

34.  She occasionally went out to go to the  doctor  or  to  church  in  the
    evening on Sunday.  She made no mention of any visits to  a  gym.   She
    used a minicab for which she had a "taxi card" to go to  these  places.
    She did not think her daughter had any social life other than  possibly
    going out for dinner or celebrate a birthday.  The  Applicant's  mother
    was in touch with family in the United States and Canada.  Usually  she
    called her sister every two or three months.

35.  The Applicant's brother gave oral testimony.  There was no evidence  of
    his immigration status in the United Kingdom and there was no  evidence
    of his claimed self-employment and only a  brief  statement  from  him.
    There was no explanation for the absence of  any  of  this  documentary
    evidence.

36.  He worked as a self-employed  bricklayer  and  plasterer:  see  hearing
    reply 168.   Initially  he  stated  he  was  married  but  subsequently
    admitted that he and his wife were separated  and  in  the  process  of
    divorcing: see hearing replies 141 and 149.   They  had  two  children.
    The eldest, a daughter was a single mother with one  son:  see  hearing
    replies 143, 169 and 150.  She lived in the same part of London  as  he
    did.  He had a 17 year old son who was said to be "abroad": see hearing
    reply 142.  No further explanation was offered.

37.  The Applicant's brother said he visited  Jamaica  for  one  month  each
    year and usually rented accommodation in the family's  home  area.   He
    had been in the United Kingdom thirteen years and spoke  fluent  Patois
    and spoke a mixture of Patois and  English  with  his  mother  and  the
    Applicant: see hearing replies 153-163.  He remained  in  contact  with
    friends and family in Jamaica and in the US  and  Canada  by  text  and
    similar modes of communication: see hearing replies 165-167.

Submissions

38.  For the SSHD Ms Kenny noted that it was  first  necessary  to  consider
    the Applicant's claimed lack of ties to Jamaica of the nature  referred
    to in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the  Immigration  Rules,  taking  into
    account the jurisprudence on the nature of ties contained  in  Ogundimu
    (Article 8 - new Rules) (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] UKUT 00050 (IAC) and in
    YM (Uganda) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1292.

39.  She submitted that much of the evidence of the  Applicant,  her  mother
    and brother was vague and there  had  been  a  number  of  inconsistent
    replies.  She argued that the evidence had been tailored to  suit  what
    the  Applicant  and  her  family  thought  would   be   best   in   the
    circumstances.  For example, the Applicant had said she had worked  for
    a considerable time in the United Kingdom but when pressed said she did
    not know the likely requirements and qualifications she would  need  to
    obtain employment in Jamaica.  The first bundle of  documents  she  had
    submitted contained a number of certificates evidencing attendances  at
    courses and qualifications  mostly  in  the  care  and  health  fields.
    Additionally, she had substantial work experience.  The  Applicant  had
    said her work was casual but on the other hand her mother had said that
    she worked thirteen hours a day.

40.  At the First-tier Tribunal hearing the Applicant had  said  the  reason
    for her wish to stay in the United Kingdom was to further her  studies.
    These could be continued in Jamaica.

41.  The Applicant's mother and brother  had  each  stated  they  used  some
    Patois at home and the Applicant's claim to have entirely lost  it  was
    not plausible.  Further, English is a majority language in Jamaica  and
    even if no English was spoken in  the  Applicant's  home  area  of  St.
    Thomas,  she  could  re-locate.   She  had  not  claimed  ties  to  any
    particular area in Jamaica.  Her adoption of a British  style  diet  in
    place of a Jamaican style diet was no reason for her to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.

42.  The Applicant had returned to Jamaica; her mother and brother had  made
    a number of visits to Jamaica for holidays and it was likely that  some
    support would be available to the Applicant on return.

43.  The main plank of the Applicant's claim before the Upper  Tribunal  was
    her relationship with her mother and her mother's state of health.   It
    was accepted her mother had some health issues and placed some reliance
    on  the  Applicant  for  washing  and   dressing.    Nevertheless   the
    Applicant's mother manages for herself during the day  and  manages  to
    get out of home and make visits while the Applicant is at work.   There
    was a material inconsistency in the evidence given by the Applicant and
    her mother with reference to visits by her mother to the gym.  It was a
    weak excuse to keep the Applicant in the United Kingdom for her  mother
    to claim she feared abuse from those who might  care  for  her  in  the
    absence of her daughter.

44.  The regular pattern of visits to Jamaica by the Applicant's mother  and
    brother together with  her  own  visits  suggested  the  Applicant  had
    stronger ties to Jamaica than suggested in her evidence.

45.  There was no reason for the Tribunal to  allow  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules or on Article 8 grounds outside the Rules.  There was
    a lack of substantial evidence about the Applicant's  private  life  in
    the United Kingdom beyond her relationship  with  her  mother  and  her
    work.  She had little contact with her brother and even with  her  son.
    She was fit enough to return to Jamaica and re-establish herself.

46.  The Applicant stated she was in regular contact with relatives  in  the
    United States and Canada and yet suggested it would  be  too  expensive
    for her to maintain such contact from Jamaica.  Her brother  maintained
    contact by methods which were certainly not costly, texts and  programs
    like What's App.

47.  The Applicant's circumstances did not warrant a  consideration  of  her
    claim under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  She  had  a  poor
    immigration history and the little evidence of  her  private  life  was
    insufficient to outweigh the  public  interest  in  maintaining  proper
    immigration control.  Her relationship with  her  mother,  even  taking
    into account her caring responsibilities to  her  mother,  did  not  go
    beyond the threshold  of  normal  adult  relationships  between  family
    members established in Kugathas.  The Applicant's son was an adult  and
    on her own evidence she had little contact with him.  Her  relationship
    with her brother was on the  evidence  of  each  of  them  limited  and
    certainly did not cross the  Kugathas  threshold.  The  appeal  against
    refusal of further leave and removal should be dismissed.

48.  For the Applicant Dr Onipede submitted the circumstances of the  appeal
    were unique and  there  were  exceptional  circumstances,  such  as  to
    warrant consideration of the Applicant's claim under Article 8  outside
    the Immigration Rules.  The evidence given in  oral  testimony  of  the
    three witnesses had not been vague.  The witnesses  were  credible  and
    truthful.  The Applicant's situation on return to Jamaica would be very
    different from her  circumstances  in  the  United  Kingdom.   All  her
    qualifications were obtained in the United Kingdom and  her  employment
    prospects on return would be very bleak.

49.  No regard should be had to the finding that the  Applicant  had  wished
    to stay in the United Kingdom in order to further her studies contained
    in the First-tier Tribunal's determination of 27 November 2014  because
    it had been set aside it its entirety.   I  reminded  Dr  Onipede  that
    while the decision may have been set aside the  Record  of  Proceedings
    still stood.

50.  He continued that the Applicant had been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for
    sufficiently long to forget Patois - her mother language.  The evidence
    of the Applicant and  her  mother  about  their  change  of  diet  from
    Jamaican  style  to  British  style  had  been   consistent   and   the
    inconsistencies identified by the SSHD were all of  a  trivial  nature.
    The evidence of the Applicant's mother why she preferred the  Applicant
    to look after her rather  than  social  services  should  be  accepted.
    Further, it would be cheaper for the State for the Applicant who was in
    employment to care for her mother rather than pay  social  services  to
    assume those responsibilities.

51.   He  submitted  the  Applicant  met  the  requirements   of   paragraph
    276ADE(vi) because she had  no  social,  cultural  or  family  ties  to
    Jamaica.

52.  Turning to the factors listed in Sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act  to
    be considered he submitted t the Applicant  spoke  English,  was  self-
    sufficient because she  worked  as  a  care  assistant  and  was  fully
    integrated into British society.

53.  There were exceptional circumstances warranting a consideration of  the
    claim under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  The  decision  to
    refuse leave and remove was not proportionate because of the impact  on
    the Applicant's mother who suffered from  serious  medical  conditions.
    It would be proportionate to allow the appeal.

Findings and Consideration

54.  The evidence of the three witnesses was that the  contact  between  the
    Applicant and her  mother  on  the  one  hand  and  on  the  other  the
    Applicant's brother was extremely limited, visits at  Christmas,  other
    holidays and birthdays.  There was no evidence of contact  between  the
    Applicant or her mother with the Applicant's son who is an adult.   The
    Applicant has  not  shown  these  relationships  between  adult  family
    members involve any degree of dependence which  crosses  the  threshold
    explained in Kugathas...  and  which  if  severed  by  removal  of  the
    Applicant would be a sufficient  interference  to  engage  the  State's
    obligations under Article 8.  I note the Applicant  has  a  niece,  the
    daughter of her brother, who is a single mother living in Tottenham,.

55.  With reference to the relevant factors to be considered  by  reason  of
    Sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act, the Applicant speaks English and is
    self-sufficient by reason of her work as a care assistant.   There  was
    no evidence of the Applicant's private life beyond  her  work  and  the
    evidence of family life was restricted to  her  relationship  with  her
    mother.  Since expiry of the Applicant's leave as a  student,  she  has
    been granted discretionary leave outside the  Immigration  Rules  on  a
    number of occasions.

56.   The  evidence  of  the  Applicant's  brother  and  mother   was   that
    conversation at home included Patois: see hearing replies 128 and  160-
    162.  I find the claim  that  the  Applicant  has  forgotten  what  was
    claimed to be her mother tongue of Patois to be  both  implausible  and
    not credible.

57.  The evidence of the Applicant's British style diet rather than  Jamaica
    style was limited and was not fully explored.  I find I can give little
    weight to the submissions on this particular aspect of the  Applicant's
    lifestyle.

58.  The Applicant admits to visiting Jamaica on at least one  occasion,  in
    2003, since her arrival in the  United  Kingdom.  She  left  her  son's
    father in Jamaica when she came to  the  United  Kingdom:  see  hearing
    replies 26 and 27.  The Applicant's mother said that in  the  past  she
    had tried to visit Jamaica every two or three  years  and  her  brother
    said that he spent one month on holiday in Jamaica  every  year.   Both
    her mother and her brother stated that they  had  friends  in  Jamaica.
    There was no evidence of the Applicant's private  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom and so she has not shown that she has integrated  into  in  the
    Caribbean community in London or into the community at large at all.

59.  The main plank of the Applicant's claim why she should be permitted  to
    remain in the United Kingdom is her relationship with  her  mother  and
    her mother's dependence upon her.  There is a letter of 24  April  2015
    from her mother's GP and a print-out of a medical record giving details
    of her medication.  There was no explanation of the nature and  purpose
    of the various medications listed in the annex to the GP's letter.  The
    print-out  also  lists  her  medical  complaints.    These   show   the
    Applicant's mother has suffered from hypertension since  1993,  Type  2
    diabetes mellitus since  1998,  osteo-arthritis  of  the  hip,  plantar
    fasciitis and for the past  thirteen  months  chronic  kidney  disease,
    stage 3.

60.  The GP refers to her blood pressure problem but gives no  likely  cause
    other than to record that the Applicant's mother attributes this to the
    Applicant's situation in the United Kingdom.  There is  no  explanation
    whether or not this is linked to her blood pressure  problem,  even  if
    the hypertension dates back to 1993 and whether or not it is reasonable
    to attribute it to the Applicant's immigration problem which dates from
    about 2014.

61.  Similarly, the GP's letter merely records the claim of the  Applicant's
    mother of frequent hypoglycaemia attacks.  She  has  suffered  diabetes
    since 1998 and the Applicant's mother is due to see  a  diabetes  nurse
    specialist about these attacks in the week commencing 27 April.   There
    was no other evidence at the hearing and in the documentation there was
    no other reference to this appointment or anything arising from it.

62.  The Applicant's mother has suffered from diabetes  since  1998  and  it
    would appear that she has had a considerable period of time in which to
    learn to live with diabetes.  Other  than  the  hypoglycaemic  episodes
    which appeared from the GP's letter to be a  new  issue  requiring  the
    Applicant's mother to see a specialist nurse, there was no evidence the
    diabetes had become more difficult to control.

63.  There was a substantial  inconsistency  between  the  evidence  of  the
    Applicant that her mother normally went to the gym twice a week and her
    mother's confirmation of her social and other  activities  outside  the
    home as not including any attendance at a gym at hearing replies  50-52
    and 113-115.

64.  When it was put to the Applicant that her claim to work thirteen  hours
    a day would appear to make it difficult for her to care for her  mother
    in the way she described, she explained that she was an  agency  worker
    and could choose when to work and could decline work if her mother  had
    a bad day and required her to remain  at  home.   Whether  or  not  the
    Applicant is an agency worker or on a zero hours contract, or both,  it
    is difficult to reconcile her claim to work a thirteen  hour  day  with
    her claim that she takes time off to care for her mother.   Indeed  her
    mother's evidence was that the Applicant provided tea  and  biscuit  in
    the morning, her mother made her own  light  lunch  and  the  Applicant
    cooked for them at night: see hearing replies 101 and 121-123.

65.  There was  no  evidence  of  any  previous  bad  experience  which  the
    Applicant's mother or anybody close to her might  have  had  with  home
    provided social services or similar and in the absence of such evidence
    I attach only little weight to her claim  or the impact  of  her  claim
    that she is fearful of being abused by social services'  staff  if  any
    personal care which is delivered to her at home is delivered by  social
    services rather than her daughter.  At hearing reply 84 the Applicant's
    mother said the Applicant, her daughter, was the right person  to  care
    for her but this does not mean that it is inappropriate for anyone else
    to look after her needs.  There was no explanation why in the event the
    Applicant was not available, the Applicant's mother's granddaughter  in
    Tottenham, not so far from Hackney where the Applicant and  her  mother
    live, would not be able to assist.

66.  I find the evidence from the Applicant and  her  two  witnesses  to  be
    sparse and in parts embellished in a manner in which the  witness  most
    likely thought would strengthen the Applicant's case.  I have  detailed
    examples in the preceding paragraphs.

67.  The relevant test under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules is whether the Applicant has no ties (including social,  cultural
    or family) with the country to which she would have to go  if  required
    to leave the United Kingdom.  I find  that  since  her  departure  from
    Jamaica in 1999, the Applicant's ties  to  Jamaica  have  significantly
    weakened but having regard to the evidence given at the hearing,  I  am
    not satisfied she has shown on the balance of  probabilities  that  she
    has no ties.  In reaching this conclusion I have had regard to what the
    Upper Tribunal said at paragraph 123 of Ogundimu:-

         "The natural and ordinary meaning of the word  'ties'  imports,  we
         think, a concept involving something more than  merely  remote  and
         abstract links to the country of proposed deportation  or  removal.
         It involves there being a continued  connection  to  life  in  that
         country; something that ties a Claimant to his or  her  country  of
         origin. If this were not the case  then  it  would  appear  that  a
         person's nationality of the country of proposed  deportation  could
         of itself lead to a failure to meet the requirements of  the  rule.
         This would render the application of the rule,  given  the  context
         within which it operates, entirely meaningless."

    I also note what the Court of Appeal said in YM (Uganda) v SSHD  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 1292 at paragraph 51:-

         "... The test was an exacting one.  However, the exercise that  had
         to be conducted was a  'rounded  assessment  of  all  the  relevant
         circumstances' which were not to be confined to  'social,  cultural
         and family' issues."

    In Bossadi (paragraph 276ADE; suitability; ties) [2015 UKUT 00042 (IAC)
    it was said that:-

         "...The FtT was required to consider  in  the  form  of  a  rounded
         assessment whether the Claimant's familial  ties  could  result  in
         support to him in the event of his return to the DRC.  In our  view
         the Strasbourg jurisprudence understands  the  assessment  of  this
         matter to require the decision maker  to  take  into  account  both
         subjective and objective considerations and also to  consider  what
         lies within the choice of a Claimant to achieve."

68.  I have no  doubt  the  Applicant  and  her  mother  consider  that  the
    Applicant's mother is absolutely dependent upon her but  I  have  found
    the evidence about the nature, quality and extent of that dependence to
    have been at the very least  embellished  and  to  contain  unexplained
    inconsistencies to the extent that I am not satisfied that  objectively
    the Applicant's mother is so dependent upon her daughter  that  if  her
    daughter were removed she would not reasonably be able  to  manage  her
    life with dignity, if personal services were necessary and supplied  by
    others, including social services.

69.  The Applicant fails under paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    and I turn to the claim under Article  8  of  the  European  Convention
    outside the Rules.

70.  Adopting the approach to appeals on grounds of Article 8 summarised  at
    paragraphs 7-12 of EB (Kosovo) v SSGD [2008] UKHL 41, the Applicant has
    established a private and family  life  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Her
    proposed removal would be an interference of such gravity that it would
    engage the operation of Article 8.  There was no  suggestion  that  any
    interference would be otherwise than in accordance with the law and for
    the legitimate public end of  the  maintenance  of  proper  immigration
    control.  The assessment of the proportionality of the removal to  that
    legitimate public  end  will  depend  upon  the  circumstances  of  any
    particular case.

71.  There was no evidence before the Tribunal of the  basis  on  which  the
    Applicant had previously been granted discretionary leave but it  would
    appear that the last grant of discretionary leave for three years  from
    3 May 2011 expired after  her  son's  18th  birthday.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's Record of Proceedings shows  that  at  the  First-tier
    hearing the Applicant said she wanted to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    to further her studies and because her mother was in the United Kingdom
    and not in the best of health but there were no details of her mother's
    health and medical condition.

72.  I take into account the length of time the Applicant has  been  in  the
    United Kingdom with leave and that her mother does not enjoy  the  best
    of health.  I also bear in mind the Applicant  is  self-sufficient  and
    fluent in English.  I have found the Applicant and her mother have  not
    given evidence which has been full and frank and looking at it  in  the
    round I do not find the Applicant has shown  the  relationship  between
    her mother and herself shows a dependency which is  of  an  extent  and
    quality such as to establish emotional ties of the  type  which  extend
    beyond normal ties between a parent and an adult child and  so  do  not
    cross the Kugathas threshold.  The extent of  the  Applicant's  private
    and other family life in the United Kingdom is also not such as to make
    her removal to Jamaica disproportionate to the need to maintain  proper
    immigration control.  It  follows  that  the  Applicant's  claim  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention outside the Immigration Rules must
    also fail.

Anonymity

73.  There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  considered
    the appeal I find that none is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law  such  that  it  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision   is
    substituted:-

    1.   The appeal of the SSHD is allowed.

    2.   The appeal of the Applicant is dismissed on immigration grounds.

    3.   The appeal of the Applicant is dismissed on human rights  grounds.



    4.   Anonymity direction not made.



Signed/Official Crest  Date 27. v. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT: FEE AWARD

The Applicant's appeal has been dismissed so no fee award may be made.



Signed/Official Crest  Date 27. v. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
