

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/28812/2011

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 October 2013                             |ON 4 November 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     MR C M G OCKELTON, DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                             MR BARHAM MURDOCHY
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Stevenson, McGill & Co
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal with permission against a  decision  by  Judge  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal Clough dismissing this appeal against  a  refusal  to
   issue a residence card on the basis that the appellant is  the  unmarried
   partner of an EEA national.

2) The appellant is a national of Iraq.  He claimed to be in a  relationship
   with a Polish woman, referred to for the purpose of this  appeal  as  KJ.
   His alleged partner was a student living in Edinburgh  and  working  part
   time.

3) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal found that  the  appellant  and  KJ,
   with whom the appellant claimed to be in a relationship, had never  lived
   together and, from the evidence, did  not  intend  to  do  so  until  the
   appellant had secured some immigration status in the UK.  The  judge  was
   not satisfied that the appellant was in a durable relationship  with  KJ,
   whom the judge accepted was a qualified person.

4) Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was  arguable  that
   the judge's finding that the couple were not in  a  durable  relationship
   was one which was not open to her and was not properly reasoned.

5)  Shortly  before  the  hearing,  on  2  October  2013,  the   appellant's
   solicitors wrote  to  the  Tribunal  to  state  that  they  were  without
   instructions.  They had  been  informed  that  the  appellant  had  taken
   advantage of an Assisted Voluntary Return (AVR) on 30 April 2013 and that
   this had been verified by the Presenting Officer's Unit.  At the hearing,
   Mrs O'Brien confirmed on behalf of the respondent that this was  in  fact
   the case.

6) Mr Stevenson pointed out that as  the  appeal  was  made  under  the  EEA
   Regulations it is not treated as abandoned by  virtue  of  the  appellant
   having left the United Kingdom.  Nevertheless, we are satisfied  that  by
   his conduct in leaving the UK under the AVR  scheme  without  instructing
   his solicitors to continue his appeal the appellant has demonstrated that
   he does not intend to pursue his appeal.

7) We were, in addition, informed by Mr Stevenson  that  he  understood  the
   relationship had broken down between the appellant and KJ.  Based on this
   information, we are satisfied that the appellant has no proper  basis  on
   which to pursue the appeal.  Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed and the
   decision of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Conclusions

8) The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  involve
   the making of an error on a point of law.

9) We do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

10) The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity  and,  no
   application having been made, we make no order in this regard.




Signed                                             Date 4th November 2013

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans

