
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: iA/28014/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 19 June 2014                        |On 15 July 2014           |
|Prepared 20 June 2014                  |                          |

                                   Before
                                LORD MATTHEWS
                     Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    M. Z.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sharma, Counsel, instructed by Malik Law
                       Chambers, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 7 February  1990.
           He first entered the United Kingdom on  25  March  2011  with  a
           grant of leave to enter as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  which
           expired on 30 May 2012.
        2. On 29 May 2012 the Appellant applied  for  a  further  grant  of
           leave to remain in  the  same  capacity.  That  application  was
           refused by reference to paragraphs 322(1A),  245ZX(a),  and  (c)
           of the Immigration Rules on 20 June 2013, and at the same time a
           decision was taken under s47 of the 2006 Act to remove him  from
           the United Kingdom.
        3. The reference to paragraph 322(1A) arose because on 22 July 2011
           the Appellant had been convicted at Redbridge Magistrates  Court
           of three offences committed on 9 July; taking  a  motor  vehicle
           without consent, driving a motor vehicle without a  licence  and
           driving a motor vehicle without  insurance.  He  had  failed  to
           disclose those convictions  in  his  application  for  leave  to
           remain.
        4. The reference to paragraphs 245ZX (a)  and  (c)  arose  because,
           although the Appellant had been assigned a CAS on 28 May 2012 to
           study for an Extended  Postgraduate  Diploma  in  Marketing,  he
           needed to provide an English language test  certificate  in  the
           specified form in support of his application, and had  not  done
           so.  The only certificate relied upon that was  in  the  correct
           form showed that he had failed on  that  occasion  to  pass  the
           threshold score for spoken English.
        5. The Appellant's appeal against those immigration  decisions  was
           heard on 29 January 2014, and it was then  dismissed  under  the
           Immigration Rules, and on Article 8 grounds in  a  Determination
           promulgated on 5 February 2014  by  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Hodgkinson. In the course of that Determination the  Judge  made
           specific reference to the s47 decision,  and  not  just  to  the
           decision to refuse him a further  period  of  leave  to  remain.
           Moreover, we note that, although the Judge had considered in the
           course of his Determination whether the Appellant had  a  viable
           Article 8 appeal against his  removal,  the  Appellant  had  not
           raised any such ground of appeal in the IAFT-1 that  was  lodged
           with the First Tier Tribunal.
        6. By a decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein dated 8 May 2014
           the Upper Tribunal granted the Appellant  permission  to  appeal
           upon each of the four arguments that were then  advanced  as  to
           why the Respondent's decision to make a s47 removal decision  in
           relation to the Appellant  was  unlawful.  The  application  for
           permission to appeal raised no challenge to the dismissal of the
           appeal against the refusal to  vary  the  Appellant's  leave  to
           remain under  the  Immigration  Rules,  nor  did  it  raise  any
           criticism of  the  approach  taken  by  the  Judge  towards  the
           assessment of the evidence relied upon by  the  Appellant  which
           might be said to engage his Article 8 rights.
        7. The Respondent has filed no Rule 24 Notice,  and  the  Appellant
           has not subsequently sought to amend the grounds of challenge to
           the Determination.
        8. Thus the matter comes before us.


      The grounds
        9. When the appeal was called on for  hearing  Mr  Sharma  candidly
           accepted that the four arguments advanced in the grounds to  the
           application for permission to appeal were identical to the  four
           arguments that had been advanced by different Counsel  (who  had
           drafted them) before the Upper Tribunal in Castro (Removals: s47
           (as amended)) [2014] UKUT 234 (IAC). Mr Sharma did  not  however
           accept that we were obliged to follow that decision, in which  a
           Vice Presidential panel had roundly rejected those arguments. He
           told us (upon instructions) that  the  decision  in  Castro  was
           currently the subject of an application for permission to appeal
           to the Court of Appeal (although he could not  tell  us  whether
           this was an application that was  awaiting  a  decision  by  the
           Upper Tribunal, or one that was awaiting a decision by the Court
           of Appeal as a result of renewal following refusal by the  Upper
           Tribunal).  Again,  candidly,  he  informed  us  that   he   was
           instructed to make no concessions in relation to any of the four
           arguments, which might in any way prejudice the ability  of  his
           instructing solicitors, and  their  draftsman,  to  pursue  them
           further elsewhere.
       10. For our own part we  are  satisfied  (and  Mr  Sharma  does  not
           dispute) that the four arguments advanced in the grounds to  the
           application for permission to appeal were never  pursued  before
           the First Tier Tribunal. Moreover,  we  are  satisfied  that  no
           challenge  at  all  was  then  made  by  the  Appellant  to  the
           lawfulness of the s47 decision. It is plain that the Appellant's
           grounds of appeal as  set  out  in  his  IAFT-1,  were  entirely
           focused upon the Respondent's decision to  refuse  to  vary  his
           leave to remain. Whilst Mr Sharma's preparations for the hearing
           were no doubt handicapped by  the  failure  of  his  instructing
           solicitors to furnish him with a legible  copy  of  the  IAFT-1,
           there can be no room for  argument,  on  this  point  at  least.
           Moreover, the terms of the Determination offer no basis for  any
           suggestion that these were arguments that  had  surfaced  during
           the course of the hearing, when the Appellant was represented by
           other solicitors, and Mr Sharma did not seek to persuade us that
           they did. In the circumstances it is extremely difficult to  see
           how the Judge can fairly be criticised for failing to take  upon
           himself the arguments that are now raised upon the lawfulness of
           the s47 decision.
       11. Be that as it may, as set out above, we are satisfied  that  the
           four arguments advanced in the grounds to  the  application  for
           permission to appeal were the subject of full argument by  their
           draftsman, before a Vice  Presidential  panel  in  Castro.  They
           found no favour, for the reasons therein set out, and Mr  Sharma
           has entirely failed to persuade  us  that  we  should  take  any
           different view.
       12. We note Mr Sharma's assertion (which he accepted  was  not  made
           upon instructions from Counsel who appeared in Castro)  that  we
           should infer that the decision in Castro  is  materially  flawed
           for failure to pay regard  to  a  part  of  the  detail  of  the
           argument that Mr Sharma considered must have  been  advanced  to
           the Upper Tribunal, and in particular the argument that passages
           in the decisions of JS (former  unaccompanied  child  -  durable
           solution) Afghanistan [2011] UKUT 568 (IAC) @ [4] and Mirza  and
           others v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 159 @ [18] were authority for  the
           proposition that a lawful removal decision could only be made by
           the Respondent if she had given reasons for it which showed  she
           had taken into  account  all  material  factors,  including  the
           factors set out in paragraph 395C.  It seems to us that, whether
           or not these authorities were placed before the Upper  Tribunal,
           and whether or not this was a part of the detail of the argument
           advanced to the Upper  Tribunal,  there  is  no  merit  in  this
           suggestion.
       13. There is no longer any paragraph  395C  within  the  Immigration
           Rules; the provision was  deleted  on  13  February  2012,  well
           before this application  for  leave  to  remain  was  made,  or,
           refused. Even when it did form part of the Immigration Rules the
           provision in question was limited to "all the  relevant  factors
           known to the Secretary of State".  Mr  Sharma  said  that  where
           factors were unknown to the  Secretary  of  State  the  decision
           letter should say so but that would  be  completely  unrealistic
           and unworkable in practice. Furthermore, we cannot see what  the
           point of any such comment would be.
       14. Mr Sharma was quite  unable  to  identify  to  us  any  relevant
           factor, material to the s47  removal  decision,  which  was  not
           referred to within the Respondent's letter of 20 June 2013. Once
           we had pointed him to the salient passages within  that  letter,
           because of the illegibility of his own copy,  he  accepted  that
           the Appellant's age, his length of  residence  in  the  UK,  his
           immigration history,  and  his  criminal  record  had  all  been
           referred to therein in terms.
       15. In our  judgement,  the  Respondent  can  reasonably  expect  an
           Appellant in the course of his application for leave  to  remain
           to offer details of all the matters that he then considers to be
           material to that application. It is not suggested before us that
           this  Appellant  failed  to  do  so.  As  is  clear   from   the
           unchallenged  decision  of  the  Judge,  the   Respondent   gave
           perfectly adequate reasons for the rejection of that application
           under the Immigration Rules.
       16. For the Respondent to comply  with  Regulation  5(1)(a)  of  the
           Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003 any notice  she  gave  to
           the Appellant of an immigration decision had to  be  accompanied
           by a  statement  of  her  reasons  for  that  decision.  In  our
           judgement, once it was boiled down,  the  core  of  Mr  Sharma's
           argument to us was either that one letter of reasons  could  not
           lawfully accompany two different immigration decisions  made  by
           the Respondent on 20 June 2013 in relation to the Appellant, or,
           if it could, that this letter was unlawful because of a  failure
           to give specific reasons for the s47 decision.
       17. In our judgement this argument is quite misconceived. We can see
           no reason at all why the Respondent should not  write  only  one
           letter of reasons in circumstances such as  these.  Nor  was  Mr
           Sharma able to explain why the letter of 20 June 2013 was not an
           adequate  explanation  of  the  reasons  for  the  s47   removal
           decision. He could  identify  no  material  fact  of  which  the
           Respondent had been informed, that had been left out of account,
           and no immaterial fact that had been taken into account.
       18. In any event, once the  Appellant's  application  for  leave  to
           remain had been refused, then upon the exhaustion of his  appeal
           rights and the expiry of  the  period  of  his  s3C  leave,  the
           Appellant would have no leave to remain in  the  UK.  Mr  Sharma
           could offer no sensible  answer  to  the  simple  question;  why
           should removal not then follow?
       19. In the event, although the  grounds  of  appeal  did  not  raise
           reliance upon Article 8 matters,  the  Judge  did  consider  the
           question of whether or not  the  Appellant's  removal  would  be
           proportionate to the relevant legitimate public interest. It  is
           clear that no evidence was placed before the Judge to  establish
           that  there  was  any  material  matter   in   the   Appellant's
           circumstances that  the  Respondent  had  failed  to  take  into
           account, or which had arisen since the  date  of  decision,  and
           which might establish that his removal would engage his  Article
           8 rights. There was on  the  other  hand  a  very  clear  public
           interest in the Appellant's removal given his lack of any  leave
           to remain, and the matters that the Respondent had  referred  to
           in the course of making her decision by reference  to  paragraph
           322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.
       20. Accordingly this Appellant was not deprived of  the  opportunity
           to present his Article 8 appeal to the Judge as a result of  the
           failure to include reliance upon  his  Article  8  rights  as  a
           ground of appeal; Sarkar [2014] EWCA Civ 195. It has never  been
           suggested that the Appellant has established a "family life"  in
           the UK. No evidence was led to show the nature  or  strength  of
           the "private life" relied upon, and no submissions were advanced
           to the Judge either. In the circumstances  the  evidence  relied
           upon by  the  Appellant  entirely  failed  to  engage  with  the
           guidance to be found in the decisions of the Upper  Tribunal  in
           Nasim [2013] UKUT 610 and Nasim [2014] UKUT 25, and,  the  Court
           of Appeal in Sarkar, and of the Supreme Court  in  Patel  [2013]
           UKSC 72 on the proper approach to Article  8  claims  that  rely
           solely upon "private  life".  We  are  not  persuaded  that  the
           Appellant has established  that  there  was  any  error  in  the
           Judge's decision to dismiss the Article 8 appeal, save of course
           to the extent that he was not seised of any such appeal.
       21. In the circumstances we dismiss the appeal.



   DECISION


      The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on
      5 February 2014 did not involve the making of an  error  of  law  that
      requires that decision to be set aside and  remade.  The  decision  to
      dismiss the appeal is accordingly confirmed.


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
        indirectly identify the Appellant. This direction applies  both  to
        the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply  with  this
        direction could lead to proceedings being brought for  contempt  of
        court.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 20 June 2014



