
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28111/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 20 January 2017                              |On 23 January 2017         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                             Rada Chalgynchieva
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr P Richardson, instructed by Adam Bernard
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Rada Chalgynchieva, date of birth 26.5.80, is a  citizen
    of Kyrgyzstan.

 2. This is her appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Nicholls promulgated 28.7.16, dismissing  on  immigration  grounds  her
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State,  dated  30.7.15,
    to refuse her application made on 11.3.15 for leave to remain in the UK
    on the  basis  of  the  10-years'  long  residency  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 3. The Judge heard the appeal on 22.7.16.

 4. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Saffer  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    21.11.16, on the basis that in the absence of  removal  directions  the
    First-tier Tribunal had no  need  to  consider  whether  removal  would
    breach article 8 ECHR, and that even  if  the  judge  had  gone  on  to
    consider article 8 outside the Rules it is not  clear  what  compelling
    circumstances would have justified engagement of article 8.

 5. However, when the application for permission appeal was renewed to  the
    Upper Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge  O'Connor  granted  permission  on
    15.12.16, observing that the only ground of  appeal  available  to  the
    appellant was on human rights.

 6. Thus the matter came before me on 20.1.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 7. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision of Judge Nicholls should be set aside.

 8. Judge Nicholls found that the appellant could not meet the requirements
    of the Rules and thus dismissed the appeal.

 9. Judge O'Connor granted permission to appeal on the  basis  that  it  is
    arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to  understand  that
    the only ground available  to  the  appellant  was  one  based  on  the
    application of article 8 ECHR. "It is arguable that, as a  consequence,
    the First-tier Tribunal failed to lawfully consider such  ground  -  as
    pleaded in grounds 1 & 2 of the grounds of challenge."

10. In granting permission Judge O'Connor  also  addressed  ground  3,  but
    stated, "It is difficult to see any merit in ground 3, given the  terms
    of section 3C of the 1971 Act at the relevant time and that the  making
    of an EEA application is  not  an  application  for  leave  to  remain.
    Neverthless, he did not refuse permission on that ground.

11. The appellant first entered the UK with leave to remain as a student in
    2005. Her leave was subsequently extended through to February 2010.  An
    application made in March 2010 for further leave to remain as a student
    was refused, but an out of time  application  made  in  July  2010  was
    granted, so that her leave was varied to expire 15.10.12. Mr Richardson
    relies on the circumstances of the appellant's difficulties in  getting
    a CAS and that she had to take legal action in order to do so.

12. In October 2012 the appellant applied for  an  EEA  residence  card  as
    confirmation of a right to reside in the UK as the family member of  an
    EEA national. The application was  refused  on  16.7.13,  although  the
    appellant claims she never received that decision.

13. On 11.3.15 she made the application for settlement in  the  UK  on  the
    basis of 10 years' lawful residence,  which  was  refused  30.7.15  and
    which is the subject of this appeal.

14. It is clear from the above chronology that the appellant could not meet
    the requirements of paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules, as she had
    not accumulated 10 years' continuous lawful residence in  the  UK.  She
    was without any leave between 1.3.10 and 22.8.10, and  since  16.10.12,
    the day following the expiry of her last valid leave. That she made  an
    application for an EEA residence card is irrelevant to the  computation
    of lawful residence, as 3C does not apply to an application made  under
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006,  as  amended.  An  application
    under the regulations is for recognition of an existing status and  not
    for leave to remain. It follows that the application could not possibly
    succeed under the long residence provisions of the  Immigration  Rules.
    In the circumstances, there is no merit in ground 3. In any  event,  it
    was not pursued by Mr Richardson.

15. The covering letter for the application,  dated  10.3.15,  makes  clear
    that the application made was for indefinite leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis of 10 years' long residence and was  made  on  form  SET(LR),  as
    required. The body of the letter sets out why it was considered she met
    the requirements of paragraph 276B  of  the  Immigration  Rules.    The
    grounds of application for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    point out that that the appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  an
    appeal against the refusal of a human  rights  claim  and  pursuant  to
    section 82, as amended, could only be brought on human rights  grounds.
    Mr Staunton accepts this.

16. The refusal decision of the Secretary of State also sets  out  why  the
    appellant does not meet the requirements of Appendix FM in  respect  of
    family life or 276ADE in respect of private life. The appellant  failed
    to provide any evidence that she was in a subsisting relationship  with
    the person claimed to be her family member in the EEA  application,  or
    indeed with anyone else. The application implied that she was a  single
    person, with no spouse or partner, or child in the UK. It is clear from
    [9] of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  appellant
    accepted that although the marriage had not been terminated, she was no
    longer in any subsisting relationship.

17. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  relied  on  the  long
    residence provisions, but in the  alternative  raised  article  8  ECHR
    private life, stating that if she were to be returned to Kyrgyzstan  it
    would be an infringement of  her  article  8  rights,  continuing,  "It
    cannot be considered reasonable for her to leave the UK and establish a
    new life in Kyrgyzstan. The appellant has established a private life in
    the UK with a large support network of family and  friends."   She  did
    not claim any family life in the UK.

18. Judge Nicholls noted at [20] that there was no specific evidence placed
    before or submissions made  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  relating  to
    article 8 ECHR and that, in any event, there was no  removal  decision,
    and thus concluded there was no need to consider article 8 ECHR outside
    the Rules at all. Judge was in error to  disregard  article  8,  simply
    because there was no removal decision. However, it is  clear  from  the
    decision and the judge's record of hearing that although it appears  in
    the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal,  article  8  was  not
    addressed by the appellant's representative at the appeal  hearing.  In
    the circumstances, I am satisfied that the judge  was  not  obliged  to
    address it.  In Sarkar v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2014] EWCA Civ 195 it was held  that,  in  the  circumstances  of  the
    instant case, the Claimant had abandoned the Article 8  claim  referred
    to in the  appeal  notice,  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  when  no
    evidence or argument was  placed  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    support of it.

19. In any event, I am  not  satisfied  that  consideration  of  article  8
    private life would or could have made any difference to the outcome  of
    the appeal on the facts of this case.

20.  Mr  Richardson  submitted,  correctly,  that  although  there  was  no
    immigration grounds of appeal against the  276B  decision,  whether  in
    fact the appellant met  those  requirements  'informs'  any  article  8
    assessment. However, not only was there a gap beyond 28  days  in  2010
    but the appellant's last leave expired in 2012.

21. Mr Richard may be right in pointing out by reference to the Home Office
    Long Residence Guidance that at [18] the judge was in error in  stating
    that the 10 years' long residence  requirements  cannot  be  met  by  a
    person exercising a right  of  residence  under  the  EEA  regulations.
    Clearly it can. However, the appellant has not  demonstrated  that  she
    had any such entitlement of  residence.  Her  application  for  an  EEA
    residence card was refused. The fact that she may not have  received  a
    decision in respect of the same, does not assist the appellant at  all.
    It remains the case that she has not had any valid leave since 2012 and
    could not possibly reach the 10  years'  requirement,  even  exercising
    generous degree of discretion. It follows that there is nothing  within
    the long residence considerations that could assist  the  appellant  on
    article 8 grounds.

22. There was on the facts of this case no basis for the judge to  consider
    article 8 ECHR outside the Rules. The appellant has  identified  no  SS
    (Congo) compelling circumstances to justify consideration of article  8
    private life outside the Rules on the basis  that  those  circumstances
    are inadequately recognised within the  Rules  and  that  it  would  be
    unjustifiably harsh to remove the appellant.

23. The appellant entered the UK as a student and, pursuant to section 117B
    of the 2002 Act, her immigration status was at the  highest  precarious
    and at least from 2012 unlawful. Little weight should  be  accorded  to
    any private life she may have developed in the UK.  As  a  student  she
    must have understood that she had no entitlement to remain  in  the  UK
    except in  accordance  with  the  Immigration  Rules  and  should  have
    expected to return home once her period of study completed. She did not
    do  that  and  has  remained  unlawfully.  Even  if  she  did  have   a
    relationship to justify an EEA residence card, she is no longer in that
    relationship and still has not left the UK.

24. I am satisfied that even if article 8 private life was considered,  and
    bearing in mind that the appellant does not rely on any family life, it
    is  undoubtedly  the  case  that  on  any  Razgar  stepped  assessment,
    balancing on the one hand the appellant's rights to private life and on
    the other the legitimate and necessary aim of the state to protect  the
    economic  welfare  of  the  UK   through   immigration   control,   the
    proportionality balancing exercise would demonstrate that a removal  of
    the  appellant  from  the  UK  was  entirely  proportionate   and   not
    disproportionate.

25. There was no merit in this appeal; it could not have  succeeded.  There
    were some errors of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, but
    they were not material and would not have affected the outcome  of  the
    appeal, which was dismissed.

Conclusions:

26. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup





Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.








Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal to the Upper Tribunal and the First-tier  Tribunal  have
both been dismissed.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

