

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28913/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 April 2014                              |On 11 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ROBERTSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                                     I C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Collins, Counsel, instructed by Howe & Co,
Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Immigration History

 1. The Appellant in this appeal  was  the  Respondent  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing on 23 January 2014. However, for  ease  of  reference,
    the Appellant and Respondent are hereafter referred  to  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  Therefore Ms IC is referred to as  the
    Appellant and the Secretary of State is referred to as the Respondent.


 2. By way of background, the Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe,  born  on
    22 April 1979, who applied for a derivative residence card on the basis
    of her role in the care of her son, T-G, who was born  on  21  November
    2006 and is a British Citizen. She lives with her son and husband, K-G,
    who is a bus-driver. Both she and her husband were diagnosed with,  and
    are being treated for, HIV.  Before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  it  was
    submitted that the Appellant satisfied the  requirements  of  paragraph
    15A of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations,  2006  (as
    amended) and that the decision was in  breach  of  the  rights  of  the
    Appellant and her family under Article 8 ECHR.


 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn allowed the  Appellant's  appeal  under
    Reg 15A, under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules (on  the  basis  of
    her private and family life in the UK) and under Article 8 ECHR.

 4. In the grounds of application, the Respondent asserts  that  the  Judge
    erred because:


        a. He failed to give adequate reasons for findings  on  a  material
           matter in that it was stated in the RL  that  care  of  T-G  was
           shared by both parents  equally  and,  as  K-G  was  an  'exempt
           person' as defined in Regulation 15A (6) (c), the Appellant  did
           not meet the definition of primary  carer.  The  Judge  accepted
           that the father's role in  the  care  of  T-G  was  'not  solely
           financial' and that he 'plays some part  in  looking  after  his
           son,' but despite this found that the Appellant was the  primary
           carer.


        b. He materially misdirected himself in law because:


              i. He failed to appreciate that even if the Appellant was  the
                 primary carer, Reg 15A (2) (b) (iii) requires the Appellant
                 to establish that TG 'would be  unable  to  remain  in  the
                 United Kingdom' if the Appellant was required to leave  the
                 UK. TG's father  had  flexible  working  hours;  he  stated
                 during the hearing that if the Appellant  was  required  to
                 leave the UK, he would not go with her and he would not let
                 their son go either. There was no documentary  evidence  to
                 suggest that the father was unable  to  care  for  his  son
                 either due to his work or due to his medical condition;


             ii. The Judge considered the provisions of Appendix FM-EX.1  as
                 a standalone provision, contrary to the guidance  in  Sabir
                 (Appendix FM-EX.1 not  free  standing)  [2014]  UKUT  00063
                 (IAC),  and  had   therefore   failed   to   consider   the
                 requirements of Appendix FM paragraphs R-LTRPT and E-LTRPT.


 5. In granting permission, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Deans  stated  that
    'the Judge made very careful  findings  under  Article  8.  The  issues
    raised  under  Reg  15A,  are  however,  arguable.  Having  regard   to
    paragraphs 38-39 of the determination, the point raised in  respect  of
    paragraph EX.1 may also be arguable but would not seem  to  affect  the
    outcome. Overall the application for  permission  to  appeal  does  not
    appear to be directed at the outcome of the  appeal  but  only  to  the
    issue of whether it should be allowed under Reg 15A as  well  as  under
    Article 8'.


Submissions

 6. At the outset of the hearing, Mr  Collins,  in  a  bid  to  narrow  the
    issues, stated that it was accepted by the Appellant that the Judge did
    not, under Reg 15A (2)(b)(iii),  consider whether TG would be unable to
    reside in the UK if the Appellant was required to leave, but that  this
    error was not material because he had made sufficient findings of  fact
    on which to conclude that TG would be unable to reside in the  UK.  The
    father's desire to keep his son in the UK did not affect  the  findings
    of fact made by the Judge. As to Article 8, there  appeared  to  be  no
    challenge to the Judge's findings in respect of Article  8  ECHR,  only
    under Appendix FM, and therefore the only challenge was  to  the  route
    taken by the Judge to arrive at her decision.


 7. Ms Isherwood stated that she did not entirely agree  with  Mr  Collins'
    analysis because the challenge  was  that  there  was  a  contradiction
    between  the  Judge's  findings  and  the  RL,  when  the   Appellant's
    application  was  made  on  the  basis   that   both   parents   shared
    responsibility for the care of TG. She therefore relied on the  grounds
    of application, submitting the following:


        a. In the RL, at p 2 of 5, the issue of primary responsibility  was
           clearly raised, and the Judge failed to deal with it.  At  [32],
           the Judge found that the Appellant was TG's primary carer;  this
           contradicted the evidence provided at the date  of  application.
           At [33] the Judge then quoted  from  the  RL  stating  that  the
           Appellant provided "more domesticated care" whereas K-G provided
           "more of a financial contribution towards primary care" but  the
           Judge went on to find that "K-G does not share the care  of  his
           son equally with the appellant  and  that  she  is  the  primary
           carer" [35]. He used the same evidence to reach  the  conclusion
           that the Appellant is the primary carer (that being the  letters
           from T-G's school and nursery referred to at  [32])  to  confirm
           that K-G had some responsibility for T-G's day to day care [35].


        b. The Judge's account of the presenting officer's  submissions  at
           [39] did not accurately reflect the submissions made  on  behalf
           of the Respondent  recorded  at  [24].  The  presenting  officer
           actually submitted that 'there was  no  evidence  that  the  son
           would be unable to reside in the UK without his mother' not that
           'it would be reasonable to expect T-G to live in  Zimbabwe'  and
           therefore the way the Judge viewed  the  evidence  affected  his
           findings of fact which affected his Article 8 assessment.


        c. The finding at [54] was not sufficient to allow the appeal under
           the Regulations or sufficient for the Appellant  not  to  comply
           with the provisions of the Immigration Rules. In his findings at
           [56] the Judge was simply relying on the evidence  in  [54]  and
           not 'looking at the whole picture'.

        d. At [58] the Judge misinterpreted the Respondent's position;  the
           Judge had quoted from the RL at [33], which confirmed  that  the
           Respondent did not accept that the  Appellant  was  the  primary
           carer of T-G. The Judge focused on the  financial  contribution,
           which was not the whole of the picture.

 8. Mr Collins submitted as follows:


        a. The  Judge's  determination  was  meticulous  and  careful;  the
           references to the  RL  by  the  Judge  were  just  that  and  Ms
           Isherwood's submissions ignored the findings of  the  Judge.  At
           [2], he summarised the evidence, and  at  [3]  the  Respondent's
           case. At [7 - 15] the Appellant's evidence was given and at  [16
           - 23], K-G's evidence was provided. The Judge's findings of fact
           started at [28]; he made firm findings at [32] and he considered
           the evidence as to care and made a balanced  decision  at  [35].
           The assertion in the grounds that the reasoning in  relation  to
           the primary care point was inadequate  was  not  made  out.  The
           reference to the findings of the Judge on which his decision  as
           to primary  care  rested  in  paragraph  5  of  the  grounds  of
           application was selective. At [54] the  Judge  made  clear  that
           childcare would be difficult to organise in the absence  of  the
           Appellant.


        b.  Mr  Collins  accepted  that  the  Judge  had  not  specifically
           considered the requirements of Reg 15A(2)(b)(iii) but  submitted
           that the only rational inference that could be  drawn  from  the
           findings of fact was that T-G would be unable to live in the  UK
           if his mother was required to leave the UK. Therefore, the error
           was not material.


        c. As to the provisions of Appendix FM, the route for the parent of
           a  child  was  couched  in  terms  of  sole  responsibility.  As
           recognised by Judge Deans in granting permission, even if  Judge
           Flynn was wrong in relation to the  provisions  of  Appendix  FM
           (and how much Sabir impacts where the route under  consideration
           is the child route rather than the parent route is a matter  for
           discussion),  still  the  Appellant  must  succeed   under   the
           provisions of Article  8  ECHR,  to  which  there  had  been  no
           challenge.


        d. He submitted that the Appellant would  therefore  succeed  under
           Reg 15A but if I was not with them on  that,  she  must  succeed
           under Article 8 ECHR as there was no challenge to  allowing  the
           appeal under this ground in the grounds of appeal.


 9. Ms Isherwood had no additional submissions in reply.


10. I reserved my decision, which  I  now  give  below,  together  with  my
    reasons. In the event that I found a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination, both  Ms  Isherwood  and  Mr  Collins  agreed  that  new
    evidence would need to be  called  as  the  Respondent  would  wish  to
    question K-G further with regard to his medical condition.


Decision and reasons

11. I deal firstly with Ms Isherwood's submissions that the Judge,  in  his
    findings,  contradicted the Respondent's assertions in  the  RL  and/or
    misquoted or misinterpreted the RL and/or the submissions made  by  the
    presenting officer on  behalf  of  the  Respondent  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing as follows:


12. There is no  merit  in  Ms  Isherwood's  submission  that  the  Judge's
    findings contradicted the RL. The purpose of an  appeal  is  to  enable
    each party to present the evidence and for a judge to make findings  of
    fact based on the evidence and to make a decision  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities.  His  function  is  not  to  ensure  that  he  does  not
    contradict the assertions of the Respondent in the RL. Where the  Judge
    has assessed the same or similar evidence to that which was provided to
    the Respondent, he is not bound to reach the same conclusions  on  that
    evidence as was reached by the Respondent in the RL, provided  that  he
    gives adequate reasons for his findings. This would be  the  case  even
    where there is no additional oral  evidence  but  applies  particularly
    where, as  here,  there  was  oral  evidence  as  well  as  documentary
    evidence.

13. There is also no merit  in  the  submission  that  the  Judge  at  [39]
    misquoted the submissions made on behalf of the Respondent (because the
    presenting officer did not submit that it would be reasonable  for  T-G
    to live in Zimbabwe; the presenting officer had  submitted  that  there
    was no evidence that K-G would be unable to care for TG if  his  mother
    was required to leave the UK).  This  is  because  at  [25]  the  Judge
    records that  the  presenting  officer  submitted  that  "it  would  be
    reasonable for the child to relocate to Zimbabwe". This  submission  is
    based on a failure to read the determination carefully.

14. Turning next to the first ground of application, i.e finding  that  the
    Judge's reasoning in relation to the primary care point was inadequate,
    I find that there is no merit in this. Again I find that the Judge  did
    not misinterpret the Respondent's position at [58] where he  stated  "I
    accept, as did the Respondent,  that  the  Appellant  has  been  almost
    wholly responsible for the day to day care of her son..." This  is  not
    so different from his direct quote from the RL at [33], that  is,  that
    the Appellant provided "more domesticated care"  whereas  K-G  provided
    "more of a financial contribution towards  primary  care".  It  is  not
    wrong for a Judge to draw from this  primary  evidence  the  conclusion
    that this "domesticated" or "day to day" care has been provided by  the
    Appellant to T-G since the day of his birth and to  find  "...that  the
    Appellant has been almost wholly responsible for the day to day care of
    her son since he was born". It is a reasonable inference for the  Judge
    to draw that TG therefore "...has a strong emotional dependency on  his
    mother and that he relies on her for assistance with his  daily  needs,
    including medication." Furthermore, there is  nothing  inconsistent  in
    the Judge's references to the school and nursery letters  at  [32]  and
    [35]; at [32] he makes his findings of fact and at [35] he explains his
    findings.


15. Contrary to Ms Isherwood's submissions, I find that the Judge  did  not
    focus simply on one aspect of the care required by  T-G  (whether  this
    was financial [35] or child care [54]); his findings are at [32  -  35,
    39, 54 - 58], and he has considered the 'whole picture'.

16. On a reading of a determination as a whole, I find  that  there  is  no
    merit in the submission that the Judge's findings of fact on the  issue
    of primary responsibility are inadequate.
17. As to ground 2, as accepted on behalf of the  Appellant,  having  found
    that the Appellant was the primary carer of T-G  for  the  purposes  of
    Regulation 15  (2)(a)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006, as amended (the  Regulations),  the  Judge  erred  in
    failing to consider whether T-G would be unable to continue to live  in
    the UK, pursuant to the provisions of Regulation 15 (2)(b)(iii) if  the
    Appellant were removed. Contrary to the submissions on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, there  were  insufficient  findings  of  fact  to  draw  the
    inference that had the Judge directed his mind to this requirement  the
    only logical inference was that T-G would be unable to  remain  in  the
    UK. No medical  evidence  was  supplied  to  establish  that  the  only
    treatment regime that was effective for the father's condition was  the
    regime he was currently on or whether adjustments could be made.  There
    was also no evidence from his employer as to whether adjustments  could
    be made to his hours of employment. However, this error of law is  only
    material, and  a  further  hearing  will  only  be  necessary,  if  the
    Appellant wishes to pursue her claim to  a  derivative  residence  card
    because she is, I find, entitled to a grant of leave to remain  on  the
    findings of the Judge under Article  8  directly  applied  as  set  out
    below.


18. As to ground three, the  'material  misdirection  in  law'  point,  the
    challenge was under Sabir. The Respondent has  not  identified  whether
    the provisions  of  Appendix  FM  in  fact  apply  to  the  Appellant's
    application. Although the Judge dealt with the appeal under Appendix FM
    superficially (not following the approach in Gulshan (Article 8  -  new
    Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) and going  straight  to
    Appendix  FM  paragraph  EX.1,  contrary  to  Sabir),  the  Appellant's
    application was made on 11 November 2011.  The  decision  was  made  in
    March 2012, well before the New Rules came into force.  The  Respondent
    did not deal with the Article 8 claim in the reasons for refusal letter
    and said that she would not do so until a charged application was made.




19. Edgehill and Bhoyroo v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 402 applies.  In  Edgehill,
    it appears that the appellant's application was  made  before  the  new
    Rules came into effect, on the basis of the  14  year  rule  which  she
    could not meet until after the Upper Tribunal had issued  its  decision
    in February 2013; and therefore she had  also  appealed  on  Article  8
    grounds. In that case, before the Court of Appeal,  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent, it was submitted that where an appeal was made on Article 8
    grounds, applications made before 9 July 2012 fell to be decided  under
    the New Rules  because:


        a. Only applications under the Immigration  Rules  would  be  dealt
           with under  the  old  Rules.  However,  all  applications  under
           Article 8 were outside the Rules and  the  provision  that  they
           would be dealt with under the old Rules did not apply to Article
           8 claims; and


        b.  The new Rules applied because the Tribunal on an  appeal  under
           Article 8 was considering the state of affairs at  the  date  of
           hearing, not at the date of the Secretary of State's decision.

20. Both Arguments were rejected by the CA. Lord Justice Laws said that if,
    in deciding an appeal  under  Article  8  there  was  reliance  by  the
    Tribunal on the New Rules in cases where applications were made  before
    9 July 2012, that would be a material error of law.  Therefore,  whilst
    it is an error of law not to follow the approach in Gulshan  and  Sabir
    in Article 8 cases where the application was made after  9  July  2012,
    they cannot apply to cases in which applications were made before  that
    date.


21.  The  Judge  considered  the  Appellant's  application  under  the  new
    Immigration  Rules  when  the  application  was  made  before  the  new
    Immigration Rules were in force and therefore  did  not  apply  to  the
    Appellant's application. It follows, therefore, that he should not have
    applied the approach in Sabir, which applies to the new Rules  and  the
    Judge therefore misdirected himself in law. However, this  error  would
    only be material if the Judge did not go  on  to  consider  the  appeal
    under Article 8 ECHR directly applied.


22. The only challenge to the Judge's assessment of  proportionality  under
    Article 8 directly applied was that his findings of fact as to  primary
    care were flawed for the reasons submitted during  the  hearing.  These
    submissions were unsustainable.  He  directed  himself  properly,  made
    careful findings,  which  are  not  perverse  or  irrational,  he  gave
    adequate reasons  and  his  conclusions  on  proportionality  were  not
    challenged and were open to him on the evidence before him. There is no
    basis on which to set aside  his  decision  to  allow  the  Appellant's
    appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

23. On the basis of the above, a resumed hearing will only be necessary  if
    the Appellant, who on the basis of my  conclusions  is  entitled  to  a
    grant of leave under Article 8 ECHR, wishes to pursue  her  application
    for a  derivative  residence  permit,  which  will  require  additional
    evidence as agreed by the parties at the hearing,  in  the  absence  of
    which there is insufficient evidence before me to find that  T-G  would
    not be able to continue to live in the UK if his mother was required to
    leave. In view of this, the parties were sent directions setting out my
    conclusions and asking the Appellant to confirm whether she  wishes  to
    pursue her application for a derivative residence permit within 10 days
    of the directions being sent out. It was made clear that if no response
    was received, I will assume that a further hearing is unnecessary.


24. The Appellant has not indicated her intention to pursue her application
    for a derivative  residence  card  within  the  stipulated  period  and
    therefore there will not be a resumed hearing.


Decision


25. There are material errors of law in the determination of Judge Flynn as
    set out above. His decision in relation to:


        a. Regulation 13 of the EEA Regulations is set aside. I remake  the
           decision to dismiss the appeal under Regulation 15;


        b. Article 8 under the new Immigration Rules is set aside. I remake
           the decision to dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules.


        c. There are no material errors of law in relation to his  decision
           under Article 8 directly applied and his determination  on  this
           ground therefore stands.

Anonymity


26. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. I continue this
    order pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 on the basis of the  details  relating  to  the  Appellant's
    child and details relating to the medical conditions of  the  Appellant
    and  her  husband.  Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs
    otherwise, the Appellant and her husband and son are granted anonymity.
    No report of these proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify
    them or any member of their family. This direction applies both to  the
    Appellants and the Respondent. Failure to comply  with  this  direction
    could lead to contempt of court proceedings.










Signed                                  Date


M Robertson
Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee has been paid or is payable and therefore no fee award can be made






Signed                     Dated

M Robertson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
