
[pic]
IAC-FH-AI-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/28243/2011
                                                               IA/28246/2011

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) Hearing in Field House        |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 20th January 2014                            |On 27th January 2014       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                             mr p a and mrs y a
                           (AnONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms S Naik, Counsel instructed by Wilson Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are nationals of Ghana and are husband  and  wife.   The
    first Appellant PA entered the United Kingdom  lawfully  on  a  student
    visa on 2nd July 1998 with leave to remain as a student until 2nd  July
    1999.  Subsequent applications for leave to  remain  were  granted.   A
    further application for leave to remain as a student was  refused  with
    no right of appeal but an appeal was lodged on human rights grounds  on
    10th September 2009.  PA sought leave to remain on  the  basis  of  his
    family life with his three children who are minors.

 2. PA's spouse, their eldest  child,  Roland,  and  her  daughter  from  a
    previous relationship, Mavis, entered the UK on 28th May 1999 and  they
    were granted leave to remain until 2nd July 1999.

 3. PA and his spouse have had two children (David and Laurence) whilst  in
    the United Kingdom. Their three children were taken  into  care  and  a
    court order issued on 22nd October 2007 placing them  in  the  care  of
    Leeds City Council.  There have been and are family  court  proceedings
    to which reference will be made later in this decision.

 4. In relation to their immigration status, the appeals of both Appellants
    to be allowed to remain under Article 8 ECHR were dismissed  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Clayton in a  determination  promulgated  on  24th  April
    2012.   Grounds  of  application  were  lodged,  permission  to  appeal
    granted, with the outcome that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  made  an
    error of law and the decision set aside.  The reason was that the judge
    had not focused on the best  interests  of  the  child,  Roland,  as  a
    primary consideration and was wrong to conclude that there had been  no
    meaningful family life between the Appellants and  their  children,  in
    particular Roland.

 5. When the case was called before me on 20th January 2014, I was  advised
    that a family court hearing had been fixed for 17th March 2014  with  a
    time estimate of five days.  I considered whether the hearing should be
    adjourned to await the outcome of the family court proceedings but both
    parties urged me to proceed and given that this case has been beset  by
    delay through no fault of the Appellants it seemed to me appropriate to
    do so.

 6. For the Appellants, Ms Naik confirmed that the case was  proceeding  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds only.

 7. It is helpful to set out, briefly, the statements of both Appellants.

Statements of PA

 8. On 4th September 1995 he applied for a visa to come  to  the  UK  as  a
    student.  In 1999 his wife, Mavis and Roland came  to  join  him  here.
    His other son, Daniel, remained with his aunt in Ghana.

 9. In early 2006, Roland and David were taken from  their  care  by  Leeds
    Social Services.

10. After care proceedings, he and his wife  had  contact  with  David  and
    Roland and he was allowed to meet with  them  six  times  a  year.   In
    October 2008 his wife's contact with David and Roland  was  stopped  by
    the local authority but contact with Roland continued.

11. In his most recent statement he says that Roland is now  16  years  old
    and has indefinite leave to remain.  He is currently in  a  residential
    unit because his last placement broke down.  He and his  wife  now  see
    Roland a lot more than when the case was in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Over the [2013] school summer holiday he and his wife saw  Roland  most
    days and he came to their house over Christmas staying there from  24th
    to 27th December 2013 and also came to see them on New Year's Day.

12. Until last summer Roland was at St Mary's Roman  Catholic  High  School
    where he was elected  Deputy  Head  Boy.   He  has  done  well  in  his
    examinations.  Roland asked for his help in writing a speech and advice
    about which school would be best for him.

13. In 2012 he made an application to the family court to revoke  the  care
    orders in place in respect of all their three sons.  He does  not  know
    when the proceedings will finish.

14. He gets updates from the local authority on David and Laurence who have
    also been granted indefinite leave to remain.

15. The removal of the children was a terrible blow to his wife and removal
    to Ghana would have an awful effect on her because  she  would  not  be
    able to see Roland and she would lose hope  that  she  could  ever  see
    David and Laurence again.

16. He has lived in the UK for just over fifteen years and most of the time
    in Leeds.  Roland is there and David and Laurence are in  the  care  of
    Leeds County Council.  He sees Roland regularly and  still  hopes  that
    one day he will be able to see David and Laurence again.

Statements of YA

17. She married her husband in 1996 and in  1998  he  went  to  the  UK  to
    continue his studies.  In 1999, she, Mavis and Roland travelled to  the
    UK to be with him.

18. In February 2006 their children were taken away from them by the  local
    authorities.  They have been through long court proceedings  about  the
    children.  At first she and her husband were  able  to  see  David  and
    Roland in supervised contact sessions but in October 2008  contact  was
    stopped.

19. In March 2010 she heard Roland was not doing very well  at  school  and
    she met Roland and saw him sometimes as often as once a week.

20. In her most recent statement she says she has been quite ill.   She  is
    anaemic and has collapsed a few times.  They have applied to the  court
    for the care orders that the local  authority  has  for  all  of  their
    children to be revoked.  They have applied for contact with them all.

21. Roland recently stayed with them over Christmas.  She always talked  to
    Roland about his education.  She prepares local Ghanaian food for  him.
    She cannot imagine what it would be like  if  she  could  not  see  him
    anymore.

22. Her daughter Mavis is still living in London and she talks  to  her  on
    the telephone maybe four or five times a month.  She has been here  for
    fourteen years and her life is here.

The Oral Evidence

23. PA gave oral evidence as noted in my Record of Proceedings and  adopted
    his witness statements as true.  He explained why form IS.96  gave  his
    address as in Bromley.

24. In cross-examination he explained how friends and  his  nephew,  Frank,
    were supporting him.  He had limited contact with his family in  Ghana,
    being his mother and extended family.  If returned to  Ghana  he  could
    not go and live with his son  who  was  now  an  adult  and  living  an
    independent life.  He could visit with his mother.   He  would  not  be
    able to keep in contact with Roland if he was returned  to  Ghana.   He
    could do so by  phone  but  that  was  not  the  same  as  meeting  him
    personally.  As a child, Roland did not want  to  stay  away  from  his
    parents and had often come home while in care.  It would  be  extremely
    difficult for Roland to live here without him and his wife.  He had had
    eight different foster carers.  He did not see  other  members  of  the
    family as they were living in London.  Roland had come  to  the  United
    Kingdom when he was aged 18 months and knew nothing about  Ghana.   Nor
    could he visit them  in  Ghana  as  he  was  still  in  care.   In  re-
    examination he said he used to  work  in  Morrisons  Supermarket  as  a
    checkout operator.  As he understood it, once Roland was 18  years  the
    local authority preferred that he stayed with them in order  that  they
    could continue to support him.  If allowed  to  stay  here,  he  had  a
    teaching qualification which he would like to use and looked forward to
    completing his PhD.

25. Mrs YA gave evidence and adopted her statements  as  true.   In  cross-
    examination she said the last time she had worked was in 2006.   Roland
    was her only child she saw.  Whilst her mother was still in Ghana,  her
    family was here and she could not leave.  The process to  see  all  her
    children was ongoing.  In re-examination she was asked about the impact
    for her of being separated from her children.  She  said  it  was  very
    difficult.

Submissions for the Home Office

26. Reliance was placed on the refusal letter dated 20th September 2011.

27. Roland had been in the care of the local authority from the  age  of  8
    and had therefore developed without his parents who  had  been  without
    leave since January 2008.  At paragraph 4.6 in the most  recent  social
    work report from Christine Brown it was noted that Roland was now  more
    independent.  Roland was doing very well  and  it  was  anticipated  he
    would go to university.  The progress  he  had  made  was  without  the
    direct influence of his parents.  It would not be  disproportionate  in
    terms of Article 8 for them to be returned to Ghana.



Submissions for the Appellants

28. Reliance was placed on the skeleton argument.  The  factual  background
    was that both the Appellants had regular informal contact with  Roland.
    Consideration of Article  8  required  consideration  of  a  series  of
    questions as posed by Lord Bingham in Razgar v SSHD [2004] 2 AC and  in
    particular whether the interference was proportionate to the legitimate
    end sought to be achieved.  There was family life in existence in  this
    case and the Appellants were making attempts to develop it.  There  was
    a presumption of family life between a child and its parents.   It  had
    been established that the fact that an Appellant did not meet  all  the
    requirements  of  the  new  Immigration  Rules  was   not   necessarily
    conclusive of their Article 8 case - see MF  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 1192.  In addition, the rights of all family members had to be
    considered.  In terms of ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4, the  court
    had held that the best interests of the child broadly  meant  the  well
    being of the child.

29. The Appellants had strong private and family ties to the UK and enjoyed
    family life with  their  son  Roland.   They  also  continued  to  have
    parental responsibility for Roland (and David)  under  the  care  order
    dated 22nd October 2007.  They continued to have  regular  unsupervised
    contact with Roland.  The report of Christine Brown dated 13th  January
    2014 made it clear that Roland has had an increasing degree of  contact
    with his parents over the last two years and that Roland has very  much
    wanted this contact to take place.  The removal of  the  Appellants  to
    Ghana would clearly interfere with  their  contact  with  Roland.   The
    report also identified that Roland felt that taking  his  parents  away
    from him  would  be  harmful  (paragraph  4.18).   The  Appellants  had
    lawfully migrated to the United Kingdom and did not have a particularly
    poor immigration history.

30. Christine Brown had noted at  paragraph  4.12  that  Roland  very  much
    wanted the contact (with his parents) to take place.

31. The Appellants had been in the United Kingdom for fifteen  and  a  half
    years and fourteen years respectively.  They had nearly qualified under
    the ten years continuous leave to remain  Rule.   Both  Appellants  had
    developed friendships and ties with the community here.

32. Given their long residence, private life and community ties,  it  would
    be disproportionate  to  remove  them  from  the  UK,  there  being  no
    compelling  issue  of  public  interest  which  should  be  capable  of
    outweighing those factors.  I was asked to allow the appeal.

Conclusions

33. The evidence before me is that the relationship between Roland and  his
    parents has improved significantly since the date of the refusal letter
    of 20th September 2011 and I am bound to look at matters as they  stand
    as at the date of hearing before me.  Following  what  is  said  in  ZH
    (above) I consider the best interests of  the  children  as  a  primary
    consideration.  On the evidence before me, the issue to address is  the
    best interests of the Appellants' son, Roland.   The  reports  from  Mr
    Greg Vinnicombe (qualified social worker - see page 67 of  the  bundle)
    indicate that Roland clearly does not want his  parents  to  return  to
    live in Ghana as he believed them to be very significant in  his  life.
    The evidence of Christine Brown (Independent  Social  Worker  to  whose
    report I attach much weight) makes it clear  that  Roland  "very  much"
    wants the contact with his  parents  to  take  place  and  that  it  is
    important to him that the  contact  with  his  parents  continues.   At
    paragraph 4.13 it is noted that Roland says,

         "I need to see my parents; they are tied up  with  me  emotionally,
         educationally.  If I don't see my parents I  become  stressed.   My
         parents helped a lot even through my GCSEs."

34. At paragraph 4.18 it is noted that Roland said,

         "Taking them away from me would be harmful to  me.   I  need  their
         help.  I still regard them as the main people, the main  carers  in
         my life."

35. It is plain that the frequency of contact  that  Roland  has  with  his
    parents has increased as time has moved on  and  on  all  the  evidence
    before me it seems that the relationship he has with his parents can be
    categorised as a strong one as at the date  of  the  hearing.  It  goes
    without saying that such direct contact cannot be replicated by  modern
    means of communication. Christine Brown notes that Richard can  comment
    in a meaningful and informed way on his situation and that  facing  his
    parents (paragraph 5.4).

36. On the evidence before me, the  issue  of  what  is  in  Roland's  best
    interests is not a contentious one.   It  is  clear  from  social  work
    reports that Roland's best  interests  are  that  his  parents'  appeal
    succeeds so that he can continue to  enjoy  his  improving  and  strong
    relationship with them. At paragraph 5.10 Christine Brown notes that if
    Roland is not able to retain his present relationship with his  parents
    this would "jeopardise his future development as an adult". It  is  not
    feasible, and not suggested, that Roland who has lived most of his life
    here and has indefinite leave to remain should accompany his parents to
    Ghana.

37. In terms of the other children, it is difficult to comment on what  are
    their best interests and of course there is  a  family  hearing  taking
    place in March 2014.  It can be said with confidence that the  decision
    to remove all the children from the Appellants was not one which  would
    have been taken lightly but rather  there  must  have  been  compelling
    reasons why that took place.  It suffices to say that I have  not  been
    given the full facts of those decisions and nothing can  be  gained  by
    speculation. As Christine Brown notes at paragraph 3.24 it  is  unclear
    what has occurred in the lives of this family which is why I  focus  on
    the best interests of Roland only as a primary consideration.

38. As Lord Kerr said in ZH (paragraph 46),  "In  reaching  decisions  that
    will affect a child, a primacy of importance must be accorded to  their
    best interests.  It is a factor that must rank higher than any  other."
    He went on to say:-

         "Where the best interests of the child  clearly  favour  a  certain
         course,  that  course  should  be  followed  unless  countervailing
         reasons of considerable force displace them."

    and

         "What is determined to  be  in  a  child's  best  interests  should
         customarily dictate the outcome  of  cases  such  as  the  present,
         therefore, and it will require considerations of substantial moment
         to permit a different result."

39. What then are the countervailing factors which might militate against a
    decision in favour of the Appellants?  There is the  strong  matter  of
    public interest having regard to the economic wellbeing of the  country
    through immigration control.  At the same time it is not suggested that
    these Appellants have a particularly poor immigration history  or  that
    they have any criminal propensities.  Indeed they entered this  country
    lawfully and it appears to be common ground that they were here  for  a
    period close to ten years lawfully before  their  leave  expired.   The
    lengthy time that it  has  taken  since  the  refusal  letter  of  20th
    September 2011 for the Tribunal to deal with the matter cannot be  laid
    at the door of the Appellants.  As stated they were lawful entrants  to
    this country and on 15th September 2007 PA commenced a  five  year  PhD
    course at London College of Business and Management.  There  have  been
    numerous family proceedings  while  the  Appellants  sought  to  regain
    contact with  their  children.   As  noted  in  the  skeleton  argument
    (paragraph 87) PA has spent over fifteen and a half years in the UK and
    of those years nine and a half of which  he  had  continuous  leave  to
    remain as a student which only lapsed on 31st  January  2008.   YA  has
    been in the country for fourteen years.  While it is not permissible to
    take account of any near miss argument, (Patel v SSHD [2013] UKSC  72),
    what is permissible is to conclude that the Appellants  have  spent  so
    much of their time in the UK that  they  have  established  significant
    family and private life here.  They have extended family in the UK  and
    given their unchallenged oral evidence that they rely on the support of
    their extended family  and  friends  to  sustain  them  in  the  United
    Kingdom, it can only be concluded that these ties are very substantial.

40. It would therefore constitute a very serious  interference  with  their
    private and family life if they were removed to Ghana. It would clearly
    not be in Roland's best  interests  for  his  parents  to  be  removed.
    Looking to the future and the hearing fixed for March 2014, it is clear
    from the evidence presented to me that it is highly unlikely  that  the
    Appellants' contact with Roland would be reduced by any  order  of  the
    court.

41. With reference to the final question posed by Lord Bingham in Razgar, I
    have concluded, for the reasons given above, that the interference with
    the  Appellants'  lives  by  returning  them  to  Ghana  would  not  be
    proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to  be  achieved.   I
    have concluded that the removal would prejudice their family life in  a
    manner "sufficiently serious to amount to a breach of  the  fundamental
    right protected by Article 8" - see Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL  11.    To
    use the words of Lord Kerr  in  ZH,  there  are  no  considerations  of
    substantial moment to permit a  different  result  in  this  appeal.  I
    regard the circumstances of the family (the Appellants and  Roland)  as
    compelling which demand a decision in their favour.

42. I am therefore allowing the appeal under  Article  8  ECHR.   It  seems
    appropriate to maintain the anonymity order in this case.









Decision

43. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.



Signed                              Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or is payable and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

                          Approval for Promulgation


|Name of Deputy Judge issuing      |Mr J G Macdonald                  |
|approval:                         |                                  |
|Appellants' Names:                |Peter Appiah                      |
|                                  |Yaa Appiah                        |
|Case Numbers:                     |IA/28243/2011                     |
|                                  |IA/28246/2011                     |

Oral determination (please indicate)


I approve the attached Determination for promulgation

Name:    JG Macdonald

Date:         27th January 2014


Amendments that require further action by Promulgation section:

Change of address:

           Rep:                         Appellant:
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |

Other Information:
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |



