
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28725/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford               |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 12th September 2013          |On 6th January 2014             |
|and 11th December 2013          |                                |
|                                |................................|
|                                |.......                         |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                           Mr tabrizi behrooz moui
                          (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Khan, Counsel instructed by
For the Respondent:    Mr Divnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. The appellant is an Iranian national who was  born  on  the  23rd  July
    1960. He appeals from the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Mensah) to dismiss his appeal against the respondent's refusal  of  his
    application for indefinite leave to remain, made on the  basis  of  his
    long residence in the United Kingdom.

Background

 2. The background facts of the appeal have never really been in doubt, and
    may be summarised as follows.  The  appellant  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on the 20th August 1976 and has continuously resided here  ever
    since. He was initially granted leave to remain  as  a  visitor  for  a
    period of two months. This was subsequently extended, for  the  purpose
    of study, until the 30th June 1977. On  the  22nd  November  1983,  the
    respondent ordered the appellant's deportation on the  ground  that  he
    had remained in the United Kingdom without leave  since  the  1st  July
    1977. For reasons that have yet to be fully determined, that order  was
    not enforced. The appellant made the instant  application  on  the  3rd
    April 2012, and this was refused on the 23rd November 2012  (hereafter,
    "the decision"). At the same time the respondent served him with notice
    that a decision had been taken to remove him from the United Kingdom.

 3. The respondent considered the appellant's application  under  paragraph
    276B(i)(b) of the Immigration  Rules,  which  requires  (amongst  other
    things) that the applicant -

             ... has had at least 14  years  continuous  residence  in  the
             United Kingdom  excluding  any  period  spent  in  the  United
             Kingdom following service ... of  a  notice  of  intention  to
             deport him from the United Kingdom ... [emphasis added]

 4. The respondent's official (hereafter,  "the  decision-maker")  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant had resided in the United  Kingdom  for  a
    continuous period of 14 years and in any event relied upon  the  period
    that is excluded from the calculation by the words I have emphasised in
    the preceding paragraph. In considering whether the appellant's removal
    breached the appellant's right to respect for private and  family  life
    under Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention for the  Protection  of
    Human Rights  and  Fundamental  Freedoms,  the  decision-maker  applied
    paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules.  This  was
    notwithstanding the fact that those provisions were applicable only  to
    applications that were made on or after the 9th July 2012.

Proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant's case appears to have been argued in the  First-tier  on
    the  basis  that  he  qualified  for  long  residence  under  paragraph
    276B(i)(a): i.e. 10 years lawful residence in the United Kingdom.  This
    was notwithstanding the fact that, whilst it was the  appellant's  case
    that he had resided for upwards of 30 years in the United Kingdom, less
    than a year of this had been with leave to remain. There  also  appears
    to have been some  confusion  in  the  First-tier  as  to  whether  the
    respondent  had  ordered  the  appellant's  deportation  due   to   his
    conviction for a criminal offence or (as  was  in  fact  the  case)  by
    reason of his overstaying his leave to remain.  Finally,  it  seems  to
    have been accepted that the Tribunal had power to revoke the order  for
    deportation order  of  the  22nd  November  1983.  Having  noted  these
    misconceptions, it is now appropriate to turn to the  key  passages  in
    the judge's determination:

     11. I do not accept the appellant can  meet  the  requirements  of  the
         Immigration rules (sic) for long residence because I accept he  did
         not have 10 years lawful residence and I accept a deportation order
         was validly issued against him because the Home office  (sic)  have
         produced it. I do not accept the appellant did receive this  if  he
         remained at the last address he gave to the Home office (sic).  The
         appellant chose to withdraw his  appeal  and  go  into  hiding  and
         accepts  this.  In  those  circumstances  I  find  the  appellant's
         applications under long residence under the rules fail.

     12. I do however accept the appellant entered the UK in  1976  and  has
         been living with his brother and sister in law every since. I heard
         evidence from the family and have considered letters. I accept  the
         appellant gave a false name in order to access the NHS and I accept
         he has remained hidden from the authorities. The family admit  they
         have hidden him  from  the  authorities  and  did  not  inform  the
         authorities he was still living with them. The  appellant  lied  at
         the hearing when he told me he had never worked and  I  prefer  the
         evidence of his brother who told me he had worked  on  and  off  in
         Pizza shops.

     13. The appellant and his brother were fairly vague on the  details  of
         the conviction and the appellant's legal  representatives  did  not
         file  any  documentation  regarding  the  criteria  for  making   a
         deportation order in 1983. In fact they failed to file any evidence
         to suggest the decision was not completely lawful. I therefore find
         there is no evidence  before  me  to  support  the  submission  the
         deportation order should not have been made in 1983.

     14. It has been argued it should be revoked because the  appellant  did
         not serve a prison sentence. Whilst  this  is  a  condition  for  a
         mandatory decision to issue a notice of intention to deport  today,
         I have insufficient evidence before me about the conviction  to  be
         able to safely consider whether it should be revoked.  I  therefore
         refuse to revoke the  deportation  order.  I  have  been  given  no
         reasons why the conviction, sentencing judges  (sic)  remarks  etc.
         have not been placed before me by the  appellant's  representatives
         as it is the appellant who seeks to assert it should be revoked.

     15. Despite the above on the evidence before me I accept the  appellant
         has spent the last 30 years living "on and off"  with  his  brother
         and supporting himself on and off whilst working in Takeaways. I do
         not accept that his relationship with his brother and his brother's
         family is anything more  than  the  normal  ties  of  adult  family
         members or that he is anything more than  an  Uncle  (sic)  to  his
         nephew. I accept he may be closer to them because he has lived with
         them on their own evidence "on and off" but this  does  not  in  my
         view make the relationship anything more than one would expect from
         normal family ties.

 6. In light of the above findings, the judge went on to  consider  whether
    the appellant's removal would constitute  a  breach  of  his  right  to
    respect for private and family life. She concluded that the appellant's
    predicament was "completely of his own making", and considered that  in
    all the  circumstances  removal  was  necessary  and  proportionate  in
    securing the economic well being of the country by means of immigration
    controls.

My decision concerning the First-tier Tribunal's error of law

 7. As Ms Khan pointed out,  the  judge  clearly  did  not  understand  the
    context in which the Secretary of State made deportation  orders  prior
    to the introduction of "administrative removal", by Section 10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  However,  this  is  not  in  my  view
    material to the grounds upon which the Ms Khan now bases the appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal. Those grounds are essentially twofold; namely, that
    the judge -

      i) did not make a clear finding as to whether  and when the  appellant
         had been served with notice of the deportation order that had  been
         made on the 22nd November 1983; and

     ii) ought in any event to have found that the removal decision  of  the
         23rd November 2012  had  retrospectively  revoked  the  deportation
         order of the 22nd November 1983, so as to render it void ab initio.

    Both grounds are of course central to the operation  of  the  exclusion
    period for the purpose of calculating  the  period  of  long  residence
    under paragraph 276B of the Immigration  Rules.  I  will  consider  the
    second ground first.

 8. Ms Khan submitted that even if (which she did not accept) the appellant
    had been served with notice of   the  deportation  order  of  the  22nd
    November 1983, it did not have the effect of 'stopping the clock'  when
    calculating the period of residence under the  Rules.  This  submission
    was based entirely upon a passing remark made by Sullivan J (as he then
    was) at paragraph 91 of R v SSHD ex parte Popatia [2000] EWHC  556,  in
    which he observed that, "re-service  [upon  an  absconder]  necessarily
    implies revocation of an earlier order". However, that remark was  made
    within the context  of  the  Secretary  of  State  making  a  conscious
    decision to reconsider the merits of the appellant's removal  in  light
    of the changed circumstances that had arisen since the  making  of  the
    original deportation. This much is in my view clear from  paragraph  94
    of the judgement. In this case, however, there is no evidence that  the
    decision-maker was even aware of the existence of  the  earlier  order,
    still less that he addressed his mind to the question  of  whether  its
    enforcement,  almost  exactly  20  years   later,   continued   to   be
    appropriate.

 9. However, even if the removal decision of the  23rd  November  2012  did
    imply revocation of the earlier order, there is in my view no basis for
    suggesting that its revocation acted retrospectively. Ms Khan expressed
    some surprise when I put this proposition to her at  the  hearing,  and
    she invited  me  to  direct  disclosure  of  the  relevant  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions as an aid to interpretation. However, not only
    do I regard the proposition as self-evident, but support for it can  be
    found for it within the terms  of  the  Immigration  Rules  themselves.
    Thus,  paragraph  390  (which  deals  with  applications  to  revoke  a
    deportation order) requires the  decision-maker  to  consider,  amongst
    other things, whether there has been a material change of circumstances
    since the making of the original deportation  order.  Those  words  are
    wholly inconsistent with the notion that revocation has a retrospective
    effect. On the contrary, they clearly show that revocation is  intended
    to reflect developments that have occurred since the circumstances that
    gave rise to the making of the order. Moreover, I am satisfied that the
    purpose of the long-residence provisions is to allow for the settlement
    of those who, unaware of the Secretary of State's intention  to  remove
    them, may have gained a measure of psychological security from the fact
    of their long residence. That purpose would be entirely negated were  I
    to accept Ms Khan's submission concerning effect of  revocation.  I  am
    therefore satisfied that the only circumstance in which a  duly  served
    notice of deportation might not 'stop the clock' would be in the  event
    of it being quashed upon judicial review.

10. Ms Khan was however on much firmer ground in relation to her  complaint
    that the judge failed to make a clear finding as to whether  notice  of
    the deportation order had  been  served  upon  the  appellant.  Such  a
    finding was necessary because service of  notice  of  an  intention  to
    deport is explicitly required by paragraph 276B in order to  'stop  the
    clock'. Paragraph 11 of the  judge's  determination,  particularly  its
    second sentence, is extremely difficult to follow. Her reference to the
    deportation order having been "validly issued against him"  appears  to
    gloss over the question of  service.  There  is  no  reference  to  the
    question of which party bears the burden of proving service (Mr Divnycz
    accepted that it is the respondent). In all the circumstances, I am not
    satisfied that the judge addressed  her  mind  to  an  issue  that  was
    potentially determinative of the appeal.

11. Having indicated to the representatives at  the  hearing  on  the  12th
    September 2013 that I intended to remake the decision  in  relation  to
    the service of notice of the Secretary of State's intention in 1983  to
    deport the appellant, Mr Diwnycz informed me that he  wished  to  serve
    additional evidence upon the appellant in relation  to  that  issue.  I
    considered that it was obviously unfair to expect the appellant to meet
    this evidence at such short  notice,  and  I  therefore  adjourned  the
    hearing of this aspect of the appeal to the first available date  after
    six weeks that would be convenient to Ms Khan. The matter was thus  re-
    listed before me on the 11th December 2013 in order for me to determine
    whether there had been effective service  of  the  deportation  on  the
    appellant so as to "stop the clock"  and  thus  prevent  the  appellant
    acquiring a right of  residence  by  reason  of  14  years'  continuous
    residence in the United Kingdom.

The evidence

12. In addition to the documentary evidence that had been before the First-
    tier Tribunal, I received  a  further  bundle  of  documents  from  the
    respondent containing documents variously dated between the 12th August
    1981 and the 4th October 1987, and a further bundle of  documents  from
    the appellant containing  his  witness  statement  dated  the  ...  and
    further statements  from  Mr  Mohamed  Moui  Tabrizi  (the  appellant's
    brother) and Mrs Beverley Moui Tabrizi (his brother's wife).

13. I heard oral testimony,  in  each  case  given  in  English,  from  the
    appellant, Mr Mohamed Moui Tabrizi, and Mrs Beverley  Moui  Tabrizi.  I
    thereafter heard helpful submissions from each of  the  representatives
    before reserving my decision, which appears below.

Legal self-directions

14. The  burden  of  proving  that  there  was  effective  service  of  the
    deportation order rests upon the respondent and the standard  of  proof
    is a balance of probabilities.

15.  The representatives agreed that the  requirements  for  service  of  a
    deportation order were, at the  material  time,  to  be  found  in  the
    Immigration Appeals (Notices) Regulations  1972.  These  required  that
    written notice of the decision should be given "as soon as practicable"
    (Regulation 3) and that service may be by post in a  registered  letter
    or by the recorded delivery service to his last known or usual place of
    abode (Regulation 6).

16. I am bound to  be  selective  in  my  references  to  the  evidence  in
    explaining the reasons for my findings. However, I  wish  to  emphasise
    that I considered all the evidence in  the  round  in  arriving  at  my
    conclusions.

Findings

17. There is no direct evidence - such as formal proof of  posting  -  that
    notice of the decision to deport the appellant  was  served  upon  him.
    There is however a significant body of circumstantial evidence to  show
    that notice of the decision was delivered by post  to  the  appellant's
    last-known address, at 15 to 21 Victoria Centre, Nottingham,  NG1  3PN,
    on a date that was  sometime  prior  to  the  14th  July  1984.  It  is
    necessary at this stage to summarise that evidence  before  I  turn  to
    consider the evidence that is put forward  by  the  appellant  and  his
    witnesses by way explanation for it.

18. I find  that  the  following  primary  facts  are  established  by  the
    documents  that  are  set  forth,  in  chronological  order,   in   the
    respondent's most recent bundle of documents.

19.  On  the  22nd  July  1980,  the  appellant  was  convicted  at  Bolton
    Magistrates Court of an offence of attempting dishonestly to  obtain  a
    G.C.E. ('O' level) certificate by sitting an examination in the name of
    another. He was sentenced to a fine and ordered to pay costs.  Attempts
    to enforce that sentence at the  appellant's  then  address  in  Bolton
    proved fruitless.

20. On the 22nd July 1981, the appellant withdrew  his  appeal  against  an
    earlier decision to refuse him leave to remain in the United Kingdom as
    a student. He did however ask for a review of  the  original  decision.
    This was refused on the 17th September 1982. The appellant's Member  of
    Parliament then intervened on his behalf.  Consequently,  on  the  13th
    December 1882, the appellant was visited by an immigration  officer  at
    the flat in which he was then living with his  brother  and  sister-in-
    law, namely, 15 to 21  Victoria  Centre,  Nottingham  (above).  In  the
    course of the interview that followed, the appellant said that  he  had
    no fear of returning to Iran because his father continued to reside and
    operate a haulage business there without difficulty. The appellant  was
    also questioned about the studies he was supposedly undertaking at that
    time. Having  made  appropriate  enquiries,  however,  the  immigration
    officer concluded that there was nothing to indicate that the appellant
    was genuinely studying in the United Kingdom and thus no reason why  he
    should not return to Iran. He therefore recommended  that  the  earlier
    refusal to grant the  appellant  further  leave  to  remain  should  be
    maintained. On the 10th March 1983,  the  then  Home  Secretary  (David
    Waddington) informed the appellant's MP of  this  decision  by  letter.
    That letter concluded by saying  that  the  appellant  "must  now  make
    arrangements to leave the United Kingdom forthwith,  failing  which  he
    will be deported". A similar but much shorter letter was  sent  to  the
    appellant on the 17th March 1983 at his last known address,  15  to  21
    Victoria Centre, Nottingham.

21. The Secretary of State signed an order for the appellant's  deportation
    on the 22nd November 1983. On the same day, he  also  signed  a  letter
    addressed to the appellant giving notice that  the  decision  had  been
    made to deport him. It is the question of whether this second  document
    was served upon the appellant that lies at the heart of this appeal.

22. Directions for  the  appellant's  removal  were  issued  to  the  Chief
    Constable of Nottingham on the 6th  December  1983.  These  were  later
    superseded by further directions, issued on the 28th February 1984.  It
    is reasonable to suppose that the police made some  effort  to  execute
    those directions.

23. On the 14th July 1983, the appellant's brother (Mohamed Moui) wrote  to
    the Home Office. His letter was received by the Home Office on the 19th
    July 1984. The address of  the  sender  is  given  as  '15-21  Victoria
    Centre, Nottingham, NG1 3PN'. The opening sentence reads: "I am writing
    on  behalf  of  my  brother,  Behrooz  Moui  Tabrizi,  concerning   his
    deportation order". Mohamed Moui  appealed  for  the  appellant  to  be
    allowed to remain in the United Kingdom until circumstance in Iran  had
    improved, and he stressed that the appellant did not wish to remain  in
    the United Kingdom indefinitely. It stated that the appellant was aware
    that the Home Office was looking for him, but stated that his fear  was
    "so great that he does not know what to do for the best".

24. The Home Office eventually replied to Mohamed Moui's letter on the 20th
    November 1984. After apologising for the delay in  replying  (it  would
    seem that some things never change) a  Home  Office  official  informed
    Mohamed Moui that the Home Secretary  had  concluded  that  there  were
    insufficient  compassionate  circumstances  to  justify  granting   the
    appellant exceptional leave to remain. It concluded by stating that the
    appellant should  make  immediate  arrangements  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom failing which,  "arrangements  will  continue  to  enforce  his
    departure".

25. Enquiries continued with a view  to  enforcing  the  deportation  order
    against the appellant, all to no avail. On the 23rd September 1987,  an
    immigration officer and a police officer attended at what was then  the
    last known address of  Mohamed  Moui;  namely,  149  Tenbury  Crescent,
    Aspley  Estate,  Nottingham.  Upon  speaking  to  a   neighbour,   they
    discovered that the family were no longer  residing  at  that  address.
    However they were  given  a  Sheffield  telephone  number:  305882.  On
    calling that number, the officers spoke  to  a  person  who  identified
    herself as the appellant's sister-in-law. She claimed that she and  her
    husband had not had any contact with the appellant  for  at  least  two
    years, and that neither of them was aware of his  current  whereabouts.
    She was thus unable to assist with their enquiries.

26. The oral testimony of the appellant, his brother,  and  his  sister-in-
    law, may be summarised as follows.

27. The appellant says that he moved out of his brother's flat at 15 to  21
    Victoria Centre, Nottingham,  during  the  summer  of  1983.  This  was
    because his sister-in-law was pregnant and there would be no  room  for
    him once the baby was born. The appellant therefore  moved  to  a  flat
    above a shop in Sutton-in-Ashfield near Mansfield, Nottinghamshire.  He
    did not inform the Home Office of this change of address.  Although  he
    could be contacted by telephone (there was  a  telephone  in  the  shop
    below his flat) he did not have any contact at  all  with  his  brother
    until about 1984 or 1985, when his brother and  sister-in-law  came  to
    visit him, together with their eldest daughter who  was  by  then  aged
    about 12 months. The appellant was unaware that his brother had written
    to the Home Office on his behalf in July 1984 prior to his letter being
    disclosed during the course of these proceedings. Contrary to  what  is
    stated in that letter, the appellant was unaware at that time that  the
    Home Office were looking at him.

28. Mohamed Moui Tibrizi is the appellant's brother.  He  does  not  recall
    writing the letter of the 14th July 1984. However, he acknowledges that
    he must have done so because it is written in his hand.  He  had  never
    received written notice of his brother's deportation, whether  by  post
    or otherwise. He must have used the term 'deportation' in his letter as
    a result of hearing it being used in connection  with  others  who  had
    been removed from the United Kingdom. However, he did at one time see a
    letter from the Home Office in which it was stated that  the  appellant
    should leave  the  United  Kingdom.  Although  he  no  longer  has  any
    recollection of writing it, he speculates that his letter to  the  Home
    Office was prompted by that letter. It was certainly not the case  that
    the appellant had asked him to write it. He cannot now  recall  whether
    he told his brother of the letter at the time. It is however  unlikely,
    as he did not have any contact at all with him for a period of  between
    1 and 2 years after the  appellant  moved  to  Sutton.  There  was  one
    occasion thereafter when he visited the appellant in his flat  above  a
    shop in Sutton. He recalls that his wife received a telephone call from
    the Home Office concerning the appellant's whereabouts.  This  occurred
    after he moved, in  1986,  to  Sheffield.  He  thereafter  invited  the
    appellant to join him in Sheffield in order to help in his takeaway.

29. Beverley Tibrizi is the wife  of  Mohamed  Moui  Tibrizi.  She  has  no
    recollection of speaking by telephone  to  an  Immigration  Officer  in
    September 1987. She does however acknowledge that the telephone  number
    (Sheffield 305802) on which the Immigration Officer says that he  spoke
    to a person identifying herself as the appellant's sister-in-law, is in
    fact her landline telephone number. She knew that the appellant had  to
    return to Iran but not that he was the subject of a deportation  order.
    Her husband had told her that if Home Office officials  discovered  the
    appellant's whereabouts they would send him back to Iran. She was aware
    that prior to him joining her family in Sheffield,  the  appellant  had
    been living in  Sutton-in-Ashfield.  It  follows  from  this  that  any
    suggestion by her that she was unaware of  his  whereabouts  would  not
    have been true. However, neither she nor her family  ever  visited  the
    appellant at his flat in Sutton.

30. I do not believe a word of the evidence that I heard from the appellant
    and his two witnesses.  The  only  possible  reason  for  Mohamed  Moui
    Tibrizi writing the letter that he did in July 1984 was because both he
    and his brother had received notice of the fact that an order had  been
    made for the appellant's deportation. The  letter  states  that  it  is
    written on behalf of the appellant and makes explicit reference to  the
    Home Office's intention to deport him.  Moreover, Mohamed Moui  was  at
    that time still residing at the address to which the Home Office  would
    have sent notice of the decision to deport the appellant. This provides
    overwhelming  circumstantial  evidence  of   service   of   notice   of
    deportation. Furthermore, I have no doubt  it  was  the  fact  of  such
    service  that  precipitated  the  appellant's  decision  to  leave  his
    brother's flat in Nottingham in order to avoid enforcement, rather than
    (as he claims) the impending addition to his  brother's  family.  I  am
    prepared to accept that Mohamed and Beverley Tibrizi only  visited  the
    appellant on one occasion whilst he was hiding at an address in Sutton-
    in-Ashfield. No doubt they were wary of leading the authorities to  the
    appellant's door. I have no doubt, however, that the appellant and  his
    brother maintained regular telephone contact with each  other.  In  the
    absence of any suggestion that there had  been  a  rift  between  them,
    there was not reason for them not  to  have  done  so.  Moreover,  upon
    reading Mohamed Tibrizi's letter as a whole, it is clear  that  it  was
    written at the appellant's request. I  am  further  satisfied  that  an
    Immigration Officer spoke to Beverley Tibrizi by telephone in September
    2007, and that she on that occasion untruthfully  stated  that  neither
    she nor her husband had had any form of contact with the appellant  for
    over two years. I find that her claim at the  hearing  that  she  never
    visited the appellant in Sutton-in-Ashfield (which was contrary to what
    was said by both the appellant and her husband) was the result  of  her
    desire to give an account that was, so far as possible, consistent with
    that which she had given to the Immigration Officer in  that  telephone
    interview. I therefore find as a fact that  the  appellant  was  served
    with written notice of the deportation order on a day between the  22nd
    November 1983 and the 14th July 1984.

Analysis

31. The effect of service  of  notice  of  the  deportation  order  on  the
    appellant by, at the latest, the 14th July  1984,  had  the  effect  of
    'stopping the clock' for the purpose of the  appellant  qualifying  for
    leave to remain by reason of his long residence in the United  Kingdom.
    By that time, he had resided in the United  Kingdom  for  a  period  of
    rather less than eight years.  This was  slightly  over  one  half  the
    period of residence required by paragraph 276B and  slightly  over  one
    third of the period that is required by paragraph  276ADE.  It  follows
    that the respondent's  decision  was  in  accordance  with  Immigration
    Rules.

32. I have heard little by  way  of  evidence  concerning  the  appellant's
    relationship with his minor nephews/nieces, and there  is  no  evidence
    that his  relationship  with  his  adult  brother  extends  beyond  the
    ordinary emotional ties of an adult sibling. I have heard  no  evidence
    as to whether the  appellant  has  surviving  family  members  who  are
    resident in Iran. Nevertheless, in view of his long  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom, I am satisfied that the consequences of the appellant's
    removal to Iran are of sufficient gravity to surmount the modest hurdle
    necessary for engagement of Article 8 of the 1950  European  Convention
    for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. The lawful
    basis for the appellant's removal is Section 3(5)  of  the  Immigration
    Act 1971, and I am satisfied that  it  is  necessary  in  a  democratic
    society in order to maintain the economic well  being  of  the  country
    through the consistent application of immigration  controls.  Moreover,
    having regard to the fact that the appellant's long  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom has been very largely achieved through what I find  were
    his determined efforts  to  evade  those  immigration  controls,  I  am
    satisfied removal would be proportionate to that end.

Decision

33. The First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law and  its  decision
    is set aside. The appeal against the decision to refuse the appellant's
    application for indefinite leave to remain and to remove the  appellant
    to Iran  is  nevertheless  dismissed,  and  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision accordingly stands.



Anonymity was not directed in the First-tier Tribunal and is  not  therefore
directed in the Upper Tribunal.



Signed                                  Date: 4th January 2014

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

