
           [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/28523/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Phoenix House                 |                 Determination   |
|                                       |Promulgated                      |
|On 11 May 2015                         |                 On 17 June 2015 |
|                                       |                                 |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                              MR KULSHAAN SINGH

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms S Najma, Legal Representative
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant in this appeal is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department. The respondent is a national of India born  on  30  September
   1987. However for the sake of convenience I shall refer to  Mr  Singh  as
   the appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent which are  the
   designations they had before the First-tier Tribunal.


2. The appellant appealed against the decision of the  respondent,  dated  8
   July 2014 for leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  1
   (entrepreneur)  Migrant.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Boyd  allowed  the
   appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.


3. A Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ransley granted  the  appellant  leave
   to appeal on 27 January 2015 stating that it is arguable that  the  Judge
   erred in law in taking  into  account  post-decision  evidence  which  is
   precluded by section 85A, being evidence that had not  been  lodged  with
   the application and which did not come  within  paragraph  245AA  of  the
   Immigration Rules.


   First-tier Tribunal's findings


4. The Judge made the  following  findings  in  his  determination  which  I
   summarise. In order for the appellant to succeed he has to establish,  on
   a balance of probabilities that he meet the requirements of paragraph 245
   ED of the Immigration Rules. It is not disputed that the appellant  meets
   the requirements of Appendix B and Appendix C of the  Immigration  Rules.
   His refusal solely relates to  appendix  A  attributes  under  access  to
   funds,  funds  held  in  regulated  financial  institutions   and   funds
   disposable in the United Kingdom and also paragraph 245 ED (a) and (i) of
   the Immigration Rules. As this  is  a  case  under  part  six  A  of  the
   Immigration Rules in relation to a  points-based  application,  I  cannot
   take into account any documents not lodged at the time of the application
   under is permitted under paragraph 245 AA of the immigration rules.


   Grounds of appeal


5. Despite correctly directing himself at paragraph 16 of the  determination
   that he cannot take into account any documentation not  lodged  with  the
   application and is permitted by  paragraph  245  AA  of  the  immigration
   rules, the Judge  proceeded  to  take  into  account  evidence  which  is
   precluded by section 85A in his assessment of  the  general  business  of
   otherwise of the appellant's business. Specifically, he has referenced to
   the following evidence. That the appellant's father  statement  regarding
   the origin of the funds (paragraph  eight of the determination  and  page
   27 of the appellant's bundle) letter from the  contractor  regarding  the
   contract paragraph 23 and page 222 of the  appellant's  bundle),  NatWest
   accounts paragraph 23 referring to page 70  of  the  appellant's  bundle)
   letter from DSP regarding  an  application  for  a  business  account  at
   paragraph 27 and page 278- 280 of  the  appellant's  bundle)  he  further
   refers to the evidence in the round including the very substantial bundle
   of documents provided for the appeal hearing.


6. None of the above evidence was submitted with  the  application.  All  of
   the above evidence has been included in  the  Judge's  assessment  as  to
   whether or not the business is genuine, such that points under appendix A
   ought to be awarded. None of the cited evidence was permitted under  Rule
   245 AA. The respondent relies on and Ahmed and another  (PBS:  admissible
   evidence) [2014] UKUT 00365. Given that the appellant has arrived at  his
   conclusion by considering evidence which was excluded,  it  is  submitted
   that had he not consider the evidence, he may have arrived at a different
   conclusion on the issues at hand.


   Decision as to whether there is an error of law


7. At the hearing Ms Najma did not dispute that the Judge took into  account
   post-decision evidence but said that there was evidence before the  Judge
   which was submitted with the application from which he  was  entitled  to
   make a positive finding for the appellant.


8. While it may be true that there was sufficient evidence before the  Judge
   for him to make a decision in favour of the appellant, the fact  that  he
   took into account post decision evidence, which he was  not  entitled  to
   do, as well as  evidence  submitted  with  the  application,  it  remains
   unclear upon which evidence he based his conclusions.


9. The Immigration Rules are very clear that post decision evidence  is  not
   permitted under section 85A of the Immigration and Nationality Act. It is
   equally clear that the post-decision evidence provided by  the  appellant
   does not come within paragraph 245 AA of the Immigration Rules.


10. I found that there was a material error of  law  in  the  determination,
   and I set it aside in its entirety. There  was  no  dispute  between  the
   parties that the  appeal  should  be  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal to be heard again given that  the  determination  is  materially
   flawed and no findings of fact can be preserved.


11. Pursuant to Paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statements of the  Immigration
   and Asylum Chamber of the Upper Tribunal I remit the case to  the  First-
   Tier Tribunal for a rehearing and for the decision to be remade.


12. The appeal to be listed before a First-tier Judge other than Judge  Boyd
   on the first available date.


  13. The First-tier Tribunal has not made an anonymity  order  pursuant  to
      rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
      2005.





Signed



A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Mrs S Chana

                                             Dated this 3rd day of June 2015

