
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
IA/28183/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard             at             Field             House,             London
Determination Promulgated
On                     26                     March                     2015
    On 26 March 2015


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                              MADDASAR MEHMOOD

                                                            Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the appellant: Mr J Wells, M&K Solicitors
For the respondent: Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a national of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal against a decision made by the Secretary of State to refuse  his
   application for a residence card as confirmation of a right to reside  in
   the UK as the spouse of Agnieska Paszko, who is Polish and  therefore  an
   EEA national. Due to a number of discrepancies in  a  marriage  interview
   carried out in 18  June  2014  the  respondent  was  satisfied  that  the
   appellant was a party to a marriage of convenience  and  the  application
   for a residence card was refused with reference to regulation  2  of  the
   Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)   Regulations   2006   (The   EEA
   Regulations).

2. The respondent had produced an interview summary  sheet  in  relation  to
   the interview on 18 June 2014 but did not produce the  interview  record.
   At the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal the  presenting  officer  asked
   for an adjournment to obtain the record. The Judge refused  to  grant  an
   adjournment. The Judge records  in  his  determination  on  a  number  of
   different occasions that the appellant's representative raised the  issue
   of fairness in that  the  appellant  did  not  know  the  extent  of  the
   respondent's case in the absence of the interview record. The appellant's
   representative advised the First-tier Tribunal Judge that  the  appellant
   and his wife would not adopt their witness statements or be  put  forward
   for cross-examination in the absence of the interview record. The hearing
   therefore proceeded by way of submissions only.

3. The Judge found that the interview summary  was  'wholly  one-sided'  and
   that the respondent had deprived the appellant of an opportunity to refer
   to positive aspects of the interview and that this diminished the  weight
   which he gave to the discrepancies reported [20]. However the Judge  took
   into account that it was accepted by the appellant that there  were  some
   conflicts in the answers given. The Judge concluded that  the  respondent
   had produced 'enough credible evidence to justify a reasonable  suspicion
   that the marriage  was  entered  into  for  the  predominant  purpose  of
   securing residence rights'  and  that  the  evidential  burden  therefore
   shifted to the appellant [24]. The Judge decided that he could not attach
   much weight to witness statements which had not been  adopted  and  where
   the witnesses had not been subject  to  cross-examination.  He  therefore
   concluded that the appellant had not discharged the burden  upon  him  to
   displace the reasonable suspicion raised by the respondent.

4. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal make three main  submissions.
   It is contended  that  the  Judge's  decisions  to  proceed  without  the
   interview record and to refuse to give a preliminary ruling as to whether
   the Secretary of State had discharged the burden  on  her  gave  rise  to
   procedural unfairness in that the appellant did not know the whole of the
   evidence against him.  It is further contended that the  Judge  erred  in
   giving little weight to the witness statements in considering whether the
   appellant had discharged the burden upon him [26] yet he  did  take  them
   into account in drawing the adverse inference that the appellant accepted
   that there were some conflicts in the answers given at interview [21]. It
   is further contended that, given that he attached little  weight  to  the
   interview record, the Judge failed to give reasons why he found that  the
   respondent had discharged the burden  on  her  to  justify  a  reasonable
   suspicion that the marriage was one of convenience.

5. At the hearing before me Mr Wells also relied  on  the  decision  of  the
   Upper Tribunal in Miah  (interviewer's  comments:  disclosure:  fairness)
   [2014] UKUT 00515 (IAC). The Secretary of State in the Rule  24  response
   submitted that as this decision was issued on 10 November 2014, after the
   First-tier Tribunal hearing, the Judge cannot be criticised  for  failing
   to have regard to it. Mr Kandola submitted that the evidence set  out  by
   the respondent in the summary was enough to discharge the burden and that
   it was therefore open to the Judge to find that  the  appellant  had  not
   discharged the burden upon him in light of his decision not to give  oral
   evidence. He submitted that there had been no unfairness looking  at  the
   decision as a whole.

6. It appears that the decision in Miah dealt  with  the  opposite  scenario
   from that in this case in that the interview record had been produced but
   not the interviewer's comments, which  are  contained  in  the  interview
   summary. In his  decision  in  Miah  the  President  gave  the  following
   guidance in relation to fairness and disclosure;

"12.     What are the main features of the context of  the  decision  making
under scrutiny in the present appeal? Fundamentally, what  is  at  stake  is
the entitlement of the  person  concerned  to  be  admitted  to  the  United
Kingdom, where the status of permanent residence  can  be  pursued.  If  the
decision is in the affected  person's  favour,  this  entitlement  is  given
effect. If the decision is otherwise, this entitlement is  negated  and  the
person must leave the United Kingdom. The decision also has a direct  impact
on the other party to the marriage.  Furthermore,  an  assessment  that  the
marriage was  one  of  convenience  is  a  matter  of  some  moment.  It  is
tantamount to a decision that  the  marriage  was  undertaken  for  improper
motives,  designed  to  secure,  dishonestly,  a   status   and   associated
advantages to which the affected person was not legally entitled. This  will
be a significant blot on the person's immigration history and could  operate
to his detriment in the future.

13.     These features of the context point decisively  to  the  proposition
that the affected person must be alerted to the essential  elements  of  the
case against him. This places  the  spotlight  firmly  on  the  pre-decision
interview which, it would appear, is an established part of the  process  in
cases of this nature. The  interview  is  the  vehicle  through  which  this
discrete duty of disclosure will, in  practice,  be  typically,  though  not
invariably  or  exclusively,  discharged.  In  this  forum,  the  suspicions
relating to the genuineness of the marriage must be fully  ventilated.  This
will entail putting to the subject the essential elements  of  any  evidence
upon which such suspicions are based.  In  this  way  the  subject  will  be
apprised of the case against him and will have the opportunity to  make  his
defence, advancing such  representations  and  providing  such  information,
explanations or interpretations as  he  wishes.  Adherence  to  these  basic
requirements should, in principle, ensure a fair decision making process  in
the generality of cases. In order to cater for the  unusual  or  exceptional
case, those involved in the decision making process must always be alert  to
the question of whether, in the interests of fairness, anything  further  is
required.
...
15.     The analysis above demonstrates that, in the context of  a  marriage
of convenience enquiry under the 2006 Regulations, the key requirement of  a
fair  decision  making  process  is  disclosure  to  the  "suspect"  of  the
substance of the case  against  him.  This  means,  in  practice,  that  the
interview will invariably occupy a position of  pivotal  importance  in  the
process.
...
21.     The requirement to  make  disclosure  (formerly  discovery)  of  all
material documents in a party's possession,  custody  or  power  is  a  long
established feature of most litigation contexts. It is an integral  part  of
the administration of justice. It is a duty owed to  both  the  other  party
and the court or tribunal concerned. It is rooted in fairness and  the  rule
of law itself. In the particular context  of  judicial  review  proceedings,
Sir John Donaldson MR stated in R - v - Lancashire County  Court,  ex  parte
Huddleston [1986] 2 All ER 941, at 944:


         "Certainly it is for the applicant to satisfy  the  Court  of  his
         entitlement to judicial review and it is  for  the  respondent  to
         resist his application, if it considers it to be unjustified.  But
         it is a process which falls to be conducted  with  all  the  cards
         face upwards on the table and the vast majority of the cards  will
         start in the authority's hands".
         [My emphasis.]

This has also been formulated as a duty of candour: see Tweed - v -  Parades
Commission (Northern Ireland) [2006] UKHL  33,  at  [54],  per  Lord  Brown.
Asylum, immigration  and  kindred  appeals  are  a  species  of  public  law
proceedings, in which the parties are the citizen (on the one hand) and  the
State (on the other). I consider that these duties apply with full force  in
the context of such appeals. To suggest otherwise would be inimical  to  the
administration of justice. Rule 13 of the 2005 Rules is to be construed  and
applied accordingly."

7. Although issued after the hearing in  this  case  the  decision  in  Miah
   reiterates the general principle of fairness with particular reference to
   case law including the decision in R - v - Secretary  of  State  for  the
   Home Department, ex parte Doody [1994] 1 AC 531, which was cited  to  the
   First-tier Tribunal in his case. It is clear from the  analysis  in  Miah
   that the failure to disclose the interview record in this case did amount
   to a procedural unfairness. The appellant did not know all  of  the  case
   against him in order to prepare a properly  informed  response.  Further,
   the absence of a full transcript led the  Judge  to  conclude  that  this
   diminished the weight he could attach to the summary. This in turn led to
   a lack of clarity as to what evidence the Judge relied on to support  his
   finding that the respondent had discharged the initial burden upon her.

8. Accordingly  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Judge  permitted  a  procedural
   irregularity in proceeding without the  interview  record,  this  made  a
   material  difference  to  the  fairness  of  the  proceedings.  In  these
   circumstances I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

9. I am satisfied  that  the  appellant  has  not  therefore  had  his  case
   properly considered by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  parties  were  in
   agreement with my view that the nature and extent of  the  judicial  fact
   finding which is necessary in order for the decision to be remade is such
   that (having regard to the overriding objective in Rule 2  of  the  Upper
   Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008) it is appropriate to remit the case to the
   First-tier Tribunal. Mr Kandola said that he ahs requested a copy of  the
   interview record and it should  therefore  be  available  for  the  fresh
   hearing.

Decision
The Judge made an error on a point of  law  and  the  determination  of  the
First-tier Tribunal is set aside.
The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.

Signed
       Date:  26 March 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


