
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/28974/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 31st January 2018                      |On 21st February 2018             |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                               Muhammad Arshad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Noor of Counsel instructed by Juris Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Alis (the  judge)  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 17th May 2017.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born 1st June 1986.  He entered
    the UK as a Tier 4 Student on 30th December 2010. His leave expired  on
    25th November 2011.  He made a number  of  applications  for  leave  to
    remain all of which were unsuccessful.  The Appellant has not had valid
    leave since 25th November 2011.

 3. On 7th December 2013 the Appellant married a British  citizen  [AR]  to
    whom I shall refer as the Sponsor.  The Sponsor had two children from a
    previous relationship, a son born [ ] 1997, and a  daughter  born  [  ]
    2008.

 4. On 20th May 2014 the Appellant applied for leave to remain  based  upon
    his private and family life.   The  application  was  refused  on  12th
    August 2015.  The Respondent considered Appendix FM, and  decided  that
    the Appellant failed the suitability  requirements,  in  particular  S-
    LTR.2.2. as it was contended that he had obtained a  TOEIC  certificate
    following a test taken on 18th April 2012, by using fraud, as  a  proxy
    text taker had been used.

 5. With reference to Appendix FM the  Respondent  accepted  the  Appellant
    satisfied the eligibility requirements of paragraph R-LTRP.1.1.(d)(ii).
     The Respondent did not go on to consider EX.1. because  the  Appellant
    did not satisfy the suitability requirements.

 6. In relation to the parent route, the Respondent again pointed out  that
    the Appellant could not satisfy the suitability requirements but in any
    event,  it  was  not  accepted  that  he  satisfied   the   eligibility
    requirements under the parent route as  the  child  in  question,  that
    being the Sponsor's daughter, was not the  Appellant's  child  and  the
    Appellant did not have sole responsibility for her.

 7. The Appellant's private  life  was  considered  pursuant  to  paragraph
    276ADE(1).  It was noted that he had not lived continuously in  the  UK
    for at least twenty years.  It was not accepted that he had proved that
    very significant obstacles existed to his integration into Pakistan.

 8. The Respondent considered whether any exceptional circumstances existed
    which would warrant a grant of leave to remain pursuant  to  Article  8
    outside the Immigration Rules.  The Respondent noted that the Appellant
    had only been in the UK since November 2010 and that he had  married  a
    British citizen who had children from  a  previous  relationship.   The
    Respondent noted the Appellant did not have any medical  conditions  or
    health issues.  He had not lost all ties to his home country.   Because
    he had sought to obtain leave to remain in the  UK  by  deception,  the
    Respondent was of the  view  that  his  presence  in  the  UK  was  not
    conducive to the public good, and therefore there were  no  exceptional
    circumstances which would warrant granting leave to remain outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

 9. The appeal was heard by the FTT on 11th May 2017.  The judge found that
    the Respondent had not proved that the  Appellant  had  used  fraud  to
    obtain a TOEIC certificate.  The judge went on to consider Appendix FM,
    and in particular EX.1., but concluded at paragraph 51 that EX.1.(a) is
    not  engaged,  and  with  reference   to   EX.1.(b)   there   were   no
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside the UK.  The
    appeal was dismissed with reference to Article 8.

10. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal  which  was  granted  by
    Judge Page of the FTT in the following terms;

         "2.  There were two issues before the judge.  The first was whether
             the Appellant had fraudulently  obtained  his  IELTS  language
             certificate,  and   secondly   whether   the   Appellant   had
             established an entitlement to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
             under Article 8.  The judge has found that the Respondent  had
             failed to discharge the burden of proof against the  Appellant
             and that the Appellant had not used a proxy test-taker in  his
             IELTS test.  That left the remaining issue as to  whether  the
             Appellant  could  succeed  under  Article  8.   I   have   had
             difficulty  in  understanding  the  grounds  of  appeal  under
             Article 8 and the  judge's  findings  under  Article  8.   The
             grounds of appeal argue that the Respondent had accepted  that
             the Appellant met the requirements for limited leave to remain
             as a partner and the  judge  has  misapplied  the  Immigration
             Rules.  It is not entirely clear why the judge has reached the
             conclusion that the Appellant could be removed to Pakistan  in
             circumstances where he is married to a British citizen who has
             two children from  a  previous  relationship.   One  of  these
             children is 8 years of age, by virtue of a Family Court  order
             the children have contact with  their  father  every  weekend.
             There appears to be family life  between  the  Appellant,  his
             partner and her children.  The judge  appears  to  have  found
             that the only person who would be affected  if  the  Appellant
             had to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  would  be  the  Appellant
             himself.  At paragraph 61 of the decision he accepts that  the
             Appellant has become a stepfather to these children but  makes
             an adverse view of the  family  situation  because  the  judge
             could not 'overlook the fact the Appellant is a stepfather  to
             these children who came into their lives in the  circumstances
             he did'.  In the interests of justice I  grant  permission  to
             appeal on all grounds.  Hopefully the Appellant's  grounds  of
             appeal will become clearer when they are fully argued."

11. Following the grant of permission the Respondent submitted  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, contending, in summary, that the Grounds of Appeal failed to show
    why the judge erred in law in dismissing the appeal under Article 8.

12. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain  whether  the  FTT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

Error of Law

13. At the commencement of the hearing Mrs Aboni indicated that she did not
    rely upon the rule  24  response,  but  conceded  that  the  judge  had
    materially erred in law.  Mrs Aboni accepted that the judge  had  found
    that the Appellant had a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
    with the Sponsor's daughter, who is a British citizen child, and  found
    that it would not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the  UK,
    but then erred by concluding section EX.1.(a)  was  not  engaged.   Mrs
    Aboni submitted that because the judge had erred in considering  EX.1.,
    the decision was unsafe, needed to be set aside, and should  be  remade
    by the Upper Tribunal.

14. I therefore did not need to hear from Mr Noor in relation to  error  of
    law, although I had taken into account the skeleton  argument  that  he
    submitted on that point.

15. I indicated that the decision of the FTT was set  aside  by  reason  of
    material error of law and a written decision would be issued confirming
    my reasons

Re-Making the Decision

16. Mr Noor submitted that the decision should  be  re-made  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal, applying the unchallenged findings of fact made by  the  FTT.
    It was therefore not necessary to hear any further evidence.

17. Mrs Aboni agreed that the decision  should  be  re-made  on  the  basis
    proposed by Mr Noor, and indicated  the  Respondent  did  not,  in  the
    circumstances, and given the findings of fact made by the FTT which had
    not been challenged, oppose the appeal being allowed under Article 8 of
    the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

18. I indicated that I would issue a written decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

19. I firstly set out my reasons for finding a material error of law.

20. The Respondent considered the  Appellant's  application  for  leave  to
    remain with reference to Section R-LTRP which contains the requirements
    for limited leave to remain as a partner, which for ease  of  reference
    is set out below;

         "R-LTRP.1.1. The requirements to be met for limited leave to remain
         as a parent are-


         (a)  the applicant and their partner must be in the UK;


         (b)  the applicant must have made a valid application  for  limited
             or indefinite leave to remain as a partner; and either


         (c)  (i) the applicant must not fall for refusal under  Section  S-
                  LTR; Suitability leave to remain; and


             (ii) the applicant meets all of the requirements of Section E-
                  LTRP; Eligibility for leave to remain as a partner; or


         (d)  (i) the applicant must not fall for refusal under  Section  S-
                  LTR; Suitability leave to remain; and


             (ii) the applicant meets the  requirements  of  paragraphs  E-
                  LTRP.1.2. - 1.12. and E-LTRP.2.1 - 2.2.


             (iii)    paragraph EX.1. applies."


21. The Respondent's view was that the application made  by  the  Appellant
    must be refused pursuant  to  S-LTR.2.2.  because  the  Appellant  used
    deception to obtain a TOIEC certificate by using a proxy test-taker  in
    a test undertaken in 2012.  However the judge found that the Respondent
    had not proved this, and that the appeal should  not  be  dismissed  on
    suitability grounds.

22. The judge therefore proceeded to  consider  R-LTRP  and  in  particular
    EX.1. which is set out below;

         "EX.1.   This paragraph applies if


                (a)    (i)  the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
                        parental relationship with a child who-


                        (aa)   is under the age of 18 years, or  was  under
                             the age of 18  years  when  the  applicant  was
                             first granted leave  on  the  basis  that  this
                             paragraph applied;


                        (bb)   is in the UK;


                        (cc)   is a British Citizen or has lived in the  UK
                             continuously  for  at  least  the  seven  years
                             immediately preceding the date of  application;
                             and


                    (ii)   it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                        leave the UK; or


                (b)     the  applicant  has   a   genuine   and   subsisting
                    relationship with a partner who is in the UK  and  is  a
                    British Citizen, settled in the UK or  in  the  UK  with
                    refugee leave or humanitarian protection, and there  are
                    insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  with   that
                    partner continuing outside the UK.


         EX.2.    For the purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  'insurmountable
                obstacles' means the  very  significant  difficulties  which
                would  be  faced  by  the  applicant  or  their  partner  in
                continuing their family life together  outside  the  UK  and
                which could not be overcome or  would  entail  very  serious
                hardship for the applicant or their partner."


23. At paragraph 44 of the decision the judge  found  that  the  Appellant,
    although not the biological father of the Appellant's children,  had  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with them.

24. The judge found at paragraph 45 that the children are British  citizens
    and therefore considered that he must then decide whether it would  not
    be reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK.

25. Having considered this point the judge at paragraph 49 found there "are
    therefore no circumstances in which  I  would  find  it  reasonable  to
    require the child and her sibling to leave the country".

26. The judge has therefore  found  that  it  is  appropriate  to  consider
    EX.1.(a) and the requirements  are  satisfied,  but  then  goes  on  at
    paragraph 50, to state that the children would not have  to  leave  the
    UK, and the only person who could be  required  to  leave  the  country
    would be the Appellant.   The judge then concludes at paragraph 51 that
    EX.1.(a) is not engaged.

27. In my view the error is contained within paragraphs 50 and 51.  If  the
    requirements of EX.1.(a) are satisfied, it would seem, in  the  absence
    of any countervailing circumstances, that the appeal should be allowed.
     In my view the judge also errs in considering EX.1.(b) in  finding  no
    insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  between  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor continuing outside the UK.  The judge found the Sponsor  to  be
    an honest and credible witness who gave evidence that were it  not  for
    her children, she would accompany the Appellant back to Pakistan.   The
    judge noted there was in force, in relation to the Sponsor's  daughter,
    a Family Court order dated 6th October 2015.  This gave the  biological
    father contact rights with his daughter.  The judge found at  paragraph
    57 that the court order "was not fixed in stone and  whilst  the  court
    order  currently  is  an  obstacle  I  am  not  persuaded  it   is   an
    insurmountable obstacle".

28. In my view if the Sponsor wished to  carry  on  family  life  with  the
    Appellant in Pakistan, she had a stark choice, either take the daughter
    out of the UK in breach of the  court  order,  or  leave  her  daughter
    behind.  The court order states that a child may not be  taken  out  of
    the UK without the  written  consent  of  every  person  with  parental
    responsibility for the  child,  or  the  leave  of  the  court.   I  am
    satisfied that the existence of the court order means that the  Sponsor
    would face very significant difficulties in continuing her family  life
    with the Appellant outside the UK, which  would  entail   very  serious
    hardship.

29. Having set aside the FTT decision I now turn to re-make the decision.

30. I must take into account that only one Ground of Appeal  is  available,
    and that is whether the decision made by the Respondent is contrary  to
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act  1998.   The  Appellant  relies  upon
    Article 8.  In deciding this appeal I adopt the balance sheet  approach
    recommended by Lord Thomas at paragraph 83 of Hesham Ali v SSHD  [2016]
    UKSC 60, and in so doing,  have  regard  to  the  guidance  as  to  the
    functions of this Tribunal given by Lord Reed at paragraphs 39 to 53.

31. The burden of proof lies on the Appellant  to  establish  his  personal
    circumstances in the UK and why the decision to refuse his human rights
    claim interferes disproportionately in his family life in this country.
     It is for the Respondent to  establish  the  public  interest  factors
    weighing against the Appellant.  The standard of proof is a balance  of
    probabilities throughout.

32. The following findings made by the  FTT  were  not  challenged  by  the
    Respondent.  The  Appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with the Sponsor's children.  Both  children  are  British
    citizens.  It would not be reasonable to expect the children  to  leave
    the UK.  For the reasons given above, I conclude that EX.1.(a) and  (b)
    are satisfied.  This means that the Immigration Rules setting  out  the
    requirements for limited leave to remain as a  partner  are  satisfied.
    These are the rules, as explained  in  GEN.1.1.  of  Appendix  FM  that
    reflect how under Article 8 of the 1950 Convention the balance will  be
    struck between the right to respect for private and family life and the
    legitimate aims of protecting national security, public safety and  the
    economic wellbeing of the UK,  and  which  also  reflect  the  relevant
    public  interest  considerations  as  set  out  in  Part  5A   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  which  includes  section
    117B.

33. There would therefore appear to be no  need  to  undertake  a  separate
    consideration of section 117B, which would be necessary  if  Article  8
    outside  the  Immigration  Rules   has   been   considered.    In   the
    circumstances however I will consider section 117B  of  the  2002  Act.
    This confirms that the maintenance of effective immigration control  is
    in the public interest.

34. It also confirms that it is in the  public  interest  that  individuals
    seeking to remain can speak English, as  the  Appellant  can,  and  are
    financially independent.  The Appellant does  not  have  permission  to
    work in the UK, and  I  do  not  find  that  he  can  be  described  as
    financially independent.  Ability to speak English is a neutral factor.
     Section 117B confirms that little weight should be given to a  private
    life established when a person  has  either  a  precarious  immigration
    status or an unlawful status.  The Appellant however does not rely upon
    his private life.  He relies upon his family life with the Sponsor  and
    the children.

35. Section 117B(4) states that little weight should be given to a  private
    life or a relationship formed with a qualifying partner established  by
    a person at a time when the person  is  in  the  UK  unlawfully.   This
    applies in the Appellant's case, as the Sponsor is a qualifying partner
    because she is a British citizen, and the relationship started when the
    Appellant was in the UK without leave.

36. Section 117B(6) confirms that in the case of a  person  not  liable  to
    deportation, the public interest does not require his removal if he has
    a genuine and subsisting relationship with a qualifying child,  and  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.

37. In considering the above,  there  is  only  the  younger  child  to  be
    considered as the other child is now an adult.   However  the  findings
    made by the FTT are that the Appellant has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with  a  British  child,  and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.

38. I find therefore that not only does the Appellant satisfy EX.1.(a)  and
    (b) but also section 117B(6) based upon the findings made by  the  FTT.
    I have considered whether there are any other relevant public  interest
    factors.  The Appellant's lack of financial independence may be  solved
    if he is given permission to work.  It is not the case that he has been
    involved in any criminal activity.  I have taken into account  that  he
    has remained in the UK without leave since November 2011.

39. However my conclusion is that very substantial weight must be given  to
    the fact that the Appellant satisfies the relevant Immigration Rules in
    order to be granted limited leave to remain as the partner of a British
    citizen.  I find that outweighs the fact that the Appellant remained in
    the UK without leave from November 2011.  I therefore conclude,  taking
    into account that the Respondent's stance at the hearing was that there
    was no opposition to the appeal being allowed pursuant to Article 8, in
    view of the unchallenged findings made by the FTT, that the Appellant's
    removal from the UK would be a breach of  Article  8  as  it  would  be
    disproportionate.  Therefore the decision made  by  the  Respondent  is
    contrary to section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.

I re-make the decision.  The appeal is allowed.

Anonymity

The FTT made  no  anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no  request  for
anonymity and I see no need to make an anonymity order.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             6th February 2018




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Because I have allowed the appeal I have considered whether to  make  a  fee
award.  I make no fee  award.   The  appeal  had  been  allowed  because  of
evidence considered by  the  Tribunal  that  was  not  before  the  original
decision maker.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             6th February 2018


