
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/28876/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30 September 2015                 |On 15 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                    S A S
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Pipe, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
I continue the anonymity direction made by UTJ Kekic in her  decision  of  7
September 2015 in order to protect the identity  of  the  Appellant's  young
child


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Background

      1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Guyana.  She  appeals  against  the
         respondent's decision dated 3  July  2013  refusing  her  leave  to
         remain on Article 8 ECHR grounds and giving notice of  her  removal
         to Guyana.

      2. The background to this case is  set  out  at  [2]  to  [3]  of  the
         Tribunal's decision promulgated on  7  September  2015  finding  an
         error of law in the decision of First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Thomas
         and I do not repeat it save as necessary below.  Having  set  aside
         Judge Thomas' decision, the matter comes back before me in order to
         re-make the decision.

Evidence

      3. Both parties agree that the starting point for my decision  is  the
         earlier decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Waumsley promulgated on 22
         March 2012 in  relation  to  an  earlier  decision  to  refuse  the
         Appellant indefinite leave to remain.  That decision set aside  the
         earlier decision of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cheales,  finding
         there to be an error of law but preserving  the  findings  of  fact
         reached  in  that  decision.    Between  the  dates  of  First-Tier
         Tribunal Judge Cheales' decision and that of Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Waumsley's decision, the Appellant's circumstances had  changed  as
         she had given birth  to  a  son,  J,  on  5  September  2011.   The
         Appellant had been told by J's father that he had indefinite  leave
         to remain and so she believed that J was  a  British  citizen.   In
         fact, it transpired from information handed in by the Respondent at
         the hearing that J's father only had limited leave at the  relevant
         time and so J  had  not  acquired  citizenship.  That  will  become
         relevant when I turn  to  consider  the  evidence  before  me  when
         considered  against  the  evidence  before  Upper  Tribunal   Judge
         Waumsley.

      4. Upper Tribunal Judge Waumsley heard evidence  from  the  Appellant,
         her mother and stepfather which is set out at [10] to [18]  of  the
         decision.   Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Waumsley's  findings  on   that
         evidence are set out at [28] to [29] of  the  decision.   In  short
         summary, the Judge did not find the Appellant or her mother  to  be
         reliable witnesses.  The Judge went on to consider Article  8  ECHR
         in  light  of  his  findings  but  found  that  removal  would  not
         constitute a disproportionate interference with the Appellant's and
         J's human rights.

      5. I am required to treat  those  findings  as  a  starting  point  in
         accordance with the case of Devaseelan v Secretary of State for the
         Home  Department  [2003]  Imm  AR1.    However,   the   Appellant's
         circumstances have changed since the date of Upper Tribunal Judge's
         Waumsley's decision.  At the core of this case is the mental health
         of the Appellant and, most importantly, the impact that has had  on
         J and his relationship with his mother and his grandmother and  the
         impact it would have on that relationship if the  Appellant  and  J
         were removed.

      6. The Appellant suffers from post-natal depression.  Although  J  was
         born some five months  before  the  hearing  before  Upper-Tribunal
         Judge Waumsley,  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  Appellant  was
         suffering  the  effects  of  this  at  the  relevant   time.    The
         Appellant's ability to cope by herself with J if returned to Guyana
         at that time turned only on the economic impact of being without  a
         job and with limited family support.  I set out below the  evidence
         of the impact now based on the Appellant's mental health from which
         it is clear that the situation now is very different to that  which
         pertained in March 2012.  Indeed the reason why  the  Tribunal  set
         aside First-Tier Tribunal Judge  Thomas'  decision  was  due  to  a
         failure to consider the report of the social worker, Ms Hira, which
         concerns the impact of removal of the Appellant on J.

      7. The medical evidence before First-Tier Tribunal Judge Thomas as  to
         the Appellant's mental health consists of a report from Dr  Persaud
         dated 17 May 2012, a letter from Dr David Purdy dated 16  September
         2013 and a report from Dr Silvert dated 4 August 2014.

      8. Dr Persaud is a consultant psychiatrist.   His report is  based  on
         one meeting  with  the  Appellant,  a  review  of  her  immigration
         documents and letters from her GP.   He describes the Appellant  as
         completely dependent on her mother.  He also notes the  Appellant's
         mother taking charge of J during the meeting.  He reports that  the
         Appellant's dependency on her mother has  increased  following  J's
         birth.   He considers that the Appellant  is  at  a  high  risk  of
         suicide if removed.  Dr Persaud appears to base this on an incident
         where the Appellant tried to self harm with a  knife.   It  is  not
         clear if this incident is based on reporting from the Appellant and
         her mother or on something in her medical notes.  It  is  mentioned
         in the Appellant's mother's statement in 2012 but was not mentioned
         before me and as such I give the reliance on that incident  in  the
         report limited weight.  In any event,  that  incident  occurred  at
         least three years ago.  Dr Persaud  diagnoses  clinical  depression
         and records that the Appellant is on  the  maximum  dose  of  anti-
         depressants. I note also that the report recommends specialist help
         from a consultant  psychiatrist.   It  does  not  appear  that  the
         Appellant has taken any steps to seek out such continuing help.

      9. Dr Silvert is also a consultant psychiatrist and his report  is  in
         similar vein to that of  Dr  Persaud  although  more  recent.   His
         diagnosis is of moderate to severe depressive illness.  In relation
         to the risk of suicide which is mentioned also in this report based
         on the same incident as referred to by Dr  Persaud,  the  Appellant
         says that she took an overdose of paracetamol in November 2014.  Mr
         Jarvis submitted before me that this was not a serious  attempt  as
         the Appellant took  only  four  tablets.   The  Appellant's  mother
         accepted in evidence (in her capacity as a nurse) that  this  might
         not be fatal in most cases but could be  and  that  she  found  her
         daughter on the floor having taken the tablets.  The Appellant  was
         also referred to the Crisis Team as a  result,  although  she  gave
         evidence that she was no longer under their care  as  she  was  not
         entitled to it due to her immigration status.

     10. Dr Purdy's letter is based on review over a period from April  2012
         to September 2013 albeit the letter is very short and gives  little
         detail. In his letter, Dr Purdy refers to  an  improvement  in  the
         Appellant's mental health by September 2013.  That though needs  to
         be considered in context of Dr Silvert's report which post-dates Dr
         Purdy's  letter.  Dr  Purdy  refers  to  continuing  low  mood  and
         occasional thoughts of self harm  which  he  finds  to  be  without
         intent.   By  September  2013,  the  Appellant  was   taking   20mg
         Citalopram  and  was  continuing  to  take  her  medication.    She
         continued to be reviewed albeit not regularly.

     11. The Appellant supplied a copy of her medical records  from  October
         2014 to July 2015.  Those confirm the incident in November 2014 (as
         noted at [9] above) which is recorded by the Crisis Team as "intent
         self poison/exposure to nonopoid analgesic".  The records  indicate
         that whilst she took only four tablets, she  "says  would  consider
         taking overdose" and  note  also  her  mother's  concern  that  the
         Appellant was "smashing dishes at the weekend".  I note  also  that
         at this time the Appellant's medication was at 40mg Citalopram.  By
         the time of the hearing before me, the Appellant indicated that she
         is now taking 20mg Citalopram,  25  mg  Quetiapine  and  Zopiclone.
         Although it appears therefore that her mental health has  improved,
         she is still receiving medication for  her  condition  and  is  not
         fully recovered.

     12. As noted at [2] above, the Tribunal found an error of law in First-
         Tier Tribunal Judge Thomas' decision.  That finding was  by  reason
         of the Judge's failure to make adequate findings on the  report  of
         Ms Hira, a social worker who has provided a report  dated  30  July
         2014 in relation to the relationships between J, the Appellant  and
         the Appellant's mother and the impact on J  of  removal  to  Guyana
         having regard to the bond with his grandmother and the  Appellant's
         mental health.

     13. Ms Hira's report is based on one meeting on 29  July  2014  but  is
         nonetheless a very thorough analysis of the situation  based  on  a
         detailed account of the various relationships and  considering  the
         impact on J  of  being  cared  for  by  the  Appellant  whilst  she
         continues to suffer with her mental health.  I  take  into  account
         that the report is based on what Ms Hira was told by the  Appellant
         and her mother but the detail in her report is consistent with  the
         evidence presented to me and with the evidence  of  the  healthcare
         professionals as regards the Appellant's  mental  health.  Ms  Hira
         herself has experience as  a  mental  health  practitioner  and  is
         therefore able to comment also on this aspect.

     14. Ms Hira deals in detail at [6] of her report with the  relationship
         between J and his mother and  grandparents.   She  notes  from  her
         assessment that "it became apparent to me that presently Mrs  [O'S]
         [J's grandmother] was [J's] main carer".  She sets  out  in  detail
         what that care involves and that the Appellant is largely unable to
         look after J independently (see [7] of the report).  Ms  Hira  goes
         on to say that, in her opinion, the Appellant "would not be able to
         sustain [J's] physical and emotional wellbeing" in the  absence  of
         her mother's support.  Under "Clinical Observations" (in  light  of
         her experience as a mental health  practitioner),  Ms  Hira  opines
         that J would be "at high risk of neglect" if the Appellant were his
         sole carer.

     15. She opines that it is in J's best interests for him  to  remain  in
         the UK with both his mother and his grandparents.  She concludes in
         the following terms:-

             "I am of the view that permanent removal of [  the  Appellant]
             from the UK is likely to cause significant  detriment  to  all
             the family members and also on the  integrity  of  the  family
             unit as a whole with lasting and damaging effects particularly
             on this child.  In particular [J] will be unable  to  continue
             with  the  emotional  ties  he  has   established   with   his
             grandparents and not be able to realise his full potential  if
             removed from the care they offer him."

     16. I also had the benefit of further written and  oral  evidence  from
         the Appellant and her mother,  J's  grandmother.   The  Appellant's
         statement provides an update of her mental  health  condition.   In
         November 2014, she suffered from severe depression and was referred
         to the Crisis Team (as noted above).  Her medication  was  reviewed
         and increased.  She records that her medication makes  her  drowsy.
         This was confirmed in her oral evidence and I was able  to  observe
         her demeanour when giving evidence which was consistent  with  that
         self-diagnosis.  The Appellant's witness  statement  describes  her
         relationship  with  J's  father  and  confirms  that  she  did  not
         deliberately enter into that relationship or conceive J as a way of
         regularising her stay in the UK.  She says that in fact  she  never
         asked J's father what his status was in the UK.

     17. The Appellant also  mentions  the  background  to  her  immigration
         status.  She came to the UK with her mother as  a  dependent.   Her
         mother had leave as a work permit holder.  Her mother  has  been  a
         British citizen since 2010, having  obtained  indefinite  leave  to
         remain  in  May  2008.    The   Appellant   blames   her   previous
         representatives for giving her the wrong information which  led  to
         her failure to apply for indefinite leave to remain with her mother
         in 2008 and a later failure to apply for indefinite leave to remain
         on the basis of completion of the requisite period of leave in  the
         UK.  She had been advised that she needed to complete five years in
         the UK with leave whereas she says that the position then was  that
         as the dependent of a work permit holder she was  not  required  to
         complete five years residence and should  have  been  eligible  for
         indefinite leave at the same time as her mother.

     18. The Appellant's circumstances in Guyana have also changed.  This is
         one of the factors in the case which caused  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Waumsley to find that the  Appellant's  mother  in  particular  was
         dissembling as she claimed that there were  no  family  members  in
         Guyana to whom  the  Appellant  could  turn  whereas  in  fact  the
         Appellant's sister, grandmother, uncle and his family  still  lived
         there.  However, the Appellant's sister now has a visa to  move  to
         the US to join  her  husband.    The  Appellant  accepts  that  her
         grandmother and uncle and his family still live in Guyana but  gave
         evidence that they would not be able  to  provide  for  her  and  J
         because they are old and living in  difficult  circumstances.   The
         Appellant's  uncle's  wife  is  suffering   from   MS.    In   oral
         examination, the Appellant accepted  that  she  had  not  made  any
         enquiries  about  what  support  might  be   available   from   the
         authorities or any NGOs in Guyana.   She  also  accepted  that  her
         mother might be able to send some money for her and J to Guyana but
         it would be difficult for her parents to do so.

     19. The Appellant's mother gave evidence before me on this aspect.  She
         explained that she had not mentioned the Appellants' relatives when
         she gave evidence in March 2012 because she did not  consider  that
         they could look after the Appellant and J  and  did  not  therefore
         consider them to be relevant.  I do not accept that explanation and
         it is clear from Upper Tribunal Judge Waumsley's decision  that  he
         was entitled to find her not credible on  this  account.   However,
         she gave oral evidence before me and, although I consider that  she
         may have been exaggerating the position before Upper Tribunal Judge
         Waumsley, I find her evidence now to be credible.  She presented as
         truthful and I did not  consider  that  she  was  embellishing  her
         evidence.

     20. The position in Guyana  is  that  the  Appellant's  grandmother  is
         bedridden and needs daily care.  She  lives  with  the  Appellant's
         uncle and his family in a small  one  bedroom  house  with  limited
         facilities and a low income.  The Appellant's mother confirmed that
         the Appellant's uncle would not be able to provide accommodation or
         financial support to the Appellant and J.    The  Appellant's  aunt
         also still lives in Guyana but she is not of  fixed  abode  and  so
         could not provide accommodation or support.  The Appellant's cousin
         also still lives in  Guyana  but  the  Appellant's  mother  has  no
         contact with him and has been unable to contact him by phone.   The
         Appellant's mother is not in contact with  the  Appellant's  father
         due to an acrimonious separation and whilst the Appellant's  mother
         believes that her ex-husband's brother and  one  sister  remain  in
         Guyana, one of the sisters and her family are in the UK.

     21. The Appellant's mother said that she would send money to Guyana  if
         the Appellant and J were removed but would be unable to  send  much
         due to her and her husband's circumstances.  The Appellant's mother
         confirmed that she does support the Appellant and J now,  including
         paying for toys and clothes.  However, she pointed  out  that  this
         was not as much of a financial burden as would be the  position  if
         the Appellant and J were in Guyana.  The Appellant and J live  with
         her and her husband so that there are no  additional  accommodation
         costs and the increase in the bill for the additional food to cater
         for them was negligible. If the Appellant and J were in Guyana more
         financial support would be needed to fund accommodation  and  food.
         The Appellant's mother works as a registered  staff  nurse  in  the
         community and her husband works for the local council.   They  have
         no savings.

     22. In terms of maintenance of contact with the Appellant and J if they
         were removed, the Appellant's mother said that she and her  husband
         would be unable to pay regular visits to Guyana due to the costs of
         flights.  The maintenance of the relationship with, in  particular,
         J would be difficult by, for example, Skype.  Communication  via  a
         computer is not the same as day to day  care,  particularly  for  a
         young child.  She and her husband would not accompany the Appellant
         and J to Guyana if they were removed as they are  fully  integrated
         in the UK, have a house and  employment  in  the  UK  and  are  now
         British citizens.

     23. The Appellant's mother confirmed that she assumes about 80% of  the
         care of J because of her daughter's illness. She does  the  washing
         and cooking for him, reads him bedtime stories  and  takes  him  to
         school most days although the  Appellant  sometimes  collects  him.
         She said that J tends to call her "Mum" rather  than  referring  to
         her as his grandmother although Ms Hira notes  in  her  report  (in
         July 2014) that J had started to call the Appellant "mummy" at that
         time.  The Appellant confirmed her mother's evidence and  indicated
         in her statement in August 2014 that J regards her as a sister  and
         her parents as his parents due to the amount that they  were  doing
         and still now do for him.  She said her parents look after  J  more
         than she  does  and  that  J  has  a  very  strong  bond  with  his
         grandmother because his grandmother  has  looked  after  him  since
         birth.

    Submissions

     24. Mr Piper made clear that the Appellant's case is limited to a claim
         outside the Rules based on compelling circumstances.   He  did  not
         suggest that the Appellant could meet the Rules and he very  fairly
         accepted that although  the  Appellant  would  suffer  hardship  if
         returned to Guyana the circumstances do not  reach  the  very  high
         threshold to be termed "very significant obstacles".  He did though
         submit that there are very compelling circumstances  in  this  case
         based on a combination of the Appellant's mental health, the strong
         bond between J and his grandmother in particular, the impact  on  J
         of removal to Guyana where there is some doubt that  the  Appellant
         would be able to cope with looking after him and  the  evidence  of
         the Appellant's dependency on her mother. He noted that there is no
         provision under the Rules for leave to remain as an adult dependent
         relative in the circumstances of  the  Appellant  nor  is  there  a
         parent route for J to remain with his grandparents.  As such, those
         are all issues which need to be considered outside the Rules.

     25. Mr Piper reminded me that the Appellant was originally  in  the  UK
         with leave as the dependent of her mother.  She was  here  lawfully
         albeit in the latter stages on  statutorily  extended  leave  under
         section  3C  Immigration  Act  1971  until  Upper  Tribunal   Judge
         Waumsley's decision in 2012.   He  submitted  that  the  dependency
         between the Appellant,  J  and  the  Appellant's  parents  shows  a
         sufficient level of dependency to amount to family  life.   Whether
         considered on that basis or on the basis of private life alone,  he
         submitted that this is a strong case on its own facts which is  not
         outweighed by the public interest.

     26. Mr Piper relied also on the best interests of J and what  was  said
         by Ms Hira; that it is in J's best interests to remain  in  the  UK
         with both his mother and his grandparents.  He noted that J's  best
         interests are a primary though not the  primary  consideration.  Ms
         Hira's report and the evidence of  the  Appellant  and  her  mother
         demonstrates a significant bond between J and his  grandmother.   J
         has also only known life in the UK and although he is  still  at  a
         young age, Ms Hira's report shows that there would be a significant
         impact on him of removal particularly where the Appellant is likely
         to be unable to offer him much support in reintegrating.  Mr  Piper
         submitted that it is  not  reasonable  to  expect  the  Appellant's
         parents to relocate to Guyana (notwithstanding both were originally
         from that country).

     27. In relation to the medical evidence, Mr Piper submitted  that  even
         if limited in content, I should still  rely  on  that  evidence  as
         showing the same trajectory and that  the  Appellant  continues  to
         suffer with her mental health.  That coupled with Ms Hira's view of
         the impact of the Appellant's mental health on  J's  wellbeing  and
         development is sufficient to justify the Appellant and J  remaining
         in the UK.

     28. In relation to section 117B, although the Appellant is not  working
         at present, she has done so in the past and may be able  to  do  so
         again if her mental health improves.  Her  parents  are  supporting
         her and J in the meanwhile.  Mr Piper accepted that in light of  AM
         (S117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC), he could derive  no  support
         from the Appellant's ability to speak English.   He  accepted  that
         the Appellant's status in the UK  was  precarious  even  when  here
         lawfully so that private life had to be given  little  weight.   He
         pointed out, however, that family life was formed at least  at  the
         outset (and after J's birth) when  the  Appellant  was  in  the  UK
         lawfully and is deserving of weight.

     29. Mr Piper submitted that in light of the above circumstances,  taken
         together, it would be  disproportionate  to  remove  the  Appellant
         particularly  when  considering  the  impact  on  the   Appellant's
         wellbeing, on J and on the Appellant's mother of  removing  J  from
         her.

     30. Mr Jarvis submitted that I should be slow to accept the evidence of
         the Appellant and her mother particularly in light of the  findings
         of Upper Tribunal Judge Waumsley that they are prone to  dissemble.
         He  submitted  that,  based  on  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Waumsley's
         decision, I should be particularly slow to  accept  their  evidence
         when dealing with the extent of the relationship between J and  the
         Appellant's mother and the circumstances in Guyana. He reminded  me
         that  there  is  no  direct  evidence  updating  me   as   to   the
         circumstances in Guyana and I had therefore to  rely  on  what  the
         Appellant and her mother said in that regard.  He noted the  report
         of Ms Hira but this is based on one meeting and what she  was  told
         by the Appellant and her mother.

     31. Mr Jarvis submitted that  the  medical  evidence  shows  a  general
         overall improvement of the Appellant's mental health.  Although the
         records show an increase in the Appellant's  medication  in  recent
         months, Mr Jarvis submitted that the  evidence  of  Dr  Purdey  who
         regularly reviewed the Appellant, coupled with the medical records,
         show that her condition is managed by medication.  The  Appellant's
         medical condition does not meet the threshold to engage  Article  3
         ECHR and in those circumstances is unlikely to outweigh the  public
         interest in order to breach Article 8 ECHR.

     32. Mr Jarvis noted that the Appellant does not seek  to  rely  on  the
         Rules and admitted that she could not meet those.  Whilst there may
         be circumstances worthy of consideration outside the Rules in  this
         case, those could not be described  as  very  compelling.   In  any
         event, the issue then is one of proportionality.  When  considering
         section 117B, the fact that the Appellant  speaks  English  is  not
         relevant.  The Appellant and J are not financially independent.  He
         accepted that the Appellant could not work at present  due  to  her
         status and might be able to do so, as she had in the past, if given
         leave.  He also accepted that the evidence is that she is presently
         supported by her parents. The Appellant is presently an  overstayer
         and her status in the UK has firstly been precarious  and  latterly
         unlawful.  As such, private life and family life  should  be  given
         little weight.  Although he accepted that J could not be blamed for
         his status, his life here too had been formed at a  time  when  his
         status was precarious and unlawful.

     33. Mr Jarvis accepted that J's  best  interests  were  served  by  him
         remaining with the Appellant  and  possibly  also  his  grandmother
         (depending on my findings).  Ms Hira's report was however based  on
         one point in time and there is an absence of evidence from those in
         regular contact with  the  family.   He  accepted  there  would  be
         disruption of the relationship between J and his grandmother  which
         would impact on both if the  Appellant  were  to  be  removed.   He
         submitted though that the public interest outweigh the  family  and
         private lives of the family  even  taking  into  consideration  the
         impact  on  the  Appellant's  parents.   He  noted  also  that  the
         Appellant's parents could accompany her and J to Guyana given their
         background to assist the Appellant and it is reasonable for them to
         do so.

Decision and reasons

     34. Having reviewed the evidence including the evidence  before  me,  I
         accept that the Appellant and J in particular  have  a  very  close
         relationship with the Appellant's mother (and to  a  lesser  extent
         her father).  I find that the relationship, based on the evidence I
         heard and Ms Hira's report and medical  evidence,  is  sufficiently
         strong to amount to family  life,  particularly  in  light  of  the
         recent case of Singh and Singh v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
         Department [2015] EWCA Civ 630.  It is clear from Ms Hira's  report
         and the evidence given by the Appellant's mother  that  J  and  his
         grandmother have a very close bond, to the extent that  he  regards
         her as his mother and  regularly  calls  her  "Mum".   Although  it
         appears from Ms Hira's report that the Appellant does  care  for  J
         when she is able, it is clear that  she  is  struggling  to  do  so
         without support and such care  is  intermittent  depending  on  the
         highs and lows of her mental health condition.  I  also  take  into
         account Ms Hira's conclusions about the likely impact of removal on
         J in terms of the support which the Appellant would be able to give
         and  therefore  the  potential  impact  on  his   development   and
         integration in Guyana  given  that  he  would  be  reliant  on  his
         mother's support in that  regard.   I  find  that  there  would  be
         considerable disruption to the bond between J and  his  grandmother
         which he is likely to find very distressing, even at his young age,
         where she has provided the main support to him since birth.  As the
         Appellant's mother said in evidence, weekly contact via a  computer
         screen is not the same as the every day  care  she  provides  to  J
         presently.

     35. In relation to the Appellant's mental health condition,  I  do  not
         accept the totality of the medical evidence,  based  as  it  is  on
         matters which were given little prominence in the  evidence  before
         me and as to which  there  is  no  independent  support.   This  is
         particularly so in relation to the risk of and previous attempts at
         suicide.  As the person with exposure over a longer period of  time
         to the Appellant's mental health condition, I accept  the  evidence
         of Dr Purdy that whilst the Appellant may have suicidal ideas, this
         is without intent.  Although there is  evidence  that  she  took  a
         number of  paracetamol  tablets  in  November  2014,  that  is  not
         recorded in her medical notes as an attempted overdose  but  rather
         as an attempt to self-poison (although I do not  seek  to  downplay
         this  incident  on  that  basis).  However,  although  the  medical
         evidence  does  suggest  that  the  Appellant's  mental  health  is
         improving after a downturn in November 2014  it  remains  the  case
         that she is on medication which is impacting on her ability to care
         for herself and her child.  As I have noted above, the way in which
         she gave evidence indicated that the Appellant was not exaggerating
         the impact of her medication on her energy levels or the impact  of
         that on her ability to care  for  a  young  child.   I  accept  the
         Appellant's mother's evidence also about the extent  to  which  the
         Appellant is currently able to care for J in light  of  her  mental
         health and medicated condition.  That is reinforced  by  Ms  Hira's
         report. I note that the Appellant's mother indicated that she takes
         care of J about 80% of the time.

     36. In relation to family in Guyana, the Appellant's sister might  have
         provided sufficient support to the Appellant and J (as she did when
         the Appellant was younger and her mother left Guyana for  the  UK).
         However, although her sister has not yet left Guyana  for  the  US,
         she now has a visa to do so and there is evidence that she will  do
         so shortly.  I accept the evidence of the Appellant and her  mother
         that the other relatives in the UK are either elderly  and/or  have
         insufficient resources to accommodate and support the Appellant and
         J or cannot be traced.  I find therefore that the  Appellant  would
         not have relatives in Guyana who could support her  except  perhaps
         to a limited extent emotionally.  I do not consider  it  reasonable
         to expect the Appellant's parents to leave the UK with her in order
         to support the  Appellant  and  J.   They  have  made  a  life  for
         themselves in the UK.  They have property here.  Both are  employed
         and providing a meaningful and valuable contribution to UK society.
          They are British citizens.  They cannot be expected to  uproot  to
         return to a country where they have nothing in order to support the
         Appellant and their grandson.

     37. The Appellant accepts that she and J do not  meet  the  private  or
         family life requirements of the Rules.  The appeal proceeded solely
         on arguments relating to  the  application  of  Article  8  of  the
         European  Convention  outside  the  Rules.   I  accept  Mr  Piper's
         submission that the combination in this  case  of  the  Appellant's
         mental health,  the  Appellant's  and  J's  relationship  with  the
         Appellant's mother in particular and the impact on J of removal  to
         Guyana is sufficient to amount to  compelling  circumstances  which
         fall to be considered outside the Rules on the facts of this  case.
         Indeed, I did not understand Mr Jarvis to argue that I  should  not
         consider the case outside the Rules.

    Best interests of the child

     38. In assessing the best interests of the  child  I  have  taken  into
         account the statutory guidance "UKBA Every  Child  Matters:  Change
         for Children" (November 2009), which gives further detail about the
         duties owed to children under section 55. In that guidance the UKBA
         acknowledges  the  importance  of   a   number   of   international
         instruments relating to human rights including the UN Convention on
         the Rights of the Child (UNCRC). The guidance goes on  to  confirm:
         "The UK  Border  Agency  must  fulfil  the  requirements  of  these
         instruments in relation to children whilst exercising its functions
         as expressed in UK domestic legislation and policies." I take  into
         account the fact that the UNCRC sets out rights including a child's
         right to survival and development, the right to know and  be  cared
         for by his or her parents, the  right  not  to  be  separated  from
         parents and the enjoyment of the highest  attainable  standards  of
         living, health and education without discrimination. The UNCRC also
         recognises the  common  responsibility  of  both  parents  for  the
         upbringing and development of a child.

     39. I have also taken into account the decisions  in  ZH  (Tanzania)  v
         SSHD  [2011]  UKSC  4,  Zoumbas  v  SSHD  [2013]  UKSC  74  and  EV
         (Philippines) and others v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874.  The  best
         interests of the child are a primary consideration in this case but
         not the primary consideration and they may  be  outweighed  by  the
         cumulative effect  of  other  matters  that  weigh  in  the  public
         interest.

     40. The Appellant's son was born in the UK and knows no other life.  He
         is liable to removal with the Appellant.  He is only four years old
         and is not at an age where he has established any significant  ties
         to the UK outside his family (although he does now  attend  nursery
         school).   His life  is  likely  to  revolve  around  close  family
         members.  Unusually in this case, his main care is provided by  his
         grandmother who will not be removed as she is  a  British  citizen.
         She has provided the majority of his care since birth  due  to  his
         mother's mental health condition and as such it is  the  impact  of
         severance of that relationship which is  at  the  forefront  of  my
         consideration of the impact of removal on him.  His grandmother  is
         in the position of one of his parents and the  evidence  points  to
         her being the main parent in J's eyes.   The  evidence  also  casts
         serious doubt on the ability of the Appellant, J's mother, to  cope
         with him and support him if they are removed to Guyana without  the
         support of her parents.  As a  young  child  moving  to  a  strange
         country, J would be completely dependent on his mother for  support
         in integrating in Guyana, a support which the evidence suggests she
         would be unable to give.  The Appellant herself left Guyana in 2005
         and has not lived there either for 10 years  and  would  have  very
         limited support from family on return.

     41. For these reasons I conclude that it is in the best interests of  J
         to remain with his mother and grandparents in the UK. In the  UK  J
         and his mother can continue to benefit  from  the  support  of  the
         Appellant's mother who ensures J's care and support for most of the
         time and in particular when the Appellant is unable to do so due to
         her mental health condition.   As I note above, however,  I  accept
         that J's best interests are not a trump card.  He is not a  British
         citizen.  His best interests fall to be balanced against the public
         interest.

    Article 8 (private and family life)

     42. Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights  protects  the
         right to private and family life. However, it is  not  an  absolute
         right. The state is able to lawfully interfere with an  appellant's
         private and family life as long as it is pursuing a legitimate  aim
         and it is necessary and proportionate in all the  circumstances  of
         the case. The starting point is the basic principle  that  a  state
         has the right to control the entry and residence of  people  within
         its borders. There is a strong public interest  in  maintaining  an
         effective system of immigration control. This is done  through  the
         Rules, which set out the requirements for leave to enter or  remain
         in the UK. The Rules are now the main guide to what  decisions  are
         likely to be considered reasonable and proportionate. It  is  still
         possible for cases that fall outside those requirements  to  engage
         the operation of  Article  8  but  only  if  there  are  compelling
         circumstances that are not sufficiently recognised under the Rules:
         see Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11, Patel & Others v SSHD [2013]  UKSC
         72, MM & Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985 and SS  (Congo)  v  SSHD
         [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

     43. As I have found at [34] above, the dependency of the Appellant  and
         J on the Appellant's mother is sufficiently strong as to amount  to
         family life.  The Appellant has been in the UK for ten  years,  for
         much of the time with leave to remain (until 2012) and  has  worked
         in the UK in the past.  She was eighteen years old when she arrived
         here and  has  therefore  spent  her  early  adulthood  here.   The
         evidence shows that currently she does not have much  contact  with
         others outside the home which she shares with J and her parents due
         to her mental health condition but the period of time spent in  the
         UK is sufficient to show that removal is likely to  interfere  also
         with her private life.  J was born in the UK.   He  is  at  a  very
         young age and most of his relationships will  therefore  be  within
         the home but he does now attend nursery school.  Ms  Hira's  report
         provides some information about the (limited) friendships which  he
         has formed with other children.  There will therefore be a  limited
         interference with his private life by removal but a  more  profound
         interference with his family life with his grandmother.   In  these
         circumstances I accept that removal is likely to interfere with the
         Appellant's and J's right to both a private and family  life  in  a
         sufficiently grave way as to engage the operation of Article  8  of
         the European Convention (see stages 1  and  2  of  the  five  stage
         approach in Razgar v SSHD [2004] INLR 349)

     44. I take into account that the  Appellant  and  J  do  not  meet  the
         requirements of the Rules and the normal course of action would  be
         to require them to leave the UK. However, I have already found that
         there are compelling  circumstances  in  this  case  which  require
         Article 8 to be considered outside the Rules. While the maintenance
         of  effective  immigration  control  is  an  important  factor  the
         balancing exercise under Article 8 is a complicated  one  and  must
         take into account a  number  of  different  factors  balancing  the
         public  interest  against  the  specific  circumstances   of   each
         individual. In this case the Rules relating to private  and  family
         life set out requirements in very specific categories  but  do  not
         make adequate provision for a holistic  assessment  of  the  family
         life situation in this case nor do they cater for the impact of the
         Appellant's mental health as that relates to the impact on her  and
         on J of their removal.

     45. In assessing what weight to place on  the  public  interest,  I  am
         required to  take  into  account  section  117B  (general)  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The  maintenance  of
         immigration control is in the public interest  and  must  be  given
         great weight. The appellant speaks English but that fact  does  not
         weigh in the balance in her favour.  She is not self sufficient but
         is supported by her parents.  I do not though place that factor  in
         the balance in her favour as, although she may be able to work once
         given leave to be in the UK (as she has lawfully done in the  past)
         her mental health condition may preclude that at least in the short
         term and that condition may also mean that she  relies  on  medical
         treatment for that condition at the expense of public  funds,  also
         in the short term.  Although the Appellant has formed  her  private
         life in the UK at a time  when  she  only  had  limited  leave  and
         therefore with precarious status, I do take into account  that  she
         was here lawfully for much of the time and, had she  been  properly
         advised, may well have been entitled to apply for indefinite  leave
         when her mother did so.  Since the position in that regard  is  not
         sufficiently clear, however, I give little weight  to  her  private
         life.

     46. In relation to the family life  which  the  Appellant  and  J  have
         formed with the Appellant's parents, that has been formed at a time
         when the Appellant and later J were here lawfully.  Family life (as
         Singh makes clear) is not something which is formed and then  ends.
         It is something which is established and then  continues.   In  the
         case of J, he is still a minor and I have found at [14] above, that
         he enjoys family life with his grandmother.  Indeed, I  have  found
         that this is the main family  bond  in  his  eyes  because  of  the
         Appellant's inability to care for him from birth. In this case, the
         Appellant was here lawfully from 2005 until 2012 when her 3C  leave
         ended.  During that period, J was born.  Although section 117B does
         not cater for the particular circumstances of this case, I  am  not
         bound by that to give little weight to the family  life  which  the
         Appellant and J have formed with the  Appellant's  parents.   I  do
         therefore give weight to the family life  which  I  have  described
         above when weighing that against the public interest.

     47. This case turns on its own particular facts.  There are a number of
         compelling aspects to this case which individually might  not  lead
         to a finding that removal is disproportionate.   I  would  not  for
         example have taken the view that removal of the  Appellant  if  she
         did not have a child would be disproportionate based on her  mental
         health.  I would not have found that removal of the Appellant and J
         together would be disproportionate if J's main bond  was  with  his
         mother and she was able to care for him without support. However, I
         need to consider these factors in the round and  cumulatively  when
         weighing the extent of the interference with  the  Appellant's  and
         J's family and private life.  These factors in this  case  are  all
         largely  interrelated.   J  has  a  significant   bond   with   his
         grandmother which will be severed by removal.  That bond, reflected
         in the level of care which J's grandmother provides now on a  daily
         basis, is not something which can be replicated by other  forms  of
         communication between Guyana  and  the  UK.  The  Appellant  has  a
         significant dependency on her mother reflected by findings  in  the
         medical  reports  that  she  has  a  dependent  personality   which
         manifests itself in that  relationship.   Due  to  the  Appellant's
         mental health condition, she will struggle to care for and  support
         J if they are removed without the assistance of her mother.  It  is
         not reasonable to expect her mother  and  stepfather  to  accompany
         them back to Guyana.  The Appellant and J would have limited family
         support in Guyana and the Appellant's parents would not be able  to
         provide much by way of financial support to  the  Appellant  and  J
         from the UK.

     48. The maintenance of immigration control must  be  given  significant
         weight.  As noted above, the best interests  of  the  child  are  a
         primary  consideration  albeit  not  an  overriding  consideration.
         Nevertheless there would need to  be  a  number  of  countervailing
         factors to outweigh the child's best interests.  I have found  that
         it is in the best interests of J to remain in the UK where he would
         benefit from  support  and  care  from  both  his  mother  and  his
         grandparents.  Although the Appellant has been in  the  UK  without
         leave since 2012, she was in the UK for  nearly  seven  years  with
         leave and may have been entitled to  further  leave  or  indefinite
         leave if she had applied at the relevant time (although as  I  have
         indicated I do not give this factor much weight). The Appellant has
         no criminal convictions that might add more weight  to  the  public
         interest in removal.

     49. The task of weighing all the circumstances of a particular case  is
         always difficult and complex. Having carefully weighed up the facts
         of this case I find that there is very little evidence before me to
         show that there is a pressing social need to remove this  Appellant
         and her young son. In this case the basic  guidance  given  by  the
         House of Lords in Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11 is of assistance:

             "... the main importance of the case law  is  in  illuminating
             the core value which Article 8 exists to protect. This is not,
             perhaps, hard to recognise. Human beings are  social  animals.
             They depend on others. Their family, or  extended  family,  is
             the group on which many people most heavily depend,  socially,
             emotionally and often financially.  There  comes  a  point  at
             which, for some, prolonged  and  unavoidable  separation  from
             this group seriously inhibits their ability to live  full  and
             fulfilling  lives.  Matters  such  as  the  age,  health   and
             vulnerability of the applicant,  the  closeness  and  previous
             history of the  family,  the  applicant's  dependence  on  the
             financial and emotional support of the family, the  prevailing
             cultural tradition and conditions in the country of origin and
             many other factors may all be relevant."

     50. Taking into account in particular the impact of removal  on  J  and
         bearing  in  mind  his  relationship  with  his  grandparents,  the
         Appellant's mental health condition and her consequent inability to
         care for and support J in Guyana, I have concluded that the removal
         of the Appellant (and J) would prejudice their right to private and
         family life in a sufficiently serious way to amount to a breach  of
         her fundamental rights under Article 8. For these  reasons  I  find
         that removal in consequence of  the  decision  would  amount  to  a
         disproportionate interference with  the  appellant's  rights  under
         Article 8 of the European Convention.

DECISION

I allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds outside the Rules.

Signed      [pic]      Date 15 October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
