
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28663/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 6 August 2014                                |On 15 August 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                       MR MOHAMAD MOOSID MOHAMEDHOSEN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Lemer, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Mauritius who was born on 28 April  1964.
    In a letter dated 30 January 2013 solicitors applied on his behalf "for
    indefinite leave to remain in the UK or for discretionary leave in  the
    UK for a further period  of  time  on  the  basis  of  the  applicant's
    established private life under Article 8 of the European Convention  of
    Human Rights 1950".  That application was refused by a  decision  dated
    21 June 2013 and upon appeal First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Gurung  -Thapa
    dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and  under  Article  8
    ECHR.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision  arguing  three
    grounds and leave was granted to argue each of them.  Ground 1  alleges
    an erroneous application of para 34G HC 395; Ground 2 alleges a  flawed
    approach to Reg.5(3)a of the  Immigration  (Notices)  Regulations  2003
    and; Ground 3 that  the  judge  displayed  a  flawed  approach  to  the
    consideration  of  the   respondent's   delay   in   determining   (the
    appellant's) entry clearance application.

 3. The respondent filed a Rule 24 reply which submits that the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge directed herself appropriately.

 4. I have before me all the documentation that was before  the  First-Tier
    Judge which included an appellant's bundle divided into four sections A
    - D inclusive.

 5. It does not appear to be in issue that the appellant was granted  entry
    clearance as a student and that he entered the  United  Kingdom  on  28
    July 2000.  He was then granted further periods of leave to remain as a
    student until 31 October 2006.  Thereafter  he  was  granted  leave  to
    remain under the Science and Engineering Scheme until 2 June 2007.

 6. What happened next is  set  out  in  paragraph  11  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision.  The issue arises as to whether the  appellant  made
    an application under the Highly Skilled Migrant Programme prior to  the
    expiration of the appellant's leave on 2  June  2007.   The  judge  was
    satisfied that a form produced clearly shows  the  Royal  Mail  posting
    date as 2 June 2007 and then goes on to state in paragraph 12 that  "it
    appears this application was received by the Home Office on 5 June 2007
    (this date was rubberstamped on the front of  the  form)".   The  judge
    then gave reasons for rejecting  the  appellant's  assertion  that  the
    application was made prior to the expiration of his leave.  In doing so
    I find that the judge erred.  I confess that I do not understand  fully
    what  the  judge  has  set  out  at  paragraphs  13  and  14   of   the
    determination.  On the  one  hand  the  judge  has  accepted  that  the
    application form was  posted  on  2  June  2007  which,  by  reason  of
    paragraph 34G of the Immigration Rules, meant that the application  was
    made on that day.  Albeit that it was  the  appellant's  last  date  of
    leave to remain, rather than the first date on which he  did  not  have
    leave to remain, his leave was extended by virtue of  s.3C  Immigration
    Act 1971.  The judge in rejecting  that  the  appellant  had  made  his
    application prior to the expiration of his leave quoted  paragraph  34H
    of the Rules which states:-

         "34H Applications or claims for leave  to  remain  made  before  29
                February 2008 for which a form was prescribed  prior  to  29
                February 2008 shall be subject to the forms  and  procedures
                as in force on which the application or claim was made."

    Paragraphs 34G and 34H were inserted from 29 February 2008  i.e.  after
    the application of 2 June 2007.  The Judge may have assumed that  there
    were no similar provisions in the  rules  or  elsewhere  prior  to  the
    coming into force of paragraphs 34G  and  34H  in  February  2008  that
    helped the appellant and as a result concluded that the  appellant  was
    unable to show that his application was made prior to the expiration of
    his leave on 2 June 2007.  However, the Immigration (Leave  to  Remain)
    (Prescribed Forms and Procedures) Regulations 2007 came into force on 2
    April 2007.   Regulation 5 of those Regulations refers to  a  form  set
    out in Schedule 3 of those  Regulations  as  being  prescribed  for  an
    application for limited leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    Highly Skilled Migrant for the purposes of the Immigration Rules.  That
    was the application made by the appellant.  Under prescribed procedures
    at 16(2) (c) it states that:-

         "(c) In relation to an application for which a form  is  prescribed
             by Regulation 5, the application shall be sent by prepaid post
             or by courier to Work Permits  (UK)  and  to  the  Border  and
             Immigration  Agency  at  the  Home  Office,  and  may  not  be
             submitted in person at a public enquiry office."

    Regulation 17(2) of the same Regulation makes clear that  the  date  on
    which the application is made is, in the case of an application sent by
    post, the date of posting.

    There is nothing to indicate to me that those Regulations were ever put
    before the judge or that if they were  any  submissions  were  made  in
    relation to them.  Nevertheless the result is  that  I  find  that  the
    judge erred in concluding that the appellant did not  have  statutorily
    extended leave after 2 June 2007.

    However, matters do not end there because the appellant is claiming and
    needs to prove to the relevant standard  that  he  has  had  ten  years
    lawful residence in the United  Kingdom.  The  Judge  found  for  other
    reasons than the statutorily extended leave point  that  the  appellant
    had not shown that he met the  requirements  of  the  Rules.  This  was
    because the continuity  of  residence  was  broken  by  reason  of  the
    appellant's absence from the United Kingdom for more than six months.

 7. By a decision dated 19 June 2007 the application that  was  made  on  2
    June 2007 was refused, somewhat surprisingly not because  it  was  said
    that the application was made out of time, but  because  the  appellant
    did not meet the HSMP qualifying criteria. Although requests were  made
    for reconsideration of that decision  the  refusal  was  maintained  in
    decisions dated 6 September 2007 and 20 November 2007.

 8. All of this  was  noted  by  the  judge  in  paragraphs  16-18  of  the
    determination. The judge concluded that  she  did  not  find  that  the
    respondent failed to  make  a  valid  decision  in  refusing  the  HSMP
    application.  However, between the decisions of 6 September 2007 and 20
    November 2007 is one dated 1 October 2007. That decision refers to  the
    appellant's representatives applying on his behalf for leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom as a Highly Skilled Migrant but  the  application
    was refused in view of the fact that the appellant's limited  leave  to
    remain had expired before making the application. It  was  then  stated
    that because of this there was no right of appeal against the decision.
    That must be incorrect in view  of  my  finding  that  the  application
    should have been treated as having been made  in  time  and  the  judge
    should have found likewise.   At  that  point  therefore  although  the
    appellant had been informed otherwise he should have been given a right
    of appeal against the decision of 1 October 2007.

 9. Although the appellant complains in his statement at paragraph  7  that
    he has been trying, in vain, to obtain  a  complete  copy  of  all  the
    letters to and from the Home Office and other supporting documents from
    his previous solicitor it is nevertheless apparent from looking at  the
    bundle that his representatives at the time were  very  active  on  his
    behalf. They could have taken steps to protect  his  position  if  they
    disagreed with the decision that the appellant had made his application
    for leave to remain under the HSMP out of time. This would most  likely
    be carried out by seeking judicial review of the refusal to  grant  the
    appellant a right of appeal. For whatever reason this was not done.  It
    may be that the solicitors and others whose advice the appellant sought
    thereafter advised him that ultimately he was in difficulty  unless  he
    could meet the criteria to show compliance with the requirements of the
    HSMP which at the time of the refusal decision  of  19  June  2007  the
    respondent decided that he could not. I make no finding about this  but
    then I do not need to because I am  engaged  in  deciding  whether  the
    judge has erred in a material way.

10. At paragraph 11 of his statement the appellant blames his solicitor for
    his problems.  He accuses him of being a "last minute man, not reliable
    and I was trapped in a situation with no income".  It  seems  that  the
    appellant then sought advice elsewhere  and  stated  "After  consulting
    some other immigration agencies I was advised to leave the UK  as  soon
    as possible.  The reason given was to make the processing of  the  work
    permit quicker and all I had to  do  was  waiting  (sic)  for  my  work
    permit".  It appears therefore  that  even  if  his  solicitor  was  as
    described the appellant sought and obtained advice from others and  was
    advised to leave the country and did so voluntarily.

11. There then appears in the bundle a letter from  the  appellant  to  the
    "local enforcement office" dated 10 January  2008  which  refers  to  a
    telephone conversation with an advisor (Rose).   The  appellant  writes
    that he is voluntarily returning to Mauritius and has made a  temporary
    booking for his departure for 16 January 2008.  He seeks advice on  the
    steps that he needs to follow to obtain the return of his passport.  It
    seems that he experienced various difficulties and that he finally left
    the United Kingdom on 17 February 2008.  The appellant states  that  he
    made it very clear to the officers that he had  a  pending  application
    for a work permit and that he would be returning to the UK within  some
    months.  I note, however, that by that date  the  final  decision  with
    regard to his HSMP application had been refused on 20 November 2007.

12. What is not in doubt is that the appellant left the United Kingdom  and
    returned to Mauritius.  At paragraph 22 of the determination the  judge
    sets out the appellant's evidence that he was forced to drop  the  work
    permit sponsorship and apply for entry  clearance  as  a  student.   On
    whatever date he applied for it he was refused  entry  clearance  on  8
    August 2008.  The  refusal  letter  has  not  been  submitted  but  the
    appellant asserts that the Entry Clearance Officer gave a long list  of
    reasons why the application was rejected.  The appellant  asserts  also
    that there was poor consideration of his  application  the  refusal  of
    which contained a list of unsupported and unfounded allegations on  his
    residence in the UK.

13. What happened next is that after review by the Entry Clearance  Manager
    the original decision was withdrawn and a student visa was issued on  6
    October  2008.   There  is  apparently  no  formal  document  available
    detailing the ECM's reasons for granting entry clearance.

14. I fail to see that the judge erred in stating that she  was  not  in  a
    position to speculate as to why  the  ECM  did  not  uphold  the  ECO's
    decision. The fact remains, as the judge pointed out,  that  continuity
    of residence was broken as the appellant was absent  from  the  UK  for
    more than six months.

15. Ground 3 of the application seeking permission to appeal  submits  that
    it was incumbent upon the judge to determine whether, on the balance of
    probabilities, she accepted that the original  ECO  decision  had  been
    flawed.  However, it would  be  pure  speculation  to  decide  why  the
    manager did not uphold the ECO's decision.   Even  supposing  that  the
    original decision was flawed I fail to see how that would  entitle  the
    appellant to claim 10 year's lawful residence  in  the  United  Kingdom
    when he left the country in the full knowledge that there could  be  no
    guarantee that any application made by him would either  be  successful
    or successful within any given period of time.   Furthermore,  he  left
    the country expecting to make an application  under  one  part  of  the
    Immigration Rules, it seems, and  then  submitted  an  entry  clearance
    application as a student. He provides reasons for this which only go to
    show that it was not a mere formality that he would leave  the  country
    and be readmitted with a work permit soon after. Paragraph  14  of  his
    statement: -- "I was forced to drop the work permit  sponsorship,  Visa
    logic reported it was extremely  difficult  to  get  all  the  required
    documents  from  the  company  to  finalise  my  application  and  they
    relocated ..."

16. The student application was subsequently successful but by  then  there
    had been a break in continuous residence in the UK for  more  than  six
    months. Thereby the continuous lawful  period  of  residence  had  been
    broken.

17. The guidance to caseworkers and it is just that - guidance - refers  to
    discretion for breaks in lawful residence always being discussed with a
    senior case worker.  The guidance indicates to me that only if  a  case
    worker contemplates using his or her discretion that such a  discussion
    would be required.  Where discretion is not contemplated then the point
    does not arise.

Decision

18. Although there are errors in the judge's determination for the  reasons
    that I have already given, on the particular facts those errors are not
    material such that the decision should be set aside  and  there  is  no
    other good reason why this appeal should be heard again.

19. There was no challenge to the Article 8 findings.

20.  An  anonymity  direction  has  not  been  made  previously   and   the
    circumstances do not appear to warrant one being made now so I  do  not
    make such a direction.

21. The First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision to dismiss this  appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds therefore stands.



Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton
