




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/28331/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|                                       |                                     |
|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th December 2017                  | On 12th December 2017               |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                          MS MUINAT OMOTOLA OREMOSU
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     The appellant attended in person with her daughter
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Ms Muinat Omotola Oremosu date of birth 12 May 1950,  is
    a citizen of Nigeria.  Having considered all the  circumstances,  I  do
    not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge D Ross promulgated on 1st March 2017 whereby  the  judge
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department. The Secretary of  State  had  refused
    the appellant indefinite leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    dependant of her daughter in the  UK  under  the  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 3.  In granting leave Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt stated:-

    It is arguable that the FTTJ took an incorrect approach to the evidence
    concerning good service and the previous decision  accepting  that  she
    had received notice of an earlier First-tier Tribunal  hearing.  It  is
    not clear from the decision if the point was put to  the  appellant  or
    her daughters or what evidence was taken into account, the  history  of
    the  appeal  being  somewhat  convoluted  and  are  undisputedly  being
    Tribunal  notices  to  the  appellant  at  an  incorrect  address.  The
    credibility of the appellant and her daughters is material to both  the
    article 8 and article 3 ECHR assessments.

 4. It appears that the appellant  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  7
    February 2012 travelling on a multi-entry visit visa  which  was  valid
    from 3 March 2011 to 3 March 2013.

 5. Whilst in the UK  the  appellant  suffered  medical  problems  and  she
    applied for leave to remain.  On 1 May 2012 the appellant  applied  for
    indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  the  dependant  of
    her daughter who was present and settled in the United Kingdom. At  the
    time of application  the  appellant  was  under  the  age  of  65.  The
    appellant is now over the age of 65.

 6. In making the application the address give for  the  appellant  in  the
    application was :-

    [                                                           ]  [address
    1]

    It is now claimed that that address was entered in error.

 7. Despite that  allegedly  being  the  address  for  the  appellant,  the
    respondent was writing to the appellant at :-

    [                                                       ] [address 2]

     It is accepted that that was the correct address for the appellant and
    her sponsor

 8. There is in the papers a copy of the application form which  refers  to
    the appellant as living at [                                     ]  and
    the sponsor also living at [                            ].

 9. By decision of 5 June 2013 the appellant's application for variation of
    leave, i.e. further leave, was refused. Further to that there was  also
    a decision to remove the appellant from the United Kingdom made on  the
    same day of 5 June 2013.

10. On the 5th November 2014 a letter from a  Member  of  Parliament  which
    refers     to     the      appellant      as      living      at      [
             ] address 1.

11. The appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal  was  first
    heard on 9 November 2015.

12. It appears that the appellant had asked that the appeal  be  determined
    on the papers. A judge had previously determined that there  should  be
    an oral hearing and notice of hearing was sent out. As is evident  from
    the record of proceedings of 4 October 2016 the notice of  hearing  had
    been sent to ostensibly the wrong address. Whilst it was  sent  to  the
    address, which was believed to be the one notified by the appellant  to
    the Tribunal for service, it was acknowledged on 4 October  that  there
    was an error and the correct address should be address 2.

13. The Notice of Hearing was sent out for the hearing on  the  9  November
    but it appears that there was no attendance by the appellant or  anyone
    acting on her behalf. According to the records it was sent  to  address
    2. The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Black.

14. Subsequent to that the appellant had written to the Tribunal indicating
    that she had not had notice of  the  appeal  hearing.  There  was  some
    evidence that notices in respect of other  individual  appellants  were
    being sent to the address of the appellant and her sponsor despite  the
    fact that the individuals had no connection with either.

15. As a result of the  letter  and  documentation,  Resident  Judge  Poole
    considered the decision and set it aside under Rule 32 of the  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules. It was directed that the matter be reheard.

16. Thereafter the matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge D  Ross  on
    the 15 February 2017. At that stage there was no representative for the
    appellant and no  representative  for  the  respondent.  Central  to  a
    consideration of the appeal was the credibility of  the  appellant  and
    her daughters. The judge heard evidence  from  the  appellant  and  her
    daughters. The judge in assessing the issue of credibility  started  by
    revisiting the issue of whether  or  not  the  appellant  had  received
    notice of hearing in the past. That had been decided and ruled upon  by
    Resident Judge Poole. The judge however made it a  central  element  of
    the assessment of the credibility of the witnesses.

17. Before me the representative for the respondent accepted given all  the
    circumstances the judge was left in a very invidious  position  without
    the assistance of a representative for the respondent.  However  before
    me the representative for the  respondent  accepted  that  the  judge's
    approach to the evidence disclosed material error of  law.  That  error
    relates to  failing  to  give  the  appellant  and  her  daughters  the
    opportunity to explain the complications that had arisen with regard to
    the service of notice of hearing on  them  and  whether  they  had  had
    notice of hearing. The representative for the  respondent  accepted  in
    the circumstances that as it was a fundamental basis for  the  findings
    of fact. It was accepted that there was a flaw in the decision and  the
    decision could not stand.

18. In the light of that concession I find that there is a  material  error
    of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge. The  error  of
    law impacts upon the findings of fact made by the Tribunal  Judge.  The
    findings of fact cannot stand. I therefore direct that  the  appeal  be
    heard afresh in the First-tier Tribunal. I set the decision  aside  and
    remit the case back to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

19. I allow the appeal to the extent that the appeal is  remitted  back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

20. I do not make an anonymity direction


Signed





Date 11th December 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

