
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
IA/28407/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |          Decision and Reasons        |
|                                    |Promulgated                           |
|On 3 August 2017                    |          On 15 August 2017           |


                                   Before


                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between


|           |ABDOOL RECHAD RUJBALLY                         |               |
|           |(ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)                 |               |
|           |                                               |Appellant      |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|   |      THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT      |             |
|   |                                                          |Respondent   |


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Atcha, of Counsel, instructed by Ebrahim & Co
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant, a national of Mauritius born on 8 August 1969, has  been
    granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against  a  decision
    of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal L  M  Shand  QC  who  (following  a
    hearing on 25 July 2016) dismissed his  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and on human rights grounds against the respondent's decision  of
    29 July 2015 to refuse his application of 2 April  2015  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of  his  private  and  family
    life under Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention for the Protection
    of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR).

 2. There was no dispute before the judge that the appellant arrived in the
    United Kingdom on 31 March 1996 as a visitor and that, by the  date  of
    his application of 2 April 2015,  he  had  lived  continuously  in  the
    United Kingdom for a period of 19 years. However, by the  date  of  the
    hearing, he had lived in the United Kingdom for a period in  excess  of
    20 years.

 3. At para 26 of her decision, the judge found that the appellant did  not
    meet the requirements of para 276ADE(1)(iii) because he had  not  lived
    in the United Kingdom continuously for a period of at least 20 years as
    at the date of his application for leave, as required by the  terms  of
    para 276ADE(1). The grounds do not challenge the  judge's  decision  in
    relation to para 276ADE(1).

 4. At para 32, the judge said  that  she  did  not  see  anything  in  the
    appellant's case that had not already been adequately addressed in  the
    Rules. However, she proceeded to consider proportionality.

 5. In her consideration of proportionality outside the  Rules,  the  judge
    took into account that s. 117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 provided that little weight should be given to  private
    life established when an individual is in the United Kingdom unlawfully
    or when their immigration status was precarious.  She  then  considered
    the evidence about the appellant's immigration history, at para 34.  At
    para 35, she reminded herself of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in
    VW (Uganda) [2009]  EWCA  Civ  5,  that  "if  removal  is  to  be  held
    disproportionate, what must be shown is more than mere  hardship  or  a
    mere difficulty or mere obstacle". At para 36, she said  that  she  was
    satisfied that the public interest in  the  consistent  enforcement  of
    immigration control as a means of achieving the economic well-being  of
    the country does outweigh the interference which will be caused to  the
    appellant in relocating to Mauritius.  She  therefore  found  that  the
    respondent's decision was a proportionate response.

 6. The sole issue before me is whether, in her assessment of the Article 8
    outside the Immigration Rules, the judge failed to  take  into  account
    the fact that, by the date of the hearing, the appellant had  lived  in
    the United Kingdom continuously for a period  in  excess  of  20  years
    and, if she did, whether any such error of law was material.

 7. It was not in dispute before me that the period of residence  that  can
    be taken into account for the purposes of para 276ADE(1) was limited to
    the period of residence as at the date of the application in  question,
    pursuant to the words "at the date of the application" in  the  opening
    sentence of para 276ADE(1). Para 276ADE(1) reads as follows:


       "276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
          remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that  at  the
          date of application, the applicant:


       (i)  does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-
          LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and


       (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the grounds
          of private life in the UK; and


       (iii)     has lived continuously in the UK for  at  least  20  years
          (discounting any period of imprisonment); or


       (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in  the
          UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of  imprisonment)
          and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant  to  leave
          the UK; or


       (v)  is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has  spent  at
          least half of his life living continuously in the UK (discounting
          any period of imprisonment); or


       (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years  or  above,  has
          lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years  (discounting
          any period of imprisonment) but there would be  very  significant
          obstacles to the applicant's  integration  into  the  country  to
          which he would have to go if required to leave the UK"

 8. It was not in dispute before me that, in assessing the Article 8  claim
    outside the Rules, the judge was entitled to  take  into  account,  and
    should have taken into account, the entirety of the  period  for  which
    the appellant had been resident in the United Kingdom.

 9. Ms Atcha submitted that the Secretary of State had introduced  the  20-
    year residence rule in 276ADE(1)(iii). If the  appellant  had  made  an
    application for leave on the basis of Article 8  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing, he would have been granted leave. By the date of the  hearing,
    he had lived in the United Kingdom continuously for a period in  excess
    of 20 years and did not have any  criminal  record.  The  judge  should
    therefore have allowed the appeal on that basis. There was no  need  to
    consider the s.117B factors.

10. Mr Tufan submitted that, if such an application had been made  or  were
    to be made now, the appellant would be granted leave  if  he  satisfied
    the suitability requirements. He  submitted  that  the  s.117B  factors
    still fell for consideration even when an individual has lived  in  the
    United Kingdom for a continuous period of 20 years.

11. Ms Atcha and Mr Tufan agreed that, if I were to conclude that the judge
    had materially erred in law, I should proceed to re-make  the  decision
    on the material before me.

Assessment

12. I consider that, to some  extent,  Mr  Tufan's  submissions  were  ill-
    conceived. The Secretary of State's policy is contained in  the  Rules.
    In relation to  private  life,  she  has  decided,  by  virtue  of  the
    requirements set out in para 276ADE(1)(i)-(iii), that if an  individual
    has lived in the United Kingdom continuously for a period of  at  least
    20 years, the strength of the public interest is such  that  it  is  no
    longer  served  by  the  individual's  removal  provided  that   he/she
    satisfies the requirements of 276ADE(1)(i) and 276ADE(1)(ii). This is a
    relevant consideration when the  balancing  exercise  is  conducted  in
    assessing an Article 8 claim outside the Immigration Rules.

13. It is clear that the judge applied the s.117B factors in her assessment
    of the Article 8 outside the Rules. There is nothing  to  suggest  that
    she was aware that the weight to be given to  the  public  interest  is
    such that it is no longer served by the individual's  removal  provided
    that he/she  satisfied  the  requirements  of  276ADE(1)(i)-(iii).  The
    question is whether  the  judge's  approach,  in  applying  the  s.117B
    factors, was correct.

14. The effect of the words "at the date of  application"  in  the  opening
    sentence of para  276ADE(1)  is  to  limit  the  period  considered  in
    relation to para 276ADE(1)(iii) to the period of residence  as  at  the
    date of application.

15. The requirement that an individual should make a valid application  for
    leave is a procedural requirement. However, the suitability requirement
    is not.  It is only if the suitability  requirement  is  satisfied  and
    (where para 276ADE(1)(iii) is relied upon) the individual has lived  in
    the United Kingdom continuously for at least 20 years (discounting  any
    period of imprisonment) that the weight  to  be  given  to  the  public
    interest is such that it  is  no  longer  served  by  the  individual's
    removal  from  the  United  Kingdom.  Unless   both   the   suitability
    requirement  and  the  20-year  continuous  residence  requirement  are
    satisfied, the s.117B factors continue to apply in  the  assessment  of
    proportionality outside the Rules.

16. Whether or not an individual meets the suitability  requirement  is  an
    assessment that should be conducted, in  the  first  instance,  by  the
    Secretary of State for the simple reason that the  Secretary  of  State
    may have information about an individual which may not come to light at
    a hearing before a judge.  Whether  or  not  an  individual  meets  the
    suitability requirement does not depend only on whether he or  she  has
    criminal convictions.

17. In my judgment,  the  reason  for  the  phrase:  "as  at  the  date  of
    application"  taken  together  with  the  suitability  requirement   in
    276ADE(1)(i) is that it enables the Secretary of State to  conduct  her
    enquiries in the  first  instance  in  order  to  ensure  that  she  is
    satisfied that an individual satisfies the suitability  requirement  in
    276ADE(1)(i) and, if  she  is  not  so  satisfied,  that  the  relevant
    material is placed before the First-tier Tribunal on appeal.

18. In my judgment, it is unobjectionable that it is the Secretary of State
    who should make the first assessment as to whether or not an individual
    meets the suitability requirement.

19. In the instant case, the respondent specifically stated in the decision
    letter that:

            "We accept that your application  meets  paragraph  276ADE(1)(i)
             and (ii)"

20. However, as at the date of the hearing before the judge,  a  period  of
    one year had elapsed since the decision was made. The acceptance by the
    respondent in the decision letter  that  the  appellant  satisfied  the
    requirements of para 276ADE(1)(i)  only  speaks  to  the  circumstances
    existing as at the date of the decision. Anything could  have  happened
    in the period that elapsed between the date of  the  decision  and  the
    date of the hearing before the judge.

21. Given that there was nothing to show that the respondent accepted  that
    the  appellant  satisfied   the   suitability   requirement   in   para
    276ADE(1)(i) as at the date of the hearing before  the  judge,  I  have
    concluded that the judge's approach, in applying  the  s.117B  factors,
    was the correct approach. In  the  absence  of  confirmation  from  the
    respondent that the appellant satisfied the suitability requirement  in
    para 276ADE(1)(i), it is incorrect to say that the public interest  was
    no longer served by the appellant's removal simply because he had lived
    in the United Kingdom continuously for a period of at least 20 years as
    at the date of the hearing before the judge.

22. The judge therefore did not err in law  when  she  applied  the  s.117B
    factors in her consideration of proportionality outside the Rules.  The
    respondent had not confirmed that the appellant  continued  to  satisfy
    the suitability requirement. Before me, Mr. Tufan  submitted  that,  if
    the appellant were to  make  another  application,  he  would  only  be
    granted leave if  he  satisfied  the  suitability  requirement.  In  my
    experience, there are occasions when the respondent's representative is
    prepared to confirm that the respondent does not have any  concerns  as
    to whether an individual meets the suitability  requirement.  This  was
    not one of those occasions.

23. There is no reason to think that the judge did not  have  in  mind  the
    entirety of the appellant's period of residence as at the date  of  the
    hearing when she considered proportionality in relation to the  Article
    8 claim outside the Rules.

24. I have therefore concluded that there is no material error  of  law  in
    the judge's decision.

Decision

The decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  L  M  Shand  QC  did  not
involve the making of any material errors of law.





[pic]Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                     Date: 14 August 2017
