
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28929/2011

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Sheldon Court                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 March 2014                              |On 22 April 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                           AJIBOLA LUKMAN AWORINDE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Boyle, Solicitor from Halliday Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr M Hussain, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination confirms an indication already given by Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Parkes in Directions dated 16 July 2012 that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal erred in law in its consideration of the appellant's claim
    that his removal would contravene the United Kingdom's obligations under
    the European Convention on Human Rights.

 2. It is particularly regrettable that at paragraph 35 of the determination
    the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the  appellant  was  in  a
    relationship with a woman who is identified  but  the  relationship  was
    described as something that did not:

         "constitute family life for the purpose of Article 8.  They are not
         married or living  together  and  the  relationship  is  relatively
         recent.  The  appellant's  relationship  with  Mr  Dyche  does  not
         therefore enable him to succeed in a human rights claim."

 3. This is an ambiguous phrase.  It is not clear if the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge recognised the relationship as part of the private and family life
    of the appellant but found it of so little consequence  that  disrupting
    it would not be a disproportionate interference with those rights (which
    is a legally permissible conclusion if explained properly but it has not
    been explained properly) or, alternatively found that  the  relationship
    was not part of a the private and family life of the appellant.  Such  a
    finding would be hard to understand given the evidence presented to  the
    court.

 4. It follows that this appeal has  to  be  decided  again  and  it  is  my
    judgment on the information before me that the appeal should be  decided
    in the First-tier Tribunal. So  much  time  has  now  lapsed  since  the
    original decision that there  is  nothing  of  any  consequence  in  the
    existing findings that can be taken as any more than  a  vague  starting
    point. This is an appeal that has to be argued on  fresh  disclosure  of
    facts.

 5. The Tribunal has contacted the  Family  Court  in  accordance  with  the
    appropriate protocol and has been told about the appellant's application
    for contact with his child. Mr Boyle indicated before me today that this
    relationship would not feature in the new claim to be brought on Article
    8 grounds.

 6. It is for the First-tier Tribunal to  give  directions  for  the  proper
    conduct of this case  but  I  anticipate  that  the  appellant  will  be
    directed to produce an up-to-date statement from any  person,  including
    himself, seeking to give evidence in  support  of  his  contention  that
    removal would be an unlawful interference with his  private  and  family
    life.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 16 April 2014                  |







