
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28975/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On June 9, 2017                              |On June 13, 2017              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                         MRS ROSALINE NGOMA BABALOLA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Greer (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeetie (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make  an  anonymity  order  under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

 2. The appellant is a national of Nigeria.  She entered this country as  a
    visitor on April 20, 2012 and then applied for leave to remain  outside
    of the Immigration Rules on human rights grounds. That application  was
    refused by the respondent on November 5, 2013 and  her  appeal  against
    that decision was dismissed on May 9, 2014. Permission to  appeal  that
    decision was refused on June 11, 2014.  The  appellant  then  lodged  a
    further application on March 25, 2015  but  this  was  refused  by  the
    respondent on August 5, 2015. She appealed that decision on August  19,
    2015 and her appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Chambers (hereinafter called the Judge) on September 8,  2016  but  her
    appeal was dismissed on September 22, 2016.  She appealed that decision
    on October 5, 2016 and I found there had been an error in law following
    a hearing on April 27, 2017 and I adjourned the  hearing  to  a  future
    date when I could consider further evidence and I retained the  Judge's
    findings at paragraphs [10] to [18] as my starting point.

 3. The burden remains on the appellant  to  demonstrate  that  appropriate
    support  from  Social  Services  and/or  the  Local  Authority  is  not
    available for her daughter and the mere fact the appellant may be  able
    to provide more or better support is not the issue.

 4. The appellant's solicitors filed a supplementary bundle containing  two
    letters from the appellant's eighteen/fourteen-year-old  granddaughters
    and various reports provided by the local authority.

 5. It was agreed at the start of the hearing that  no  oral  evidence  was
    necessary  and  that  ultimately  this  would  be   a   proportionality
    assessment under article 8 ECHR.

    THE APPELLANT'S CLAIM

 6. The appellant came here as a visitor and submitted  an  application  to
    extend her stay as a carer for her daughter, [DH].

 7. Her daughter is almost thirty-nine years of age and is married to  [RH]
    who is fifty-nine years of age. Her grandchildren are  aged  between  4
    and 18 and they all live together.

 8. The appellant's daughter is under the care of a consultant psychiatrist
    and according to the medical evidence she  can  suffer  a  blackout  at
    anytime. She should not be left in charge of her children and since the
    appellant has been here she  has  taken  on  this  responsibility.  The
    appellant, in her statement, made it clear that she is responsible  for
    the care of everyone in the house because her son-in-law works  and  is
    not always available.  Her  son-in-law  has  his  own  health  problems
    including  PTSD,  depression,  asthma,  hypertension,  chronic   kidney
    disease, arthritis, prolapsed disc,  sciatica  in  his  right  leg  and
    diabetes. He also suffers from memory and mental health problems.

 9. A psychiatric report  from  Dr  Ghosh  confirms  that  the  appellant's
    daughter suffers from quite severe and  chronic  post-traumatic  stress
    disorder associated with Separation  Anxiety  Disorder.  She  concluded
    that if the appellant had to leave the United Kingdom it would lead  to
    a significant deterioration in her mental state and she could become  a
    serious risk to herself.

10. The appellant's daughter's doctor  believed  the  appellant's  daughter
    requires 24-hour supervision given the severity of  her  mental  health
    issues and that the appellant's presence was therapeutic.

11. Letters from the grandchildren indicate that they attend college/school
    and they have little  time  for  anything  else  except  studies.  They
    believed that if the appellant was not here this would impact on  their
    own studies and ultimately affect their studies. The eldest would  have
    to cook meals for the family if the appellant was not  here  and  would
    not be able to have a social life. Their younger  siblings,  aged  nine
    and four respectively, are supported  by  the  appellant  as  well  and
    without her being present they too would suffer.

12. A recent assessment carried out by the local authority makes  it  clear
    that the kind of  support  provided  by  the  appellant  could  not  be
    replicated by adult social care unless the  appellant's  daughter  went
    into twenty-four-hour residential care. The effect of this would be  to
    split the appellant's daughter up from her children. As  the  appellant
    is the carer if she were removed then there would be  no  formal  carer
    and consequently no respite care would be available for the family.

    MR MCVEETIE'S SUBMISSIONS

13. Mr McVeetie  indicated  that  he  had  considerable  sympathy  for  the
    appellant's family circumstances and he accepted the  medical  evidence
    presented. However, he submitted the Tribunal could not allow an appeal
    on sympathy grounds alone as families had to make  life  choices  on  a
    daily basis. The appellant did  not  meet  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    section 117B(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  2002  makes
    it  clear  that  the  maintenance  of  immigration  control,  in   such
    circumstances, is in the public interest.

14. The appellant's family had rejected the support  offered  because  they
    believed the appellant could provide better support. The UK authorities
    has a responsibility to provide care for all UK citizens and regardless
    of how the appellant presented her case the fact remained that  if  she
    was not here then  the  authorities  would  step  in  and  provide  the
    appropriate assistance either through care in the community or  by  way
    of residential care.

15. The appellant's son-in-law has his own medical problems but  these  did
    not prevent him from working and being away from the home  for  several
    days at a time. Sometimes hard decisions had to  be  made  which  would
    impact on the way the family leads its life and this  could  include  a
    family member giving up work to provide the appropriate care  with  the
    assistance from the local authority.

16. The appellant only came here in April 2012 but her daughter's  problems
    pre-date her arrival and they family had to deal with the circumstances
    then. The family may not like what is offered by the authority  but  it
    is not enough to say the appellant can provide a better option. Care is
    on offer and the report recently submitted fails to take  into  account
    that 24 hour care would be available either through residential care or
    by a combination of the husband and care in the community.

17. The appellant does  provide  support  for  her  grandchildren  but  the
    younger children are not without support from their father.

18. The appellant lived most of her life in Nigeria ad  she  clearly  still
    has family in that country.

19. Taking all of the above matters into account Mr McVeetie submitted that
    it would not be disproportionate  to  refuse  the  appellant  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules in  circumstances  where  she  had  only  been
    granted leave to enter as a visitor and there was  care  available  for
    the appellant's daughter both within the  family  and  from  the  local
    authority and associated services.

    MR GREER'S SUBMISSIONS

20. Mr Greer adopted his skeleton argument and submitted it  would  not  be
    proportionate to refuse the appellant's application. He submitted there
    were compelling circumstances as defined by Treebhawon and Others (NIAA
    2002 Part 5A-compelling circumstances test) [2017] UKUT 12  (IAC)  that
    displaced the public interest in removing the appellant.

21. He submitted that Mr McVeetie's argument was  flawed  because  refusing
    this appeal would lead to increased cost to the public purse to pay for
    services currently provided by the appellant. The immediate consequence
    of the appellant  being  required  to  leave  would  be  to  force  the
    appellant's husband to quit his employment and this would then lead  to
    increased public resources to support this family.

22. Mr Greer referred to the decision of  Lama  (video  recorded  evidence-
    weight-article 8 ECHR: Nepal(  (Rev  1)  [2017]  UKUT  (IAC)  which  he
    submitted was similar to the facts of this current case.  He  submitted
    that although the appellant could be substituted by the state and other
    family  members,  in  qualitative   and   emotional   terms   she   was
    irreplaceable.

23. The medical evidence was not disputed and it is clear  the  appellant's
    daughter remains dependant on the  appellant  and  removing  her  would
    significantly impact on her daughter's health  and  the  lives  of  her
    grandchildren. Whilst the State can  provide  assistance  what  was  on
    offer was not adequate. The help available would be insufficient unless
    her daughter went into a residential care. If care was to  be  provided
    at home then  there  are  serious  concerns  regarding  the  daughter's
    wellbeing in light of what happened in 2010.

24. Mr Greer submitted that applying Section 117B of the 2002 act it  would
    be disproportionate to remove the appellant.

    FINDINGS

25. The medical evidence before me is accepted and Mr McVeetie did not seek
    to persuade me that the appellant's  daughter's  medical  circumstances
    had been exaggerated. The same could also be said  of  the  appellant's
    son-in-law's medical ailments albeit it cannot be overlooked  that  his
    conditions have not  prevented  him  continuing  his  employment  as  a
    freelance lecturer/tutor and trainer in law.

26. Mr McVeetie's challenge to  this  appeal  is  that  whilst  it  may  be
    preferable for the appellant to be allowed to stay and  assist  in  the
    care of her daughter there  were  other  options  that  were  available
    including either 24/7 residential  care  or  care  provided  by  family
    members supplemented with care in the community and respite care.

27. Following the earlier hearing in April 2017 I  preserved  some  of  the
    original Judge's findings that can be found in paragraphs [10] to  [18]
    of his decision. These findings can be summarised as follows:

      a) The family believe it is necessary for the appellant to be the full-
         time carer of her daughter.

      b) The respondent's carers policy (pages 67  to  88  of  the  original
         bundle) is that the community policy  is  not  designed  to  enable
         people to stay in the United Kingdom who would otherwise  not  have
         leave to do so. Leave should only be granted where it is  warranted
         by particularly compelling and  compassionate  circumstances.  Each
         case must be looked at on its own merit having regard to  the  type
         of illness/condition, type of care  required,  the  level  of  care
         available and the long-term prognosis. Local authorities are  under
         a duty to arrange suitable care.

      c) The appellant and her family had declined all help from  the  local
         authority since the appellant  had  been  here  although  they  had
         accepted the care and assistance of the local authority before  the
         appellant came here in 2012.

28. Since that hearing the appellant has provided further evidence  on  the
    level of care available both before  the  appellant  arrived  and  more
    recently. These  reports  are  contained  in  the  supplemental  bundle
    between pages 9 and 58.

29. The report at pages 9-17 is an assessment into the appellant  commenced
    on July 13, 2016 and completed on August 3, 2016  (see  page  15).  The
    appellant made clear to  the  person  interviewing  her  that  she  was
    perfectly capable of looking after her daughter and would  not  welcome
    any interference from outside the home.  The  report  states  that  the
    appellant provides a high level of oversight and  practical  assistance
    to her family including providing  her  daughter  with  personal  care,
    meals,  emotional  support  and  support  in  terms  of   unpredictable
    blackouts. The report itself does not discuss what  alternatives  would
    be available if the appellant was not present. The report confirms what
    was already  known  namely,  needs  were  identified  but  support  was
    declined.

30. The report at  pages  18-39  is  an  assessment  into  the  appellant's
    daughter undertaken at the same time as the  previous  assessment  (see
    page 37) although it seems that this plan was completed  more  recently
    on June 8, 2017 (see page 33). The subject had considered  formal  care
    and support but did not feel that this would meet her needs  and  those
    of her children. She was not keen on strangers in her home and did  not
    feel this was fair on her children. She stated her  husband  could  not
    provide the necessary care as he often worked away from  the  home  for
    several days at a time. It was not felt that the services  which  adult
    social care could provide in the home would replicate the  support  the
    appellant was providing. Formal services in the home do not require  24
    hour care at home although 24 hour care  could  be  provided  within  a
    residential setting but this was felt  by  the  author  of  the  report
    inappropriate given the needs of the children and  the  whole  family's
    right to have family life. Without the support of  the  appellant  then
    the son-in-law's employment would be compromised.  A  needs,  risk  and
    contingency plan (pages 28 to 32) confirms that social  care  would  be
    available to:

      a) Manage and maintain nutrition.

      b) Maintain personal hygiene.

      c) Ensure the appellant's daughter was appropriately dressed.

      d) She would be able to be in the house safely. She would be  able  to
         wear a personal pendant alarm to summon help.

      e)  Make  use  of  necessary  facilities  or  services  in  the  local
         community.

31. The report contained at pages 40-53 are dated (March 2010)  and  relate
    to a period when the appellant was not in this  country.  This  was  an
    initial assessment after  the  appellant's  daughter  tried  to  commit
    suicide. The assessments related to the two  eldest  grandchildren.  No
    role was deemed necessary for the family at the time albeit there  were
    concerns  over  the  eldest  grandchild's  emotional  well-being.   The
    appellant's son-in-law was assessed as a  very  supportive  father  and
    husband and whilst both he and his  wife  were  suffering  from  mental
    health issues they were seeking to address these issues.

32. It is against this background that I have to consider  the  appellant's
    appeal outside of the Immigration Rules.

33. The two arguments presented are as follows:

      a) Mr McVeetie  submits  there  are  solutions  available  within  the
         community and whilst the family may feel it is preferable  for  the
         appellant  to  remain  it  was  not  necessary  and   removal   was
         proportionate because the state can provide the necessary support.

      b) Mr Greer submitted that the options available within the  community
         did not address the individual  problems  facing  this  family  and
         there are particularly compelling and  compassionate  circumstances
         that mean it would be disproportionate to refuse this appeal.

34. If an appellant cannot meet the Immigration  Rules  that  permit  entry
    clearance or the right to remain, the appellant must rely on article  8
    ECHR.

35. The correct approach in such cases was set out by the House of Lords in
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 00027. The Court set out a  five-stage  test  and  I
    make it clear that the requirements to be met in the first four  stages
    are met and the relevant issue for me is the final stage namely whether
    it would be disproportionate to require  the  appellant  to  leave  the
    country.

36. Following the introduction of the Immigration  Act  2014  I  must  have
    regard to section 19 of that Act which introduced Section  117A-D  into
    the 2002 Act. This particular case involves Section 117B. Applying that
    section I find as follows:

      a) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the  public
         interest.

      b) The appellant speaks English and is not in receipt of public funds.
         She is supported by her son-in-law who works and is not a burden on
         the UK tax payer. Case law makes clear  that  at  best  this  is  a
         neutral factor.

      c) Whilst she has a relationship with her grandchildren this is not  a
         relationship covered by section 117B(6) as her  grandchildren  live
         with their parents.

      d) The appellant has not specifically argued a private  life  in  this
         appeal but clearly any private life created has been created whilst
         her immigration status was precarious and since her last appeal was
         refused she has been here unlawfully.

37. There is absolutely no doubt that the appellant's daughter has a number
    of medical problems. These are set out above and in more detail in  the
    bundle of documents before me. Mr McVeetie  recognised  those  problems
    but argued that the appellant has failed to  demonstrate  her  daughter
    could not receive the appropriate assistance, not necessarily the  same
    assistance, from the authorities.

38. The reports in the supplemental bundle reiterate the fact the family do
    not want to take advantage  of  such  help.  The  respondent's  carer's
    policy makes it clear that this is something  I  must  have  regard  to
    albeit I must take into account the type of illness/condition, type  of
    care required, the level of care available and the long-term prognosis.
    The  author  of  the  recent  care  assessment  notes  that  there  are
    alternatives available  but  they  would  have  repercussions  for  the
    family.

39. The appellant's daughter prior to 2012 was unable to rely on her mother
    as she lived in Nigeria. With the exception of an incident in 2010 they
    got by. Clearly having a family member on hand to look after  you  24/7
    is more desirable to having a stranger to do that task. I was told  the
    son-in-law was not capable  of  carrying  this  responsibility  because
    firstly he has his own problems and secondly if he did he would have to
    give up work. The fact he is able to work away from home  suggests  his
    problems would  not  prevent  him  providing  assistance  supported  by
    others. He is able to continue to  work  away  from  home  because  the
    appellant has taken over his daily duties. The report  from  2010  made
    clear that both he and his wife were bringing up their children and  he
    in particular was described as a "very supportive father and husband".

40. Mr Greer's submission is that removing the  appellant  would  mean  the
    husband giving up work and all that would bring with it  including  the
    additional costs to our stretched NHS services.

41. Mr Greer referred me to the decision in Treebhawon but this  is  to  do
    with private life claims. The facts of that case centre around a mother
    and father and their children. This case involves the relationship of a
    mother to an adult daughter and her relationship to her  grandchildren.
    The grandchildren's best interests are to remain with their parents and
    any decision to remove the appellant would not alter that.

42. I have to consider whether the arguments put forward by  the  appellant
    overcome the threshold  necessary  to  demonstrate  a  disproportionate
    interference with private life rights under Article 8 ECHR.

43. Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  gives
    primacy to the best interests of the grandchildren who  are  under  the
    age of  eighteen.  The  best  interests  of  these  grandchildren  will
    primarily be served by the maintenance of the family unit and as stated
    above this will not be disturbed even if the appellant  were  to  leave
    the country.

44. I have noted the content of the two letters and the reports from  2010.
    What is sadly lacking in this appeal is an examination of what  exactly
    would be provided by the authorities if the appellant  were  unable  to
    provide the assistance she does.  The  appellant  has  approached  this
    appeal and the previous appeal on  the  basis  they  would  not  accept
    outside help. That does not assist her case. Despite the problems  that
    existed prior to 2012 it seems the family survived albeit with  outside
    assistance. In an ideal world people would be  allowed  to  choose  how
    they lived their lives  and  that  remains  possible  as  long  as  the
    appellant satisfies the Immigration Rules. As she  does  not  she  must
    rely on a proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR.

45. Mr Greer urged me to have regard to the decision of Lama and  submitted
    the facts were similar. The appellant in this current appeal came on  a
    six month visa and overstayed. She lost her first appeal  to  stay  and
    this is her second attempt.  She  does  not  have  a  highly  developed
    private life. He private and family life merge as that is the only life
    she has.  She  presents  herself  as  a  carer  for  her  daughter  and
    grandchildren  but  does  not  meet  the  Rules.  Her   role   is   not
    indispensable because  her  daughter  can  turn  to  her  husband,  the
    authorities and to a much lesser extent her eldest  child.  To  suggest
    the appellant cannot be substituted is incorrect.

46. The appellant came as a visitor on April 20, 2012 with entry  clearance
    until September 13, 2012 and then applied on  September  12,  2012  for
    leave to remain outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules  on  human  rights
    grounds. That application was refused and an appeal dismissed on May 9,
    2014. She has been an overstayer since her appeal rights were exhausted
    and has been here both unlawfully and precariously.

47. There are no doubt strong arguments advanced in this appeal  but  I  am
    not persuaded the belated enquiries made in this case by the  appellant
    are sufficient to show that the removal  would  not  be  proportionate.
    There remain many options within the community available in this  case.
    None of those options appear unreasonable albeit the consequence  means
    the appellant would have or return to Nigeria where she has family.

48. Balancing the facts of this case against the public interest in play  I
    find that the respondent's refusal to grant the appellant  status  does
    not interfere with the appellant's right to private/family life.

    DECISION

49. There was an error in law in that no article 8  decision  was  made.  I
    have remade the decision and

50. I dismiss the appellant's appeal under article 8 ECHR



Signed                              Date     June 12, 2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis





FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

I make no fee award as I have dismissed the appeal

Signed                              Date     June 12, 2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
