
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28519/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated    |
|without an Oral Hearing                       |                             |
|On 27th March, 2014                           |On 08th April 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY

                                   Between

                           abisoye oyeyemi okutubo

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria,  who  was  born  on  22nd  June,
    1979.

2.   I  regret  that  I  have  no  information  concerning  the  appellant's
    immigration  history,  because  that  has  not  been  supplied  by  the
    respondent.

3.   On 16th April, 2012, the appellant made an application  for  the  issue
    of a residence  card  as  confirmation  of  the  appellant's  right  of
    residence under European Community Law as the spouse of an EEA national
    exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  The appellant  adduced
    evidence to show that she had on 10th January, 2012  married  Mr  Janis
    Veselovs, a Latvian  national,  by  proxy  marriage  in  Nigeria.   The
    appellant's spouse was said to be exercising treaty rights  within  the
    United Kingdom.

4.   The respondent was concerned as to whether or  not  the  appellant  was
    actually married  and  concluded  that  she  was  not.   The  appellant
    appealed the respondent's decision to the First-tier Tribunal  and  her
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Deni Matthews who,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 22nd February, 2012, dismissed the  appeal
    both on immigration grounds and on human rights grounds.

5.   The appellant challenged that decision asserting that the  marriage  by
    proxy was valid in Nigeria and complaining that  the  judge  failed  to
    attach significant weight to the  appellant's  letter  of  attestation,
    because it contained grammatical errors  and  contained  gender  errors
    and, as a result the judge concluded that the appellant was not married
    to the sponsor and concluded that there was  insufficient  evidence  to
    enable the judge to  conclude  that  the  parties  were  in  a  durable
    relationship.  The grounds suggested that the judge had thereby erred.

6.    I  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  16  April,  2013,  because   a
    Presidential panel were about to consider the  validity  of  proxy  and
    customary  marriages  in  Nigeria.   Subsequently,  the  Tribunal  have
    promulgated its decision in Karim (proxy marriages -  EEU  law)  [2014]
    UKUT 24 (IAC).  That makes it clear that in  EU  law  the  question  of
    whether a person is in  a  marital  relationship  is  governed  by  the
    marriage laws of the  Member  States.   Given  that  the  appellant  is
    married to a Latvian national and derives her right of  residence  from
    him, it was important that the judge should be appraised at the law  of
    Latvia, so that she could decide whether, according to Latvian law, the
    marriage would be regarded as having been celebrated in Nigeria or  the
    United Kingdom, the  appellant  and  her  claimed  spouse  having  been
    present in the United Kingdom at the time of the marriage  in  Nigeria.
    The appellant choose not to place any evidence relating to Latvian  law
    before the judge.

6.   The head note to Karim says:-

          "     A person who is the spouse  of  an  EEA  national  who  is a
          qualified person in the United Kingdom can derive rights  of  free
          movement and residence if proof of  the  marital  relationship  is
          provided.
          b.             The production of a marriage certificate issued  by
          a  competent  authority  (that  is,  issued   according   to   the
          registration laws of the country where the  marriage  took  place)
          will usually be  sufficient.  If  not  in  English  (or  Welsh  in
          relation to proceedings in Wales), a certified translation of  the
          marriage certificate will be required.

          c.              A  document  which   calls   itself   a   marriage
          certificate will not  raise  a  presumption  of  the  marriage  it
          purports to record unless it has been issued by an authority  with
          legal power to create or confirm the facts it attests.

          d.             In  appeals  where  there  is  no   such   marriage
          certificate or where there is doubt that  a  marriage  certificate
          has been  issued  by  a  competent  authority,  then  the  marital
          relationship may be proved by other evidence.  This  will  require
          the Tribunal to determine whether a marriage was contracted.

          e.             In such an appeal, the starting point  will  be  to
          decide whether a marriage was contracted between the appellant and
          the qualified person according to the  national  law  of  the  EEA
          country of the qualified person's nationality.

          f.              In all such situations, when resolving issues that
          arise because of conflicts of law, proper respect must be given to
          the  qualified  person's  rights  as  provided  by  the   European
          Treaties, including the right to marry  and  the  rights  of  free
          movement and residence.

          g.            It should be assumed that, without  independent  and
          reliable evidence about the recognition of the marriage under  the
          laws of the EEA country and/or the country where the marriage took
          place, the Tribunal is likely to be unable to find that sufficient
          evidence has been provided to discharge the burden of proof.  Mere
          production of legal materials from  the  EEA  country  or  country
          where the  marriage  took  place  will  be  insufficient  evidence
          because they will rarely  show  how  such  law  is  understood  or
          applied in those countries. Mere assertions as to  the  effect  of
          such laws will, for similar reasons, carry no weight.

          h.            These  remarks  apply  solely  to  the  question  of
          whether a person is a spouse for the purposes of EU law.  It  does
          not relate to  other  relationships  that  might  be  regarded  as
          similar  to  marriage,  such  as  civil  partnerships  or  durable
          relationships."


7.   I have concluded that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  did  not  err  in
    law.  The evidence before the  judge  did  not  establish  whether  the
    marriage which was contracted between the appellant and her spouse  was
    according to the national law of Latvia, that being the EEA country  of
    the qualified person's nationality.  The judge quite properly  went  on
    to  consider  the  appellant's  rights  under  Regulation  85  of   the
    Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  and  concluded  that
    there was insufficient evidence of a durable relationship.  This appeal
    is dismissed.

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
