

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28144/2010

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 July 2013                               |On 18 September 2013         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McCarthy

                                   Between

                            osman mahdi mohammed
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, Counsel instructed by Montague
Solicitor, London
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                 DECISION ON WHETHER TO ADMIT AN APPLICATION
                          FOR PERMISSION TO APPEAL

 1. The appellant was born on 2 April 1972 and is a  Somali  national.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 14 May 2009.  On  21  June  2010,  the
    respondent made a decision that it was conducive to the public good  to
    deport him to Somalia.  The appellant appealed against that immigration
    decision but his appeal was dismissed in a determination promulgated on
    4 January 2011.  On 4 June 2013 he applied for permission to appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. From this brief summary it will be evident  that  the  application  for
    permission to appeal was well outside the five-day period prescribed in
    rule 24(2) of the  2005  Procedure  Rules.   In  our  calculation,  the
    application was in fact made more than  880  calendar  days  after  the
    prescribed period ended.

 3. On 17 June 2013, the First-tier Tribunal issued a decision stating that
    permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  had  been  granted.   That
    decision was in the following terms.

     1. The appellant, who comes from Somalia, seeks permission  to  appeal
        the decision of a panel of the Tribunal (Judge G A Black and Ms P L
        Ravenscroft) to appeal the decision to dismiss his  appeal  against
        the proposed making of a deportation order.  This determination was
        promulgated on 4  January  2011  and  the  current  application  is
        grossly out of time.

     2. The appellant had appeared at earlier hearings but did  not  appear
        and was not represented at the hearing before the  panel.   He  had
        previously been represented by a firm no longer practising.  Notice
        of hearing was sent to him at the  address  last  notified  to  the
        Tribunal.  One of the grounds of appeal was based on asylum.

     3.   In   his   application   for   permission,   made   through   new
        representatives, it is said that notice of hearing was sent to  the
        appellant's old address, that  the  panel  should  have  sought  to
        clarify his current  address,  and  were  in  error  in  proceeding
        without doing so.  Following an application made under the  Freedom
        of Information Act it is said that the respondent was aware at  the
        time of the hearing both of the appellant's correct address and  of
        his new representatives but that  information  was  not  disclosed.
        The grounds  go  on  to  allege  that  the  panel's  findings  were
        inadequate.

     4. On the face of the documents now produced it does appear  that  the
        respondent  may  have  been  aware   of   the   new   address   and
        representatives at the time of the hearing but no  further  enquiry
        in that regard was made.  In these circumstances,  particularly  as
        there was an asylum element to the claim, which was decided in  the
        absence  of  the  appellant,  it  may  be  appropriate   to   grant
        permission.

     5. However it is for the appellant to establish the facts  as  to  the
        reasons for late submission of the application  and  that  further,
        avoidable, delay  has  not  occurred.   In  the  circumstances,  in
        accordance with the guidance in Boktor and Wanis (late  application
        for permission) Egypt [2011] UKUT 00442 (IAC) permission is granted
        conditional on whether, after proper enquiry, special circumstances
        are established which would render it unjust not to extent time.

    As the fifth paragraph makes clear, permission to  appeal  had  not  in
    fact been granted.  Instead, the  Designated  Judge  had  decided  that
    permission to appeal would be granted if the appellant could  establish
    that any delay in seeking permission had been unavoidable.

 4. We observe that there has been no argument that the  determination  was
    not promulgated in  accordance  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005.   We  are  aware  that  rule  56  provides  the
    following:

        56 Address for service

        (1) Every party, and any person representing a party,  must  notify
        the Tribunal in writing of a postal address at which documents  may
        be served on him and of any changes to that address.

        (2) Until a party or representative  notifies  the  Tribunal  of  a
        change of address, any document served on him at  the  most  recent
        address which he has notified to the Tribunal shall  be  deemed  to
        have been properly served on him.

        (3) If the respondent knows that  the  appellant  has  changed  the
        address referred to in paragraph (1), he must notify  the  Tribunal
        in writing of that fact and, if he is aware of it, the new address.

    It is accepted that neither the appellant, nor his representatives  nor
    the respondent notified the  Tribunal  of  the  appellant's  change  of
    address prior to the promulgation of the determination.  As  such,  the
    determination was promulgated in accordance with rule 22  of  the  2005
    Procedure Rules.

 5. We return to the issue described in the last paragraph of the  decision
    on the application for permission to appeal.  Although we are  in  full
    agreement that the question of timeliness is one that must be  resolved
    before the substance of any appeal can be entertained, we  are  of  the
    view that there is no power for a judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  to
    make a conditional grant of permission to appeal and to that extent the
    decision is defective.  Our reasons are as follow.

 6. It is necessary to recall the provisions of  rule  24(4)  of  the  2005
    Procedure Rules.

        "24 Application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal

        (1)  A party seeking permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
             must make a written application to the Tribunal for  permission
             to appeal.

     ...

        (4)  If a person makes an application  under  paragraph  (1)  later
             than the time required by paragraph (2) -

             (a)  The  Tribunal  may  extend  the  time  for  appealing  if
                 satisfied that by reason of special circumstances it  would
                 be unjust not to do so; and

             (b)  Unless the Tribunal extends time under sub-paragraph (a),
                 the Tribunal must not admit the application.

    Because the two parts of rule 24(4) are conjunctive, if the  First-tier
    Tribunal does not make a decision to extend time, then the  application
    cannot be admitted.  This means that until a  decision  on  whether  to
    extend time has been made by a judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    application for permission  to  appeal  cannot  proceed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.   The  implication  is  that  a  judge  seized  of  such   an
    application is required to reach a decision on the timeliness if raised
    in the application or identified from the papers.

 7. The Designated Judge who dealt with the  application  referred  to  the
    reported case of Boktor and Wanis.  The summary of that decision reads:

        Where permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal has been  granted,
        but in circumstances where the  application  is  out  of  time,  an
        explanation is provided, but that explanation is not considered  by
        the judge granting permission, in the light of AK (Tribunal  appeal
        - out of time) Bulgaria [2004] UKIAT 00201 (starred) and the  clear
        wording of rule 24(4) of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Procedure)
        Rules 2005, the grant of permission to appeal is  conditional,  and
        the question of whether there are special circumstances  making  it
        unjust not to extend time has to be considered.

    We draw attention to the first clause; the situation described  is  one
    where permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal has  been  granted  by
    the First-tier Tribunal but there has been no decision on  whether  the
    time for the application should be extended.   The  summary,  like  the
    decision, describes what might happen should  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    fail to decide the timeliness issue.

 8. In our view, this decision cannot be  regarded  as  authority  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal to avoid making a decision on timeliness because it
    relates only to situations where the First-tier Tribunal has failed  to
    do all that is required of it.  The  ability  to  correct  an  omission
    cannot be a reason to encourage a judge of the First-tier Tribunal  not
    to do what is required of them.  In support of this approach, we  refer
    to the reported decision, Samir (FtT Permission to appeal: time) [2013]
    UKUT 3 (IAC).  As its  summary  confirms,  it  is  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to decide whether time should be extended.

        In a case where, following Boktor and Wanis (late  application  for
        permission) Egypt [2011] UKUT 00442 (IAC), a  grant  of  permission
        has to be regarded as conditional  upon  a  decision  whether  time
        should be extended, the latter decision is  part  of  the  original
        decision on the application.  If the application was to the  First-
        tier Tribunal, the decision as to time is  therefore  made  by  the
        First-tier Tribunal, and if the application is not  admitted  there
        is the possibility of renewal to the Upper Tribunal.

 9. It is  on  the  basis  of  this  approach  that  we  decided,  after  a
    significant amount of deliberation and with the consent of the parties,
    to resolve the fact  that  in  this  appeal  the  issue  of  timeliness
    remained outstanding before the First-tier Tribunal, by  reconstituting
    ourselves as a panel of that Tribunal.

10. Our attention  was  drawn  to  two  reported  decisions  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The earlier one is Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules)  Nigeria
    [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC).  The relevant section refers to situations  where
    the First-tier  Tribunal  has  refused  to  admit  an  application  for
    permission to appeal because it was made outside the prescribed  period
    and describes how a subsequent application to the Upper Tribunal  might
    proceed.  The later decision is Wang and Chin (extension  of  time  for
    appealing) [2013] UKUT 343 (IAC), which  sets  out  what  a  First-tier
    Tribunal judge must do when faced with an application for permission to
    appeal that is out of time.

11. The former decision suggests  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  can  list  an
    application for permission to appeal for an oral  hearing.   This  only
    applies to applications for permission to appeal  made  direct  to  the
    Upper Tribunal; there is no equivalent  provision  in  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 which govern proceedings in
    the First-tier Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber).  As the Upper
    Tribunal indicates in Wang and Chin, a First-tier Tribunal  Judge  must
    consider the application on the papers.  It is only  where  the  First-
    tier Tribunal has failed to complete its task, as here, that the  Upper
    Tribunal will have to reconstitute  itself  to  address  the  issue  of
    timeliness since the appeal to the Upper Tribunal cannot be admitted  -
    irrespective of any merits in the application -  unless  discretion  is
    exercised by the First-tier Tribunal.

12. Although we have to consider the issue as a  panel  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, Ogundimu contains observations relevant to the  consideration
    of timeliness in either Immigration and Asylum Chamber.   We  highlight
    two paragraphs of that decision:

        16.  Factors relevant to the exercise of discretion to extend  time
        under rule 5(3)(a) of the 2008 Rules  will  include,  but  are  not
        limited to: (i) the length of any delay, (ii) the reasons  for  the
        delay, (iii) the merits of  the  appeal  and  (iv)  the  degree  of
        prejudice to the respondent if the  application  is  granted.   The
        merits of the appeal cannot be decisive (see the reasons  given  in
        Boktor and Wanis [2011] UKUT 442).

        20.  There must always be a reason shown why time limits  have  not
        been complied with and the longer the period of non-compliance  the
        more powerful those reasons should be. Whilst  each  case  must  be
        determined on its own  facts,  given  the  strict  time  limits  in
        immigration appeals generally and  the  reason  behind  those  time
        limits, the expectation is that it  will  be  an  exceptional  case
        where permission to be appeal should be  granted  where  there  has
        been a significant delay in filing an application;  by  significant
        delay we would certainly include any period more than 28  days  out
        of time.

    Although the reference in paragraph 16 of Ogundimu is to  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, the same approach is appropriate
    where the issue of timeliness arises under the Procedure Rules  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal because of the similarity  of  the  rules  in  both
    chambers.

13. We have already indicated that the application for permission to appeal
    was 881 days after the prescribed period for the  application  expired.
    In light of the guidance provided in the reported  decisions,  we  must
    identify what reasons are given for the whole of that delay.

14. The grounds of application contain the following explanation:

        This application is out of time and the  Tribunal  is  respectfully
        requested to extend  time  due  to  the  unfortunate  circumstances
        beyond the control of the appellant and his present representatives
        which has led to this delayed application.  We  submit  that  there
        are special circumstances in this case which should  be  considered
        to extend time to appeal.

        There is an unfortunate background to this matter and what will  be
        apparent is that none of it is in any way  due  to  the  Appellant.
        The errors will be identified as  they  arise  in  the  Immigration
        Judges' (sic) determination.

        A brief chronology of the circumstances that has led to the instant
        application is as follows:

    The chronology contains various  dates.   We  are  concerned  with  the
    period between the date the determination was  promulgated  (4  January
    2011) and the date of application for  permission  to  appeal  (4  June
    2013).  The information contained in the chronology  relevant  to  this
    period is:

        17. Irving & Co wrongly pursue an asylum application.

        18. Appellant instructs current firm - 20.07.2012

        19. Solicitors seek disclosure from Home Office

    These entries do not add to the general explanation for the delay given
    in the earlier paragraphs of the grounds of application.

15. Attached to the application were papers disclosed by the Home Office in
    response to the  appellant's  subject  access  request.   Those  papers
    confirm that they  were  prepared  on  28  January  2013.   Mr  Collins
    provided a letter dated 14  February  2013  from  the  Home  Office  to
    Montague Solicitors (endorsed that  it  was  received  on  20  February
    2013).  It is clearly the covering letter that accompanied the  report.
    It refers to the subject access report having  been  made  on  31  July
    2012.

16. Within the report are some relevant dates and information.

     a. On 10 June 2011, the Home Office recorded that it  had  received  a
        letter  from  Irving  &  Co,  Solicitors,  enclosing  a  letter  of
        authority and a request for an update on the appellant's situation.
         It is not clear whether the Home Office replied  in  writing,  but
        there is a  record  of  a  telephone  conversation  with  the  same
        solicitors on 8 June 2012 during which the  Home  Office  confirmed
        that the appellant was "appeal rights exhausted".

     b. A letter from Irving & Co to the Home  Office  dated  20  May  2011
        indicates that they understood that the appellant  was  awaiting  a
        fresh decision on his asylum application.     It would appear  that
        this is the letter to which reference is made in the 10  June  2011
        entry.

     c. The appellant instructed Irving & Co on or before 20  October  2010
        since that is the date he signed a letter of authority.  The papers
        from the Home Office also contain a letter dated 17  November  2010
        from those solicitors confirming their instructions.

     d. The appellant's constituency  MP  contacted  the  Home  Office  for
        information about the appellant's status.  The request was made  on
        5 December 2011 but no reply was  sent  until  1  June  2012.   The
        papers suggest that a full account of the  appellant's  immigration
        and appeal history was provided in the response.

17. The most that can be drawn from these points is that  it  would  appear
    that the appellant had not informed Irving & Co that he had  a  pending
    appeal and that the firm did not find out for the best part of one-and-
    a-half years.

18. Mr Collins suggested  that  it  was  likely  that  the  solicitors  had
    encountered some difficulty in obtaining papers  from  the  appellant's
    previous solicitors, who had closed down overnight because  of  factors
    unrelated  to  immigration  work.   This  had  resulted  in  delays  in
    obtaining the previous file.  In  addition,  that  file  was  no  doubt
    confusing  because  the  Home  Office  had  made  and   withdrawn   one
    immigration decision and it was not clear that a  second  decision  had
    been made or served.

19. Mr Collins indicated that his instructing  firm,  Montague  Solicitors,
    had found it difficult to  follow  the  papers,  which  confirmed  this
    confusion.  He also advised us that Irving & Co had told the  appellant
    that they would not assist him  once  they  had  clarified  he  had  no
    pending application.  It was at that juncture that the appellant sought
    alternative legal advice and instructed Montague Solicitors.   This  is
    supported by the fact that the Home Office letter of 14  February  2013
    refers to their application for a subject access  request  on  31  July
    2012.

20. We asked why Montague Solicitors had not submitted the application  for
    permission to appeal soon after they received the Home Office letter of
    14 February 2013.  Mr Collins again suggested that there was  confusion
    and it was only because  one  of  the  senior  solicitors  at  Montague
    Solicitors  knew  one  of  the  solicitors  who  had  dealt  with   the
    appellant's case at Sheikh & Co Solicitors (the firm  that  had  closed
    overnight), that they could clarify the situation.  Mr Collins informed
    us that his instructing solicitors were able  to  instruct  that  other
    solicitor to prepare the grounds of application.

21. This is all the evidence we had regarding the  delay  in  bringing  the
    application for permission to appeal.  We are not satisfied that  there
    is any reasonable explanation for the delay for the following reasons.

22. There is no explanation why the appellant did not inform Irving & Co or
    Montague Solicitors that he had an appeal.  There  can  be  no  dispute
    that he received the second  immigration  decision  since  he  appealed
    against it.  The explanation given about why he failed  to  attend  the
    appeal hearings is that he changed address but,  as  indicated  in  the
    chronology in his grounds of application, he remained in  contact  with
    Sheikh & Co Solicitors as it was them who informed the Home  Office  of
    his change of address.   That  firm  knew  all  about  the  appellant's
    appeal.

23. There is no explanation why Irving &  Co  were  not  more  diligent  in
    pursuing clarification of the appellant's status with the Home  Office.
     Although we accept that if they  were  without  accurate  instructions
    they would not have been aware of the urgency of the situation,  we  do
    not understand how an experienced firm of immigration solicitors  would
    be unable to make sense of papers  relating  to  an  appeal  against  a
    decision to make a deportation order.  It is plausible  that  the  firm
    did not obtain the papers from Sheikh & Co immediately but  Mr  Collins
    did not suggest they never had the earlier papers.

24. Therefore, although there may be a period soon after Irving &  Co  were
    instructed that is explained by the failure  of  the  appellant  giving
    clear instructions and that firm not having the papers  from  Sheikh  &
    Co, we cannot accept the explanation covers the whole 18  month  period
    indicated.

25. We accept that it appears that Irving & Co decided that they could  not
    assist the appellant once they knew his position because  there  is  no
    further  correspondence  from  that  firm  and   the   appellant   gave
    instructions soon after to Montague Solicitors.   This  may  explain  a
    short period of delay between June and July 2012.

26. Similarly, we can understand that if the appellant's instructions  were
    not clear and they did not  have  the  earlier  papers,  then  Montague
    Solicitors would not have realised the need to make an  application  in
    June or July 2012.  But we cannot accept that once  they  had  received
    the file of papers they did not realise  what  action  they  needed  to
    take.  The suggestion that they  needed  clarification  from  the  Home
    Office and had to await the outcome of the subject access request is  a
    distraction since the file of papers would have contained the  relevant
    information.

27. Even if that were not the case, we are clear that  Montague  Solicitors
    were aware of the appellant's circumstances by 20 February  2013.   The
    explanation  that  the  further  delay  was  the  result   of   another
    experienced firm  of  immigration  solicitors  being  confused  is  not
    plausible, particularly as there was a connection between that firm and
    the firm that originally helped the appellant in his appeal.

28.  We  recognise  that  the  fact  that  the  delay  in  this   case   is
    extraordinarily long and the fact that a large part of  that  delay  is
    without reasonable  explanation  are  factors  that  weigh  against  us
    extending time.  However, we also realise that we have to consider  the
    merits of the appeal and the potential impact on the respondent  should
    we extend time before reaching a decision.

29. We are satisfied that there are merits in the application as identified
    in the decision of the Designated  Judge.   It  is  arguable  that  the
    respondent could have advised the Tribunal of the appellant's change of
    address and that that information may have affected how the panel dealt
    with the appellant's appeal.  But we also recognise,  as  indicated  in
    Boktor and Wanis and approved of in Ogundimu, the fact that  there  may
    be an arguable error on a point of law is not a trump card.

30. We are aware that it is open to the appellant to make a fresh claim for
    asylum.  It will be for the respondent to decide whether to admit  such
    an application and there is of course  power  for  any  refusal  to  be
    reviewed judicially.  Even though the appellant is seeking to challenge
    a decision to make a deportation order, he  cannot  be  prevented  from
    seeking to rely on the provisions of international protection.

31. We are also satisfied that  the  impact  on  the  respondent  would  be
    significant if we extended time.  This is because during the period  of
    delay  there  have  been  significant  changes  relating  to   Somalia,
    including the delivery of a new country guideline case (AMM and  others
    (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011]  UKUT
    00445  (IAC)).   In  addition,  the  passage  of  time   will   require
    substantial further evidence from the appellant about his life  in  the
    United Kingdom in relation to an assessment of his private  and  family
    life rights,  if  any.   In  effect,  the  respondent  would  be  at  a
    disadvantage in any appeal that proceeded because relevant issues would
    have to be considered on the hoof.

32. For the sake of clarity, we must explain that this is not to  be  taken
    in any way that the First-tier Tribunal is  not  able  to  act  as  the
    primary decision maker in asylum or immigration appeals.   There  is  a
    long line of authority that confirms that possibility.   However,  even
    in light of those authorities, it is  recognised  that  the  overriding
    objective applies and there will be situations where it  would  not  be
    fair to one or other party for  the  Tribunal  to  proceed  because  of
    changes that have occurred between an immigration decision  being  made
    and an appeal being heard.  Such an appeal can be adjourned.   However,
    we are not dealing with such an appeal and we are  not  considering  an
    adjournment; we are considering whether time should be extended.

33. We are not aware of any other factors that we need to consider in  this
    case.  Having considered all the issues identified we are of  the  view
    that the appellant's circumstances are not ones that lead us to  extend
    time and we refuse to do so.  In  consequence  of  this  decision,  the
    application is not admitted and the appeal to the Upper Tribunal cannot
    proceed.

34. Of course, this is a decision of the First-tier Tribunal and a  further
    application for permission to appeal can be made to the Upper Tribunal.
     The parties should recall that in deciding such  an  application,  the
    Upper Tribunal will have to apply rule  21(7)  of  the  2008  Procedure
    Rules and no doubt will have regard to our findings above.

Decision

Time for  applying  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
Chamber) for permission to appeal is not extended.

The application is not admitted.

                               Signed                     Date


                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                               Sitting as a Judge of the First-tier
                                   Tribunal
