
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/28763/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7 June 2017                           | On 16 June 2017                    |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                            mr felix nwankwo kalu
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Hoshi, Sabeers Stone Greene Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is a citizen of Nigeria who appealed to  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the decision  by  the  respondent  dated  5
    August 2015 not to issue the appellant with confirmation of a right  of
    residence in the United Kingdom under Regulation 15 of the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006.  In a decision promulgated on 27 October  2016,
    following a hearing  on  18  October  2016,  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Brown  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  under  the   2006
    Regulations.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission on the following ground:

    Ground 1.  It was submitted that the judge erred in the weight that was
    attached to the evidence before First-tier Tribunal Judge and erred  in
    misapplying Regulation 15(1)(b) and (f) of the 2006 Regulations.

Error of Law

 3. For the reasons set out below I am  not  satisfied  that  any  material
    error of law was disclosed.  Mr Hoshi relied on his grounds  of  appeal
    and on his skeleton argument.  I allowed Ms Isherwood  some  additional
    time to consider the bundle of documents which was  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal which was not initially in either  the  Tribunal  or  the
    respondent's file, as these documents were the documents  that  it  was
    alleged that the judge failed to attach appropriate weight to.  It  was
    Mr Hoshi's submission that the judge applied an incorrect  standard  of
    proof and that the judge had in effect applied the standard of proof of
    beyond a reasonable doubt.  In addition Mr  Hoshi  submitted  that  the
    judge was incorrect in his finding, at [28], that Mr Hoshi had  invited
    him to make an assumption on the evidence.  Rather, Mr Hoshi  submitted
    that he had asked that the judge draw  legitimate  inference  from  the
    evidence that the appellant's partner was a qualified person during the
    relevant period.

 4. The background to this case is that the appellant, a Nigerian  national
    was previously married to an EEA national and had obtained a  residence
    card on that basis.  However in refusing the application for  permanent
    residence  the  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that   it   had   been
    demonstrated that the appellant's partner had exercised  free  movement
    rights for a continuous period of five years  and  the  respondent  was
    further not satisfied that the marriage was not one of convenience.

 5. Although Judge Brown, at paragraph  29,  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    respondent had discharged the burden of proof to demonstrate  that  the
    marriage was one of convenience, the judge was satisfied and  concluded
    at paragraph 28 that the appellant had failed to prove on  the  balance
    of probabilities that the appellant's former partner  was  a  qualified
    person, within the meaning of Regulation 6 of the 2006 Regulations, for
    a continuous period of five years from 21 February 2009 to 20  February
    2014, which was the  relevant  period  considered  by  the  judge.   In
    particular, the judge was not satisfied that there  was  evidence  that
    the appellant's former partner had worked as a hairdresser in 2014.

 6. The findings made by the judge were ones that were properly open to him
    and it is uncontroversial that weight was a matter for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge.  Although  the  judge  was  somewhat  sidetracked   at
    paragraph 27 of the decision and reasons in relation to whether or  not
    the couple were living together continuously for the five year  period,
    which is not a requirement as the  "residing  with"  requirement  under
    Regulation 15(1)(b) relates to presence in the UK and does not  require
    living in a common family home (PM (EEA -  spouse  -  "residing  with")
    Turkey [2011]  UKUT 89 (IAC) applied);  the  judge  in  any  event  was
    (correctly) of the view that even if they had not been living  together
    this would not have been sufficient to deprive  the  appellant  to  the
    right to permanent residence.  Therefore the  judge  made  no  material
    error in paragraph 27 and such was not suggested.

 7. Mr Hoshi, in both the grounds of  appeal  and  his  skeleton  argument,
    referred to the fact that the appellant and his former partner were  no
    longer together and that the appellant had provided whatever  documents
    were available.  It was submitted in the  skeleton  argument  that  the
    appellant could not possibly have provided any other documents  as  the
    couple do not have any contact with each other and that on the  balance
    of probabilities the judge should have accepted  that  the  appellant's
    partner was working from 2009 to 2014 (for the avoidance of doubt other
    activities as a qualified person including looking for work can also be
    taken into consideration).

 8. However, Mr Hoshi accepted that the fact that the appellant claims  not
    to have been living with his ex-wife and that not to have  any  contact
    with her does not change the burden and standard of proof.   It  should
    also be noted that the judge raised  credibility  issues  including  at
    paragraph 24 that the appellant's claim in an email to  London  Borough
    of Barking dated 4 December 2015 that  he  did  not  know  of  his  ex-
    partner's whereabouts  and  no  information  about  her  seemed  to  be
    inconsistent with the  fact  that  he  knew  her  previous  residential
    address and that they had spoken by telephone in February  2015.   That
    was a finding that was open to the judge on the evidence before him.

 9. The judge carefully considered the documentary evidence before him  and
    was satisfied that there was "some reasonably cogent evidence" that the
    appellant's ex-partner had worked as  a  self-employed  person  between
    2009 and 2011, in  the  form  of  the  payment  of  national  insurance
    contributions, accounts and completed tax returns.

10. However, the judge gave  adequate  reasons  for  going  on  to  not  be
    satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  demonstrated  on  a  balance   of
    probabilities that she had been working or was  otherwise  a  qualified
    person for a continuous period of five years and  the  judge  correctly
    directed himself that it was not sufficient that the EEA  national  had
    himself been working in the UK or  that  they  had  resided  as  family
    members in the UK.  The judge went on at  [25]  to  indicate  that  the
    appellant had "accepted that MK had worked as a hairdresser  from  2008
    until 2013, but he did not suggest that MK had done  so  during  2014".
    Although Mr Hoshi noted that  there  was  no  record  of  interview  in
    relation to the retention of rights interview, it was open to the judge
    to find that there  was  nothing  to  refute  the  assertion  that  the
    appellant's evidence about his ex-partner's work had been  vague.   The
    appellant in his witness statement set out his relationship with his ex-
    wife and  in  his  witness  statement  he  claimed  that  the  marriage
    irrevocably broke down in October/November 2013  and  that  they  lived
    together until January/February 2014 (although I note  that  the  email
    from the appellant to the council was inconsistent with  the  statement
    and stated that the appellant's wife had  "moved  out  in  May").   The
    appellant went on in his statement to discuss the evidence that he  had
    submitted in relation to his wife's  employment  and  strongly  refuted
    that the marriage was  one  of  convenience.   However,  there  was  no
    adequate information or evidence in his witness statement as to his ex-
    wife's claimed activities as a qualified person, working or  otherwise.



11. Much was made at the hearing before me in relation to the  document  at
    page 52 of the appellant's second bundle which was an invitation to the
    appellant's ex-partner to complete a tax  return.   This  was  dated  6
    April 2014 and related to the tax year 6 April 2013 to  5  April  2014.
    However there was no error in the judge's findings, at  [28],  that  he
    could not assume that she had met the requirements.  Whether  Mr  Hoshi
    had asked him to "assume" this or to draw an inference on the basis  of
    the evidence the result is the  same.   Mr  Hoshi  did  not  reasonably
    suggest that the judge had not considered all the documents before  him
    or that it was not open to him to find as  he  did  at  [22]  that  the
    notice to complete a tax return was not "any evidence  at  all  of  the
    fact that" the appellant's ex-partner had been working or  economically
    active.

12. Indeed there appeared to be very little adequate  evidence  before  the
    judge in relation to  the  appellant's  ex-partner's  activities  as  a
    qualified person  after  2011.   Although  I  accept  there  were  some
    national insurance documents and some other limited evidence after this
    date, it is fair to say that the bulk of the evidence  relates  to  the
    period about which the judge was satisfied, between 2009 and 2011.   It
    was entirely open to the judge  not  to  draw  an  inference  that  the
    limited documents that were produced and the appellant's evidence could
    be extrapolated to a finding that she was  a  qualified  person  for  a
    continuous period of five years.  Indeed I am of the view that  had  he
    done so that would have been an arguable error of law given the lack of
    evidence to support such a finding.

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose any error  of
    law and shall stand.  The appeal by the appellant is dismissed.

No anonymity direction was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Date:  15 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date: 15 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


