
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/28690/2014
     IA/28692/2014
     IA/28691/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 23rd February 2016                         |On 25th April 2016             |
|                                              |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

  AINUN BINTI ABDUL AZIZ                                             First
                                  Appellant

 AIN SYATIRAH SENEK BABA                                   Second Appellant

     ALEEF ABDUL SENEK BABA                                       Third
                                  Appellant

                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr C Sima, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are all citizens of Malaysia.  The  first  appellant  is
    the mother of the second and third appellants who are aged  24  and  16
    years, respectively.

 2. On 26th October 2015 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  R  A  Cox  gave
    permission to the appellants to appeal against the decision of Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal N Manuel in which  she  dismissed  the  appeals
    against the decisions to refuse leave to remain on human rights grounds
    applying Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

 3. The grounds of application raise seven issues:

      i) That the judge erred in assessing the claims under paragraph  EX.1.
         of Appendix FM on the basis that it would be reasonable  to  expect
         the third appellant, a child who had been in the United Kingdom for
         over seven years, to leave the United Kingdom when  he  would  lose
         contact with his father.

     ii) That the  judge  erred  in  treating  the  children  of  the  first
         appellant as adults in relation to  their  understanding  of  their
         illegal status in the United Kingdom.

    iii) That the judge erred in consideration of the reasonableness test in
         paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules  by  failing  to  take
         into consideration an  Immigration  Directorate  Instruction  (IDI)
         which required "strong reasons" in order to  refuse  a  case  where
         there was continuous UK residence of  more  than  seven  years  and
         disruption to a child's education.

     iv) The judge was in  error  in  concluding  that  there  would  be  no
         interference with family  life  because  the  appellants  would  be
         removed together when there was no evidence to show that the father
         was being removed at the same time and also failed to consider  the
         appellants' family life with Ms Baba, the first  appellant's  other
         daughter with leave to remain.

      v) The judge wrongly concluding that the appellants had no respect for
         UK law when the third appellant is a child who could not be  blamed
         for his parent's actions.

     vi) The judge wrongly treating the considerations set  out  in  Section
         117B of the 2002 Act as "mandatory requirements".

    vii) The judge failed to consider that, at the date of the hearing,  the
         second  appellant  may  have  met  the  requirements  in  paragraph
         276ADE(1)(v) relating to the length of time  spent  by  the  second
         appellant in the United Kingdom, even  if  she  had  not  met  that
         requirement at the date of application.

 4. Judge Cox gave permission on the basis that "it may be  arguable"  that
    the judge erred in her consideration  of  the  position  of  the  third
    appellant as detailed in Grounds 1 and 3 but  that  the  other  grounds
    were "weaker".

 5. The respondent entered a response to the  permission  on  3rd  November
    2015.  It was pointed out that any complaint that the  third  appellant
    would be separated from  his  father  because  there  were  no  removal
    directions against him, was totally without merit.  As  the  First-tier
    Judge had correctly concluded, the father has no legal  status  in  the
    United Kingdom and the appellant was seeking to  place  weight  on  the
    father's wish to remain in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  The response
    also comments that the judge had correctly approached the issue of  the
    reasonableness of removal in the light of the respondent's  obligations
    under Section 55 of the 2009 Act recognising that the  parents  of  the
    third appellant and his sister were not entitled to be  in  the  United
    Kingdom and it would be reasonable to expect  the  third  appellant  to
    follow them to a country where he spoke the language and could continue
    his studies and renew his contact with  his  grandparents.   The  judge
    also took into consideration that the  third  appellant  could  not  be
    blamed for the actions of his parents (paragraph 36).   Further,  there
    was nothing in the IDI quoted to suggest a presumption that leave would
    be granted after seven years.

 6. At the hearing before me Mr Sima confirmed  that  he  relied  upon  the
    grounds emphasising that, in his view, the judge had  failed  to  apply
    the reasonableness test properly.  The third appellant had been in  the
    United Kingdom from the age of 3 and was now 16 having attended  school
    here and established friendships.  In support of his arguments Mr  Sima
    endeavoured to  produce  an  unreported  Tribunal  decision  which  was
    opposed by Mr Parkinson.  I refused permission.

 7. Mr Sima also emphasised that the judge's consideration of human  rights
    in respect of the second appellant failed to  take  into  consideration
    that her sister had been granted leave to remain.

 8. Mr Parkinson contended that the grounds were just a  disagreement  with
    the cogently reasoned findings of the judge.  The appellants' knowledge
    of the illegality of their status on the basis concluded by  the  judge
    did not mean that the judge was blaming the second and third appellants
    for that status.

 9. Mr Parkinson argued that the father of the second and third  appellants
    should leave the country as he had no status and it was wrong  for  the
    appellants to rely upon any refusal to move by him as  giving  rise  to
    separation.  As to the child with leave  to  remain,  who  is  not  the
    subject of these proceedings, her status did  not  mean  that  she  was
    obliged to remain or could not be reunited with her family in Malaysia.
     The second and third appellants did not have a right to  education  in
    the United Kingdom even if that had led to the establishment of private
    life.

10. Mr Parkinson concluded his submissions by reminding me that the factors
    in Section 117B of the 2002 Act could not benefit the  appellants  and,
    further, the judge was entitled to conclude that the parties could  not
    maintain themselves.  He ventured to suggest that the seventh ground of
    application was incomprehensible.

11. In conclusion, Mr Sima  added  that  the  third  appellant  could  have
    succeeded in his own  right  under  the  Rules  and  should  have  been
    considered  on  that  basis.   He  also  thought   that   the   judge's
    consideration of the best interests of the children was inadequate and,
    as far as the child with leave was concerned, should not be required to
    abandon her private life here.

Conclusions

12. At the end of the hearing and after I considered the matter for  a  few
    moments, I announced that I was not satisfied that the decision of  the
    First-tier Judge showed an error on a point of  law.   I  now  give  my
    reasons for reaching that conclusion.

13. The  grounds  of  application  focusupon  the  position  of  the  third
    appellant who is now 16 years of age and who has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for over seven years.  The comprehensive  and  cogently  argued
    decision of the judge deals  extensively  with  the  position  of  that
    appellant  having  regard  to  his  best   interests   as   a   primary
    consideration  and  the  section  55  obligations  of  the  respondent.
    Additionally,  the  judge's  examination  of  the  position   for   all
    appellants is carefully and separately considered where relevant.

14. As to the application of the reasonableness test set out  in  paragraph
    EX.1. of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules, the
    judge's examination  of  the  relevant  issues  is  to  be  found  from
    paragraph  16  onwards  of  the  decision  taking  into   account   the
    establishment of a private life in the United Kingdom by both the third
    appellant and his mother and their family  life  together.   The  judge
    fully considers the implications of the  third  appellant  ceasing  his
    education and sporting activities  to  which  he  is  committed  before
    reaching the decision, open  to  her,  that  these  activities  can  be
    continued in Malaysia.  The judge was also entitled  to  conclude  that
    the second and third appellants were aware of their illegal  status  in
    the United Kingdom because the evidence of the first appellant made  it
    clear that her children had been aware of their  status  from  "a  long
    time ago".  The judge's comment and conclusion does not, however,  mean
    that she attributed blame  to  the  children,  particularly  the  third
    appellant, as the  judge's  findings  are  prefaced  by  the  statement
    (paragraph 36) that the  third  appellant  cannot  be  blamed  for  the
    actions of his mother.

15. The allegation that the judge failed to  consider  that  there  was  no
    evidence that the father of the second and third  appellants  would  be
    removed at the same time is without  foundation.   The  father  has  no
    immigration status in the United Kingdom and so the issue  of  enforced
    separation does not arise.  The judge carefully and  properly  examines
    the position of the father in paragraphs 32 to 35,  inclusive,  quoting
    EV (Philippines) and Others [2014] EWCA Civ 874 on the basis  that  the
    background against which the assessment is conducted  is  that  neither
    parent has the right to remain.  The judge gives comprehensive  reasons
    for concluding that the first appellant's former partner and father  of
    the children has no legal status in the United Kingdom.

16. It is wrong for the grounds to suggest that the judge considered family
    life without taking into account the right  of  the  first  appellant's
    other daughter, Baba, to  remain.   The  judge  reaches  the  decision,
    available to her, that it is  a  choice  of  the  family  whether  Baba
    remains at university to complete her studies or joins  her  family  in
    Malaysia.  The evidence of the first appellant clearly  showed  that  a
    family decision had been made for Baba to remain.

17. The seventh ground suggests that  the  judge  should  have  taken  into
    consideration the extent to which the second appellant might  have  met
    the requirements of the Rules at the hearing even if she did not at the
    date of application.  Paragraph 49 of the decision shows that the judge
    was clearly aware of  the  inability  of  the  appellant  to  meet  the
    requirements at the date of application but nevertheless deals with the
    position of the second  appellant  comprehensively,  also  taking  into
    consideration the fact that the second appellant's younger  sister  had
    been able to meet the requirements of the Rules.

18. I should also mention that the judge deals with the proportionality  of
    the respondent's decision correctly applying the provisions of  Section
    117B of the 2002 Act in the case of each appellant.  It is not  evident
    that the judge  treated  the  factors  in  the  Section  as  "mandatory
    requirements"  because  she  considered  those  factors   against   the
    background of her other findings rather than  in  isolation.   This  is
    evident from the judge's statement in  paragraph  78  of  the  decision
    which is made in conjunction with the consideration of those factors.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show an error  on  a  point
of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order nor  do  I  consider
one appropriate in this appeal.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

