
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/28123/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 May 2013                                |On  6 June 2013              |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                          dewan muntasir chowdhury

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Hosein, Legal Representative instructed by
Diamond Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 13  March  1989.   He
    seeks to appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  respondent  dated  22
    November 2012 refusing him an extension of leave to remain as a Tier  4
    (General) Student.

2.   Issue was taken by the respondent as  to  the  existence  of  the  bank
    account which is claimed.

3.   The appellant sought to appeal against the decision, which appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Randall on 8 February 2013.

4.   The respondent was not  represented  and  no  original  documents  were
    presented.  What  was  presented  was  a  copy  of  the  relevant  bank
    statement.  The statement failed to  show  the  dates  upon  which  the
    entries were made and that was the subject of criticism from the Judge.
     The wording at the foot of the  statement  was  the  subject  also  of
    concern as set out in paragraph 15 of the determination.  The appellant
    had produced several letters from the bank to confirm that indeed  that
    was his account and that  he  had  money  in  it.   The  Judge  however
    concluded that reliance could not be placed upon  the  particular  bank
    statement and therefore that the appellant had failed to discharge  the
    onus upon him to show that he had the requisite funds for the requisite
    period.

5.   Grounds of appeal were submitted in respect of the decision  and  leave
    to appeal was granted on the basis of the inadequacy of reasoning as to
    the falsity of the document.   Thus  the  matter  comes  before  me  in
    pursuance of the grant of leave.

6.   Mr Tarlow, who represents the  respondent,  agreed  that  the  evidence
    before the Judge was unsatisfactory but invited me  to  find  that  the
    Judge did what he could in all the circumstances.

7.   It seems to me that this is a case that is fundamentally  tainted  with
    unfairness.

8.   The decision by the respondent contends that the bank  statements  from
    the Sonali Bank Limited were false "because Sonali  Bank  Limited  have
    confirmed this in writing".

9.   The document in writing is not  within  the  file.   What  is  produced
    seemingly for the first time in these proceedings,  is  a  verification
    report essentially  to  the  effect  that  the  author  of  the  report
    contacted the bank on 6 November 2012 on a particular bank  number  and
    the bank confirmed that the account did not exist.

10.  Nowhere in the refusal decision is the existence  of  the  verification
    report spoken about.

11.  The nature  of  that  report  calls  into  question  not  so  much  the
    reliability of a statement but whether indeed that  particular  account
    exists.

12.  Set beside that contention is first of all a letter  from  Sonali  Bank
    Limited of 23 July 2012 certifying that  the  appellant  does  in  fact
    maintain the account  and that the balance  as  of  23  July  2012  was
    16.32.146/23 TK.  That is reflected in the copy of the  bank  statement
    which has been produced.

13.  There is a further letter from  the  bank  again  confirming  that  the
    appellant has such an account and there  is  an  attested  and  stamped
    statement from the bank relating to 4 November 2012 to 2 January 2013.

14.  Thus the real issue in this case, as between  the  respondent  and  the
    appellant, is whether or not there was such an  account.   Because  the
    respondent did not attend  the  hearing  that  issue  was  not  clearly
    identified and dealt the.  The Judge has made  no  comment  as  to  the
    genuine nature or otherwise of the letters that have been produced from
    the bank.

15.  The nature of the particular bank  statement  is  also  unsatisfactory.
    Mr Tarlow does not have it within his  file.   He  however  produces  a
    photocopy of the bank statement which is fuller than the  one  produced
    by the appellant to the Judge.  The Judge was concerned about the dates
    of the transactions and it is clearly apparent  from  the  respondent's
    copy that it relates  from  February  2012  to  June  2012.   Had  that
    particular copy been produced then the issue that had worried the Judge
    about the dates would not have been relevant.

16.  It is of course to be recognised that the writing on the  statement  is
    a matter which falls  for  consideration  within  the  context  of  the
    contention made overall that no such bank account exists.  That however
    was not as I said the matter that was addressed by the Judge, indeed it
    was not apparent as to the nature of the evidence from the reasons  for
    refusal.

17.  It seems to me for whatever reason  that  the  full  evidence  that  is
    relied upon has not been presented to the appellant in order for him to
    meet the concerns  expressed  and/or  to  obtain  further  evidence  or
    clarification from  the  bank  as  to  the  contents  thereof.   It  is
    significant that the bank in the various letters makes it clear that no
    request for verification was made to it and so it  may  be  a  relevant
    consideration in the  context  as  to  what  telephone  number  9330348
    represents.

18.  Justice is not only to be done but seen to be done and I consider  that
    the central issue in this case was not grasped either by the  appellant
    or by the Judge because of the paucity of documentation that  had  been
    provided by the respondent,

19.  Accordingly I find that the decision is one tainted by such  procedural
    unfairness that it should be set aside and re-made.

20.  Given that the issue has not really been canvassed in the way in  which
    it should have been  I  have  regard  to  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Directions on remittal.   I  consider  this  is  a
    matter that should be remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    argued properly and on the basis of all available documents.



Directions

1.   The decision of Judge Randall shall be set aside.

2.   The matter will be re-heard de novo in the First-tier Tribunal.

3.   The respondent should exercise all reasonable  diligence  in  obtaining
    the original statements submitted in support of the application.

4.   Any further evidence that is to be relied  upon  should  be  served  no
    later than five days prior to the hearing.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
























