
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/ 28709/ 2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 6 July 2017                             |On 13 July 2017                  |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                               Pabitra Ghimire
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant had not attended when I called the case on at 11.20.  The
    papers show that she was given proper notice at her address. I have  no
    reason to think she does  not  know  about  the  hearing  and,  in  the
    circumstances, I decided that it was right to continue in her absence.

 2. This is an  appeal  brought  with  the  permission  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bartlett  in
    a decision promulgated on 27 November 2016 dismissing  the  appellant's
    appeal against the decision of the respondent  refusing  her  leave  to
    remain as a student.

 3. The application that led to the appeal was made in May 2012  and  there
    has been intervention by way of judicial review.  It  is  probably  for
    this reason that the appellant was told that her rights of appeal  were
    those available before the changes in the Rules  and  entitled  her  to
    appeal on the basis that the decision was not in  accordance  with  the
    Rules.  I do not have to decide if that was  correct.   That  has  been
    done and no-one has challenged it.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal dealt with  the  case  on  the  papers  at  the
    appellant's request.

 5. The difficulty the appellant faces is that the Rules  required  her  to
    have a Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies and she did not have one.
     This is common ground.  She did not have one because the  college  had
    lost its status.  It is well-understood that in those  circumstances  a
    person disadvantaged by reason of the college's  failings,  unless  she
    had  misbehaved  would  be  entitled  to  a  period  to  make  a  fresh
    application and the period is normally 60 days.  That  was  granted  in
    this case, so there is no "fairness" challenge.

 6. As far as I can see the task before the judge was a simple one.  It was
    to decide if the appellant satisfied the requirements of the Rules  and
    on her own admission she did not.  It seems to me that the decision  to
    dismiss the appeal was inevitable.

 7. There is a slight gloss on this.  The  appellant  appeared  to  want  a
    little extra time and she says that one  of  the  reasons  for  wanting
    extra time is that she wanted to take another test of  her  command  of
    the English language.  I do not doubt why she wanted to do  that.   She
    had raised the point with the respondent and the respondent had said in
    the refusal that it was not necessary.

 8. The appellant did not attend before me and is not able to  explain  her
    plans further.

 9. I can see nothing wrong in the judge's approach  or  conclusions.   The
    judge had identified the issues and reached a rational and, I  suspect,
    the only possible conclusion on the evidence before her.

10. In the circumstances I find no error of law and I dismiss the appeal.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 12 July 2017                   |





