
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA289322015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 June 2017                               |On 23 June 2017               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             jagmeet singh brar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Uppal of Glen Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS
                       (Delivered orally 20 June 2017)

 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department ("SSHD"), permission to appeal having been  granted
    against a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cohen  which,  in
    paragraph 14 onwards, is in the following terms: -

         "In the light of my findings above, I find  that  the  respondent's
         decision herein is not in accordance with the law and  I  therefore
         allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules to the limited  extent
         indicated above. ...

         Decision

         The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules"

 2. The SSHD appeals on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal did not have
    jurisdiction to determine the appeal on the grounds it did.  I concur.

 3. The background to this appeal is  that  Mr  Brar's  ("the  claimant's")
    leave was curtailed such that it expired  60  days'  after  notice  was
    given (i.e. on 17 March 2015). The intention of this was to provide the
    claimant with an opportunity to obtain documentation (a  CAS)  enabling
    him to make a further application for leave as a Tier  4  migrant.   He
    was not able to obtain such documentation within the timeframe and made
    an application to the SSHD, on 16 March 2015, for  a  further  60  days
    leave in order to further pursue that avenue.

 4. That application was refused by the SSHD in a decision of 29 July 2015.
    The decision it is said, and I do not have the  whole  decision  before
    me, did not  include  the  necessary  information  identifying  to  the
    claimant the existence  of  his  right  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The claimant, nevertheless, quite properly lodged  an  appeal
    with the Tribunal and it was that  appeal  which  was  'determined'  by
    Judge Cohen.

 5. Turning to the scope of the claimant's appeal.

 6. It is uncontroversial that  the  SSHD's  decision  of  29  July  was  a
    decision to refuse to vary leave so that there was no  leave  remaining
    (an  immigration  decision  pursuant  to  section   82(2)(d)   of   the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002).  Prima  facie,  the
    claimant had a right to appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against  such
    decision.

 7. One needs to take a step back in time, however, in order  to  ascertain
    the scope of such an appeal. Once again it is uncontroversial that  the
    application made by the  claimant  which  led  to  the  decision  under
    challenge was "an application for leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom for  a  purpose  other  than  one  for  which  entry  or
    remaining is permitted in accordance with the Immigration Rules".  That
    this was the SSHD's view is identified in the decision  letter  itself.
    There is no immigration rule which permits leave for  the  purposes  of
    obtaining the necessary documentation to facilitate the  making  of  an
    application for Tier 4 leave.

 8. As a consequence, and pursuant to sections 88(1), 88(2)(d) and 88(4) of
    the 2002 Act (as it was), the claimant was only entitled  to  bring  an
    appeal on the grounds identified in sections 84(1)(b), (c) and  (g)  of
    the 2002 Act i.e. race relations, human rights and  Refugee  Convention
    grounds.  Consequently, the First-tier Tribunal only  had  jurisdiction
    to determine the appeal on such  grounds.   In  the  instant  case  the
    claimant pursues 'human rights grounds'.

 9. It is plain from paragraph 14 of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    that it decided the appeal on grounds  other  than  those  set  out  in
    sections 84(1)(b),  (c)  and  (g)  of  the  2002  Act.   There  was  no
    jurisdiction for the First-tier Tribunal to determine the appeal on the
    basis that the SSHD's decision was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law
    (s84(1)(e)) or that it was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules
    (section 84(1)(a)), and the First-tier Tribunal did not  determine  the
    human rights grounds before it.

10. It is agreed by the parties that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    must therefore be set aside and, it seems to me,  that  the  only  fair
    course is for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to
    be determined afresh. Although I do not direct the First-tier  Tribunal
    as to the composition of the panel that should deal with this appeal, I
    see no reason why the matter should not be put back before Judge  Cohen
    to complete the task that he ought to have  completed  on  21  November
    2016.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor


