
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28937/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1 April 2015                      |On 9 April 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Bertin Tuma Tsonewa
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the claimant: Mr J Trussler, instructed by Law Klinik LLP
For the respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the resumed hearing of the appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Kershaw  promulgated
    6.10.14, allowing the claimant's  appeal  on  the  papers  against  the
    decision of the Secretary  of  State,  dated  23.6.14,  to  refuse  his
    application for an EEA residence  card,  pursuant  to  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006,  on  the  basis  of  being  the  family  member
    (spouse) of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights in the UK,  namely
    Melissa Mendes Rodrigues, a French national.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen  having  granted  permission  to  the
    Secretary of State to appeal on 20.11.14, the matter came before Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury on 9.1.15.

 3. In the error of law decision Judge Hanbury found a  material  error  of
    law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in  that  there  was  no
    evidence before the Tribunal upon which the judge could have found that
    the marriage  entered  into  by  proxy  in  Cameroon  on  10.12.10  was
    recognised as valid in French law, pursuant to Kareem [2014]  UKUT  24.
    The Secretary of State maintained her challenge that the  marriage  was
    not in any event recognised in accordance with Cameroon law.

 4. Consequently, Judge Hanbury set the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    aside and adjourned for a resumed hearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    enable the claimant to present evidence that he and Ms  Rodriguez  were
    married in accordance with both Cameroon and French law.

 5. By order made on 31.3.15, in order  to  avoid  unnecessary  delay,  the
    matter has been transferred to myself for the purpose of  remaking  the
    decision in the appeal.

 6. I note that Judge Hanbury made a number of directions  for  the  future
    conduct of the appeal. These included that "Not later  than  the  seven
    days before the adjourned hearing the (claimant)  is  to  file  witness
    statements of both  the  (claimant)  and  the  sponsor  exhibiting  any
    documents relevant to the issues identified, that is  the  validity  of
    the marriage under Cameroon or French law." He also directed  that  the
    appellant and the sponsor attend the hearing, though such  a  direction
    is not enforceable.

 7. Neither the claimant nor the sponsor attended the hearing.  No  further
    evidence has been received by the Upper Tribunal in compliance with the
    directions and there does not appear to have been  any  acknowledgement
    of the error of law decision or the notice of adjourned  hearing,  sent
    to both the claimant and his legal representatives on 15.2.15.

 8. Mr Trussler asked for  time  to  investigate  why  there  had  been  no
    response to the directions and  to  clarify  whether  the  claimant  or
    sponsor intended to attend. I thus put the matter  back  in  the  list.
    When the matter was called back on it was made clear that  neither  the
    claimant nor the sponsor were going to attend. Mr Trussler had with him
    photocopies of two documents that do not appear to have been before the
    First-tier Tribunal namely:

      a) A short witness statement from the  claimant,  asserting  that  the
         marriage is valid by the law of Cameroon and France, and  that  the
         marriage had been "legalised"  by  the  Consulate  General  of  the
         French Embassy  in  Cameroon  on  7.1.15,  through  instruction  of
         counsel in Cameroon. That was  some  8  months  after  the  refusal
         decision;

      b) What was purported to  be  a  copy  of  the  marriage  certificate,
         allegedly stamped by the Consulate General on 7.1.15.

 9. Neither the copy marriage certificate nor the stamps of  the  Consulate
    General were translated. The marriage certificate may or may not be the
    same document as previously submitted; it is difficult to tell. In  the
    further absence of the claimant or sponsor to explain these documents I
    am not satisfied that they are what they claim to be. Further, it  does
    not necessarily follow that because the Consulate General  has  stamped
    the document, in the absence of the parties to the marriage, more  than
    4 years after the event, that the marriage is demonstrated to be  valid
    by French law. The stamp certainly does not assert that it is valid. It
    remains something of a mystery as to how the Consulate  General  could,
    in the absence of the parties, validate a marriage  certificate  issued
    more than 4 years earlier.

10. Mr Trussler, doing  the  best  he  could  for  the  claimant,  made  an
    application for a further adjournment to obtain the necessary evidence.
    However, in the light of the paucity of evidence and given  that  Judge
    Hanbury had already allowed an adjournment for what has turned  out  to
    be several months for that very purpose, I did not consider it  in  the
    public interest to further delay  the  resolution  of  this  matter.  I
    further note that on the basis the claimant asserts that he  meets  the
    requirements of the regulations it remains open to the claimant to make
    a further application under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

11. It is not clear from the witness statements of  the  claimant  and  the
    sponsor where they were when the marriage was entered into. The way  it
    is worded, it is possible  to  read  it  as  though  the  marriage  was
    performed in the UK, or in  Cameroon,  or  in  France.  The  claimant's
    skeleton argument suggests that the marriage was performed in  Cameroon
    before both parties with their witnesses and was not a proxy  marriage,
    as has been suggested in the refusal decision.

12. The Secretary of State was suspicious as to whether this was a  genuine
    marriage and whether it was in fact a proxy marriage,  which  does  not
    seem to be validly entered into in  the  circumstances  of  this  case.
    However, Judge Kershaw was satisfied  that  the  burden  of  proof  was
    discharged by the  production  of  the  marriage  certificate  and  the
    document of authenticity, which states that the marriage was celebrated
    in the presence of both parties. I note in the witness statements  they
    both say that the day after the wedding they came to the UK  for  their
    honeymoon. On the face of the documents, there is  sufficient  evidence
    to demonstrate that they were present and thus  that  the  marriage  is
    valid and I so find.

13. However, it remains the case that the claimant has to demonstrate  that
    the marriage was also valid by French law, Ms Rodriguez being a  French
    national. I find for the  reasons  set  out  above  that  the  evidence
    necessary to meet that requirement is woefully lacking. In  particular,
    I am not satisfied that  the  purported  validation  by  the  Consulate
    General is evidence of validity of the marriage in French law.

14. In the circumstances, it  is  not  necessary  to  resolve  whether  the
    parties also meet the requirements of regulation 8.

15. In the light of the above, and in the  absence  of  both  claimant  and
    sponsor, or any cogent evidence of any article 8 claim, which  was  not
    in any event pursued by Mr Trussler, there was no prospect  of  success
    whatsoever the appeal being allowed on article 8 private or family life
    grounds either under Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE,  or  outside  the
    Rules on the basis of article 8 ECHR. Given that  it  remains  open  to
    make a further application, I would have found in  the  application  of
    the Razgar steps that the decision was entirely proportionate.

Conclusion & Decision:

16. For the reasons set out herein, I find that the claimant has failed  to
    demonstrate that the marriage is valid and  thus  he  cannot  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

     The appeal of the claimant is remade by its dismissal.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated        9 June 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the  Asylum  and
Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
(rule 23A (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
2005 and section 12(4)(a) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007).

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated        9 June 2015

