
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28167/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16th May 2014                                |On: 18th July 2014         |
|Prepared 11th July 2014                         |                           |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                        mr mohammed ibrahim makintami
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Schwenk, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 3rd May  1983.   On  18th
    June 2013 a decision was made to refuse to  vary  leave  to  allow  the
    Appellant to remain in the United Kingdom and to remove him by  way  of
    directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006.  The Appellant had first arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on
    26th August 2003 with leave to enter as  a  student  valid  until  31st
    August 2004.   Subsequent  to  that  the  Appellant  was  granted  four
    extensions to stay in the United Kingdom  as  a  student  and  on  28th
    November 2012 had applied for leave to remain outside the Rules and  on
    compassionate grounds.  It was that application  that  was  refused  by
    Notice of Refusal dated 18th June 2013.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Holt sitting at Stoke-on-Trent  on  11th  November  2013.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 26th November 2013 the Appellant's  appeal
    was dismissed and no anonymity direction was made.

 3. On 6th December 2013 the Appellant lodged  Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  On 20th December 2013 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Sharp
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge Sharp noted that  the  grounds  of
    application averred that the judge failed  to  consider  and  make  any
    finding as to the unlawful nature of the Section  47  notice  including
    the initial refusal referred to in the Ground  of  Appeal.   The  judge
    noted that the determination contained a detailed review of the  merits
    of the Appellant's case under Article 8  but  made  no  mention  of  no
    finding in relation to Section 47.   Judge  Sharp  concluded  that  the
    failure to deal with Section 47 was a clear error of law and permission
    was granted on that ground alone.

 4. On 8th January 2014 the Secretary of State lodged  a  response  to  the
    Grounds of Appeal under Rule 24.   That  response  indicated  that  the
    Secretary of State opposed the Appellant's appeal.  The response  noted
    that there appeared to be a Section 47 decision  issued  on  18th  June
    2013 and in that event there was no doubt that the removal decision was
    legal and therefore there was no error  of  law  on  this  point.   The
    Secretary of State sought the matter be disposed of on the papers.

 5. That clearly did not take place and it is on that basis that the matter
    comes before me in the Upper Tribunal.  The Appellant  appears  by  his
    instructed Counsel Mr Schwenk.  The Secretary of State appears  by  her
    Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Harrison.

Preliminary Issue

 6. At the hearing Mr Schwenk applies  under  Rule  5(3)(c)  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Rules to amend his application for permission to  appeal.   In
    making his application Mr Schwenk relies on  the  authority  of  Ferrer
    [2012] UKUT 00304 at paragraphs 24 to 29.  His proposed amendment is

         "The Appellant respectfully submits that FTTJ Holt erred materially
         in law when refusing the Appellant's appeal on the  basis  that  he
         does not qualify for leave to remain in the UK under paragraph  276
         of the Immigration  Rules.   The  Appellant  submits  that  he  has
         achieved ten  years'  lawful  residence  in  the  UK  and  that  he
         qualifies for an extension of stay in the UK on  that  basis.   The
         Appellant submits that  the  FTTJ  has  erred  by  finding  to  the
         contrary."

 7. Mr Harrison notes the position and does not seek to challenge it and in
    the interest of justice permission is  granted  to  allow  the  amended
    application.

Submissions

 8. Mr Schwenk submits that the determination is flawed as  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge has failed to consider the Appellant's application under
    paragraph 276B(i)(a) namely that the  requirements  to  be  met  by  an
    applicant for indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the  grounds  of  long
    residence in the United Kingdom are that he has had at least ten years'
    continuous lawful residence in the United Kingdom.

    He submits that had the judge given due consideration to this paragraph
    of the Rules that she would have allowed it.  He appreciates  paragraph
    16 of the determination pointing out that the Appellant's  Counsel  was
    wrong to have conceded that the Appellant could not succeed  under  the
    Rules and that the judge has failed to analyse and  take  into  account
    the relevant Rule when making her determination.

 9. Mr Harrison submits that there was no  application  formally  made  for
    indefinite leave to  remain  and  therefore  the  Appellant  could  not
    succeed at the time when he applied under paragraph  276B  although  he
    concedes that he could have  done  so  at  the  time  of  the  hearing.
    However he does concede that the issue is  "Robinson  obvious"  to  the
    judge at the date of hearing and as such that the case must fall to  be
    considered under paragraph 276B(i)(a) and therefore  he  concedes  that
    there is a material error of law and that the Appellant  can  meet  the
    Immigration Rules.  He too concedes  that  the  representative  of  the
    Appellant was wrong in his concession that the Rules could not  be  met
    and the matter was aired before the First-tier Tribunal.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

12. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has considered this application  pursuant
    to paragraph 276ADE rather than paragraph 276B.   This  application  is
    based very largely on one of long residence.  Indeed the application to
    appeal based on private life was refused by Judge Sharp  when  granting
    permission.  I acknowledge that the format of the  appeal  has  changed
    due to the late application  for  permission  to  appeal.   However  Mr
    Harrison has taken an extremely sensible and pragmatic  approach.   The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge has failed to give any analysis to  paragraph
    276B.  It is conceded by Mr Harrison that the Appellant  had  at  least
    ten years' continuous lawful residence in the United Kingdom  and  that
    there were no reasons why it would be undesirable for him to  be  given
    indefinite leave to remain on the grounds of long residence taking into
    account the factors set out in paragraph 276B.  In failing to  look  at
    this matter under the relevant Rule the judge made a material error  of
    law.  Bearing in mind the concessions made by the Secretary of State  I
    consequently find that there  was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and I remake the decision  allowing
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.  The appeal is now allowed under the  Immigration
    Rules.

14. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   No
    application is made to vary that order and none is made.






Signed                              Date 11th July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


