
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28905/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 3rd June 2015                   |On the 22nd June 2015                |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Miss Abena Owusu Sekyere
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Harris, HarperBell Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Brown, who on the 2nd  February  of  this  year  at
    Taylor House heard the  appeal  of  Abena  Owusu  Sekyere  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State  to  refuse  to  issue  her  with  a
    residence card under the EEA Regulations.  The issue was whether or not
    Miss Sekyere was in a  durable  relationship  with  Mr  Hassan  Ishiaku
    Ibrahim, who is a German national and therefore an EEA  citizen.   Both
    are originally from Ghana and at one stage had sought to  rely  upon  a
    Ghanaian customary marriage.  That, however, was not recognised by  the
    Secretary of State and there was  no  evidence  to  show  that  such  a
    marriage would have been valid under German law as required by the case
    of Kareem.

 2. In the determination the Judge found on the evidence  before  him  that
    they were in a durable relationship. We make it  clear  at  this  stage
    that the Secretary of State does not challenge that factual finding.

 3. The decision was set out in paragraph 18 and the  Judge  simply  stated
    this: "The  appeal  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 is allowed".

 4. The Secretary of State takes issue with that manner of finding  relying
    on the headnotes in the case of Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011]
    UKUT 340 (IAC).  Headnote 3 stated this:

         "iii)    Regulation 17(4) makes the issue of a residence card to an
             OFM/extended family member a matter of discretion.  Where  the
             Secretary of State has not yet exercised that  discretion  the
             most an Immigration Judge is entitled to do is  to  allow  the
             appeal as not being in accordance with  the  law  leaving  the
             matter  of  whether  to  exercise  this  discretion   in   the
             Appellant's favour or not to the Secretary of State."

 5. We observe that the finding in paragraph 8 is to some extent  ambiguous
    and it is accepted by both parties  to  this  appeal  that  the  appeal
    should have been allowed  on  a  limited  basis  and  limited  for  the
    exercise of discretion.  I think in some ways this is  perhaps  a  belt
    and braces approach.  The decision itself did not oblige the  Secretary
    of State to issue a residence card and the  Secretary  of  State  could
    have taken the exercise of the discretion upon herself.  However, as it
    is before the Upper Tribunal to the extent that there is  an  error  in
    this case and it was purported that a residence card should  have  been
    issued we set aside that part of the decision, we remake  the  decision
    and remit to the Secretary of State for the exercise of her  discretion
    to decide whether or not, in the circumstances that there is a  durable
    relationship in this case, the Appellant should be in  fact  granted  a
    residence card.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is allowed to the extent that the Secretary of  State's  decision
is not in accordance with the law and the case is remitted to the  Secretary
of State to make a decision  with  regard  to  the  exercise  of  discretion
relating to the issue of a residence card.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 18th June 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes


Fee Award

This was an appeal by the Secretary of State and in those circumstances
there can be no fee award.



Signed   Date 18th June 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes

