

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        Appeal Number: IA/28909/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                    |Decision Promulgated     |
|On 6 December 2016                     |On 7 December 2016       |
|                                       |                         |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                 MOHSIN ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Marrington (OISC Registered Immigration Advisor)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


       1. This is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
          Department  ('SSHD')   against  a  decision  of   the   First-tier
          Tribunal ('FTT') dated 1  June  2016,  in  which  it  allowed  the
          appeal of Mr Ali ('the  claimant')  against  the  SSHD's  decision
          dated 5 August 2015 to refuse  his  application  for  a  residence
          card as confirmation of his right to  reside  in  the  UK  as  the
          durable  partner  of  an  EEA  national  under   the   Immigration
          (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended) ('the  2006
          Regulations').


       2. In her decision the SSHD was not satisfied that the  marriage  was
          a lawfully recognised one or that the parties were  in  a  durable
          relationship.



FTT decision

       3. The FTT heard oral evidence from the  claimant  and  his  partner,
          and concluded that the relationship is  not  one  of  convenience.
          Indeed  the  FTT  indicated  "absolutely  no   doubt"   that   the
          relationship is not a durable one (para 15).  The FTT  then  found
          that the claimant is  an  extended  family  member  and  that  his
          application should succeed.  The FTT allowed the appeal.

Issues arising

       4. The SSHD was granted permission on the basis that the  FTT  should
          not have allowed the appeal outright.  Regulation  17(4)  of  2006
          Regulations provides discretion to the SSHD to issue  a  residence
          card to an 'extended family member'. In the  claimant's  case  the
          SSHD has not  yet  considered  the  exercise  of  such  discretion
          because she did not have the full facts available.


       5.  At  the  hearing  Mr  McVeety  submitted  that  the  FTT  had  no
          jurisdiction to consider the appeal following  Sala  (EFMs:  Right
          of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC).  The headnote states: "There  is
          no  statutory  right  of  appeal  against  the  decision  of   the
          Secretary of State not to grant  a  Residence  Card  to  a  person
          claiming  to  be  an  Extended  Family  Member."   Mr   Marrington
          accepted that the claimant applied for a  residence  card  as  the
          extended family member ('EFM') of an EEA  national  with  whom  he
          claimed to  have  a  "durable  relationship".   As  such  for  the
          purposes of any appeal against the decision he was  an  EFM  under
          reg 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations.   Mr  Marrington  accepted  that
          the FTT did not have jurisdiction to consider the appeal.

       6.  Mr  Marrington  submitted  that  the  appeal  before  me   should
          nonetheless be adjourned pending the appeal in Sala to  the  Court
          of Appeal.  I refused to grant  the  adjournment.   In  this  case
          there have been comprehensive clear findings  of  fact.   Although
          the FTT did not have jurisdiction  to  make  those  findings,  the
          reality of the situation is that a Judge has heard  evidence  from
          the appellant and his partner  and  accepted  the  genuineness  of
          their  relationship.   In  addition,  as   Mr   McVeety   candidly
          acknowledged the presenting officer before the FTT  had  placed  a
          note on the file to the effect that the couple  was  genuine.   In
          my judgment this  is  a  case  that  would  benefit  from  further
          consideration by the SSHD  in  light  of  recent  events  and  the
          updated evidence.  It is difficult to see how the appellant  could
          obtain any material advantage from an adjournment.  After all,  as
          both representatives accepted, even  if  Sala  is  overturned  the
          appellant's case would still have to be  considered  by  the  SSHD
          for her to consider whether to use her discretion in light  of  FD
          (EEA discretion - basis of appeal) Algeria  [2007]  UKAIT  and  YB
          (EEA reg 17(4) - proper approach) Ivory Coast [2008] UKAIT 0006.


       7. In these circumstances the most proportionate course  is  for  the
          appellant  to  make  a  new  application  in  which  he  can  draw
          attention to the FTT's findings,  the  presenting  officer's  note
          and any relevant updating evidence.

Disposal

       8. The appellant has no right of appeal. The FTT had no jurisdiction
          to hear the appeal. It erred in law in doing so.


       9. I set aside the decision to allow the appeal and substitute a
          decision that there was not a valid appeal before the FTT.


Signed:
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
6 December 2016



