
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28585/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 20 May 2014                                  |On 25 June 2014            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     GV
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Jack of the Specialist Appeal Team
For the Respondent:    Mr P Ward, solicitor of James & Co



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent (the Applicant) is  a  citizen  of  Uzbekistan  born  on
    26 January 1989.  On 16 July 2005 she entered with leave as a  student
    which was subsequently varied on a number of occasions.  She was lastly
    granted leave to remain as  the  dependant  of  a  Points-Based  System
    migrant, expiring on 30 April 2013. On 5 September  2007  she  married.
    On 17 July 2013 her husband was granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain.
    They have two children who were both born in this country,  a  daughter
    in 2008 and a son in 2012.  On 30 April 2013, but before expiry of  her
    then extant leave, the Applicant applied  through  her  solicitors  for
    further leave  as  the  dependant  of  her  husband  who  had  made  an
    application for indefinite leave which was granted  on  17  July  2013.
    The gap between 30 April and 17 July 2013 is to be noted.

The Original Decision and the First-tier Tribunal's Determination

 2. On 8 August 2013 the Respondent refused the Appellant's application  on
    the basis that  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraphs 276B and 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  and  Appendix  FM.
    The Respondent stated the Applicant had no British citizen children  in
    the United Kingdom and so the provisions of paragraph EX.1 of  Appendix
    FM did not apply and although her husband had been  granted  indefinite
    leave he together with her and their son could return as  a  family  to
    Uzbekistan.  She had not been lawfully resident for a continuous period
    of ten years and so could not meet the requirements of  paragraph  276B
    of the Immigration Rules and had not been living  continuously  in  the
    United Kingdom for sufficiently long to meet any of the requirements of
    paragraph 276ADE.  The Respondent found there  was  no  aspect  of  the
    Applicant's case which constituted exceptional circumstances such as to
    engage the United Kingdom's obligations under Article 8 of the European
    Convention outside the Immigration Rules.

 3. On 14 August 2013 the Applicant lodged notice of appeal  under  Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended.  The
    grounds were that the Respondent's decision was not in accordance  with
    the Immigration Rules and placed the United Kingdom in  breach  of  its
    obligations to the Applicant and her family to respect her private  and
    family life protected by Article 8 of the European Convention.

 4. By a determination promulgated on 7 February 2014 Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal N J Bennett allowed the Applicant's appeal under  Article
    8 outside the Immigration Rules. He found it would be  disproportionate
    to require the Applicant to leave the United Kingdom  while  her  son's
    application  for  British  citizenship  remained   pending   with   the
    Respondent and remarked that if the  Appellant's  son  and  indeed  her
    daughter were registered as British citizens the Respondent would  need
    to consider the family's circumstances in the light of the judgment  in
    Zambrano v Office National de l'emploi [2011] EUECJ C-34/09.

 5. The Appellant (the SSHD) sought permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds
    that the Judge had made an error in law by allowing  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 so as to give her the opportunity to register her children as
    British citizens and had failed first to identify  circumstances  which
    would make her removal unjustifiably harsh or second to have identified
    any compelling circumstances not recognised by  the  Immigration  Rules
    such as to require the Tribunal to consider the claim under  Article  8
    outside the Rules, following the determination in Gulshan (Article  8 -
    new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC).

 6. On 25 February 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Foudy granted  the
    SSHD permission to  appeal  referring  in  particular  to  the  Judge's
    treatment of the determination in Gulshan.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 7. The Appellant and her husband attended the hearing.  At the start  they
    handed up certificates to show that both their daughter and  their  son
    were now naturalised British citizens.

Error of Law Submissions for the SSHD

 8. Mr Jack submitted it was a material error of law on  the  part  of  the
    Judge to have allowed the Applicant's  appeal  on  grounds  relying  on
    Article 8 so as to afford an opportunity for the  Applicant's  children
    to be registered as British citizens. The Judge had failed to  identify
    any circumstances which indicated that the  removal  of  the  Applicant
    would be unjustifiably harsh.  The application for naturalisation as  a
    British citizen of the Applicant's daughter had  been  made  while  the
    daughter was not even in the United Kingdom.  So that there was in  any
    event no need for the Applicant to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  for
    registration of her children as British citizens.  At the time  of  the
    hearing before the Judge they had not been so registered.

 9. The Judge had clearly found that  the  Applicant  could  not  meet  the
    relevant  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  and  that  it  would  not  be
    unreasonable for her husband to return to Uzbekistan.  He had  properly
    considered the interests of the Applicant's son who was in  the  United
    Kingdom at paragraphs 39-41 of his determination and gone on to dismiss
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

10. Although the Judge had referred to the determination in Gulshan he  had
    not highlighted any non-standard and particular features  demonstrating
    that removal would be unjustifiably harsh:  see  paragraph  45  of  the
    Judge's determination.  The  only  matter  which  could  be  considered
    relevant was the registration of  the  Applicant's  son  as  a  British
    citizen.  Her daughter was in any event  living  with  the  Applicant's
    mother  in  Uzbekistan  and  had  been  since  2008.   There  were   no
    circumstances sufficient to justify  the  Applicant  remaining  in  the
    United Kingdom and removal would not be unduly harsh.  Even if her  son
    had at the time of the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    been registered as a British  citizen  the  appeal  should  still  have
    failed.

Error of Law Submissions for the Applicant

11. Mr Ward submitted the grounds for appeal were  ill-conceived.   At  the
    time of the First-tier Tribunal hearing there was evidence  before  the
    Judge to show that both the Applicant's daughter and son had been  born
    in the United Kingdom.  Section 1(3) of  the  British  Nationality  Act
    1981 provided that:-

         A person born in the United Kingdom after commencement who is not a
         British citizen ... shall be entitled to be registered as a British
         citizen if, while he is a minor -

         (a)  his father ... becomes settled in the United Kingdom; and

         (b)  an application is made  for  his  registration  as  a  British
             citizen.

    Both children were born in the United Kingdom and  hence  even  if  not
    registered as British citizens at the date of the  hearing  before  the
    Judge, applications had been made for such registration  and  the  1981
    Act provided that the children were entitled  to  be  registered.   The
    Judge had taken this into account and his determination did not contain
    an error of law.

12. At paragraph 47 of his determination the Judge had noted that once  the
    children became registered  as  British  citizens  other  rights  would
    accrue to them and to the Applicant as their carer in the light of  the
    judgment in Zambrano.  The registration  of  the  children  as  British
    citizens was an unusual feature so as to meet the  "Gulshan  test"  for
    the engagement of a consideration of rights  under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention outside the Immigration Rules.

13. At paragraph 48 of his determination the  Judge  had  referred  to  the
    Respondent's  guidance  to  caseworkers.    His   assessment   of   the
    proportionality of the  decision  under  appeal  at  paragraph  49  was
    sustainable in the light of the reasons he had given and he had reached
    a perfectly fair and proper conclusion.

14. Mr Ward concluded that the Applicant's children, and in particular  her
    son, had been granted British citizenship  and  so  the  provisions  of
    paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM would be engaged.  The determination  did
    not contain any material error of law and should stand.

Findings and Consideration

15. At paragraph 40 the Judge doubted the explanation which had been  given
    by the Applicant why her daughter had become stranded in Uzbekistan but
    did not reject the claim that the Applicant had  failed  to  appreciate
    the possibility of obtaining a duplicate birth  certificate  to  enable
    her daughter to obtain a passport.

16. The issue of the registration of the Applicant's  children  as  British
    citizens  was  addressed  by  the  Judge  at  paragraph   47   of   his
    determination.   There  is  no  express  mention  of  their  legitimate
    expectation under Section 1(3) of  the  1981  Act  but  the  Judge  was
    entitled to take into account that by the time there was  any  prospect
    of immediate removal the likelihood would be, as in fact has turned out
    to be the case, that the Applicant's children would  be  registered  as
    British citizens.  The consequence would be that  the  Applicant's  son
    would be required to leave the United  Kingdom  and  the  Union.   This
    would engage what the Judge referred to  as  rights  arising  from  the
    decision in Zambrano and the Respondent's policy in respect of Zambrano
    although at the date of the hearing Regulation 15A of  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006 as amended had already come into effect.

17. The Judge recorded the  gap  between  the  expiry  of  the  Applicant's
    previous leave to remain and that of her husband at paragraph 2 of  his
    determination.  This was a factor he was entitled to take into  account
    at paragraph 49 when assessing  the  proportionality  of  the  decision
    under appeal  to  the  State's  need  to  maintain  proper  immigration
    control.  Crucially and essentially, he referred to the  SSHD's  policy
    that leave may be granted on a short term  temporary  basis  to  enable
    particular issues relating to a child's welfare to be addressed.  There
    is no reason why when referring to this the Judge was not  entitled  to
    include not only the  Applicant's  son  but  also  her  daughter  whose
    interests also needed to be taken into account by way of  reference  to
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and the
    determination in Mundeba (s.55 and para 297(i)(f)) DRC [2013]  UKUT  88
    (IAC)and in particular at paragraph 47.  The  registration  as  British
    citizens of the children must be considered to be a valuable benefit to
    the children and in their best interest.

18. The Judge addressed the length of the period of  leave  that  might  be
    granted to the Applicant in the light of his determination at paragraph
    49 noting that it was not appropriate for him  to  give  any  direction
    about the length or type of leave on a short term  temporary  basis  to
    enable particular issues relating to a child's welfare to be  addressed
    which should be granted outside the  Immigration  Rules.   This  is  of
    apiece with the jurisprudence at paragraph 75 of  the  judgment  in  MS
    (Ivory Coast) v SSHD [2007]  EWCA  Civ  133  which  also  involved  the
    application of a policy or instructions to caseworkers  issued  by  the
    SSHD.

19. Taking these matters into account the Judge  gave  sustainable  reasons
    for  the  conclusion  reached,  following   his   assessment   of   the
    proportionality of the SSHD's decision to the need to  maintain  proper
    immigration control.

20. The SSHD has also challenged the Judge's application  of  the  "Gulshan
    test" to engage a consideration of Article 8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Judge referred expressly to this at  paragraph  45  of  his
    determination and identified the non-standard features at paragraph  47
    so that his proportionality assessment cannot be impugned on the  basis
    that the Judge did not apply the "Gulshan test".

21. In any event, the Gulshan test is extracted from  the  SSHD's  guidance
    for caseworkers and was promulgated after the  judgment  in  Patel  and
    Others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72 in which at  paragraph  54  Lord  Carnwath
    found that the Immigration Rules are no more than  the  starting  point
    for the consideration of any claim outside the Rules under Article 8.

22. The First-tier Tribunal's determination did not contain an error of law
    such that it should be set aside and it shall stand.

Anonymity Order

23. At paragraph 50 of  his  determination  the  Judge  made  an  anonymity
    direction and I see no reason why that should  not  be  continued  and
    accordingly order that the Judge's anonymity direction shall  continue.



DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error
    of law such that it should be set aside and it shall stand.

Anonymity Direction

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Applicant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Applicant and to the SSHD.  Failure to comply with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed/Official  Crest                                                  Date
24. vi. 2014


Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



