
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
Ia/28576/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 17 March 2016                         | On 31 May 2016                   |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between

                               sukhjeet singh

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SecretARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Otchie, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Wyman) dismissing the  appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision
    taken on 14 July 2014 to refuse his application for  further  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 student.

Introduction


 3. The appellant is a citizen of  India  born  in  1990.  He  applied  for
    further leave to remain as a Tier 4 student on 31 March 2014  but  that
    application was refused because the respondent was not  satisfied  that
    he met the requirements of paragraph 245ZX(a) of the Immigration Rules.
    The respondent alleged that his TOEIC certificate  from  ETS  had  been
    obtained by deception, following an investigation by ETS.


The Appeal


 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal on Article 8  grounds
    but failed to attend an oral hearing at Hatton Cross on 25 August 2015.
    He  was  not  represented.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the
    appellant had not provided any  additional  information  regarding  his
    Article 8 links to the UK, only ever had a temporary visa and  had  not
    explained his unique circumstances. He did not meet the requirements of
    the Rules.


The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal


 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law by failing to  make
    any findings in relation to paragraph 276ADE of  the  Rules  or  as  to
    whether Article 8 was engaged. There was no proportionality assessment.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade on
    28 January 2016 on the basis that it was  arguable  that  there  was  a
    failure to demonstrate that a structured approach was taken to  Article
    8.

 7. In a rule 24 response dated 11 February 2016 the  respondent  submitted
    that the appellant had failed to attend the oral hearing or to  provide
    any evidence regarding his Article 8 links to the UK. Any error was not
    material.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before  me.  The  appellant  was  represented  by
    Counsel but again failed to attend. I am satisfied that  the  appellant
    had been notified of the hearing and that it was in  the  interests  of
    justice to proceed with the hearing.


Discussion


 9. Mr Otchie submitted that there was a low threshold to engage Article 8.
    The appellant had private life  as  a  student.  The  consideration  of
    Article 8 was inadequate. The  European  Convention  should  have  been
    dealt with properly.

10. Mr Kotas submitted  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not  mention  paragraph  276ADE  and  that  could  not  be
    properly raised now. The judge said at paragraph  19  of  the  decision
    that there was very little evidence of  private  life  in  the  UK  and
    immigration status was precarious in any  event.  There  was  still  no
    Article 8 evidence. It was not clear why the  judge  thought  that  the
    appellant had some kind of leave when he made his application. A wasted
    costs order should be considered because this was  an  appeal  for  the
    sake of an appeal.

11. Mr Otchie submitted in response that the appellant had made an in  time
    application which gave him a right of appeal. This was an ETS case  and
    the judge did not consider that testing might be unreliable.

12. I find that there was no ground of appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    relation to the Immigration Rules (except for paragraph 276ADE) and  no
    possible ETS issue  was  mentioned  in  the  permission  to  appeal.  I
    therefore decline to consider the ETS testing process.

13. I do  not  disturb  the  previous  findings  that  the  First-tier  had
    jurisdiction to decide the  appeal.  That  was  not  mentioned  in  the
    respondent's Rule 24 response and there is no cross-appeal.

14. Paragraph 276ADE of the Rules was  not  mentioned  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal to the First-tier and there is no evidential  basis  upon  which
    the appellant could succeed under that provision.

15. The judge did not refer to the Razgar tests or to  sections  117B-D  of
    the 2002 Act. I therefore find that  consideration  of  Article  8  was
    inadequate. That is a material  error  of  law  and  I  set  aside  the
    decision.

16. I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal. The  appellant  entered
    the UK on 16 December 2009 and states that he lives with his sister and
    brother in law in Southall. I accept that he has  developed  a  private
    life in the UK but his immigration status has  always  been  precarious
    and I give little weight to that private life under section 117B of the
    2002 Act. There is no evidence of family life. There is no evidence  of
    any other relevant factors under sections 117B-D of  the  2002  Act.  I
    find that removal of the appellant would be in accordance with the  law
    because he does not meet the requirements of the  Rules.  I  find  that
    Article 8 is engaged because the appellant has developed a private life
    in the UK. Removal would interfere with his right to  private  life.  I
    find that in all of the circumstances of this case, any interference in
    the appellant's right to private life in the UK is proportionate to the
    legitimate  objective  that  is  sought  to  be  achieved,  namely  the
    maintenance of an effective system of immigration control. The  Article
    8 claim must therefore fail.


Decision


17. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    remake the decision by dismissing the appellant's appeal.

18. I decline to make a wasted costs order. Permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal was granted  on  a  sound  basis.  The  failure  of  the
    appellant to attend to Upper Tribunal does  not  in  itself  justify  a
    wasted costs order, particularly as he was represented by Counsel.


Signed


[pic]
Judge Archer
Deputy         Judge         of         the          Upper          Tribunal
                      Date 27 May 2016



