
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28670/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 20th May 2015                       |On 3rd June 2015                    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

              LORD MATTHEWS, SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                                Gunjeet Kaur
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of India born on  20th  October  1973.   Her
    appeal against the Respondent's decision dated 10th June 2013 to refuse
    leave to remain and to remove her from the  UK  was  dismissed  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights on 10th  September
    2014.

2.   The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 9th  September  2009  as  a
    student with leave to remain until 28th January 2013.  On 28th  January
    2013 she applied for leave to remain on the basis  of  her  family  and
    private life in the UK.  The application was refused  because  she  did
    not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(iii),(iv), (v) and  (vi).
    Her health problems  could  be  treated  in  India  and  therefore  the
    decision did not breach Article 3.

3.   The Appellant appealed  out  of  time  but  an  extension  was  granted
    because  the  Appellant  raised  arguments  under  the   1950   Refugee
    Convention in her grounds of appeal.  In fact generic grounds of appeal
    were submitted including  citing  a  flagrant  disregard  of  the  1950
    Refugee Convention.

4.    The  Appellant  did  not  attend  the  appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, which was adjourned to  enable  the  Appellant  to  submit  a
    witness statement and medical evidence.  There was then a request  that
    the appeal be determined on the papers as the Appellant was too  unwell
    to attend the hearing.

5.   First-tier Tribunal Judge K Henderson found that there was no  evidence
    of family life and very  little  evidence  of  private  life  save  for
    letters relating to the Appellant's medical conditions.  There  was  no
    evidence that these conditions were life-threatening and the  Appellant
    could not receive treatment in India. The judge  considered  Article  8
    and concluded that the refusal of leave to remain and the  decision  to
    remove was proportionate in all the circumstances.

6.   Permission to appeal was sought three months out of  time.   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge R A Cox extended time and  granted  permission  on  10th
    February 2015 on the following grounds:

         "I have carefully  considered  the  decision  in  relation  to  the
         grounds.  The grounds do not initially inspire  confidence  because
         [4] to [10] seem to bear little relationship to the decision I have
         read, a point rather confirmed by a reference to a judge other than
         Judge  Henderson  at  paragraph  10.  I  ignore  those  paragraphs.
         However, paragraph 3 does relate to the decision  in  hand  and,  I
         find, has a kernel of arguable merit.  Put simply, there is  reason
         to think that the judge failed to take proper account of  and  deal
         with material evidence, namely the Appellant's  witness  statement.
         In that statement the Appellant had described a history of domestic
         violence from her estranged  husband  in  India  resulting  in  the
         injuries from which she still  suffers  (hence  the  health  issues
         referred to above) and her continuing fear of risk to her life from
         her husband and his father (a police officer).  The Appellant  also
         raised issues about lack of safe accommodation and means of support
         in India, exacerbated by her medical problems.   None  of  this  is
         mentioned in the decision, even though at [19]  the  judge  rightly
         refers to 'the limitations of Article 8 in private life cases  that
         are far removed from the protection of an  individual's  moral  and
         physical integrity'.  It does appear  that  the  judge  missed  the
         point that such integrity was at the core of the Appellant's  case.
         No doubt she was not assisted by having to deal with the matter  on
         the papers, the Appellant apparently being unable to attend an oral
         hearing for medical reasons.   It  may  be  that  an  international
         protection application would be a more appropriate vehicle for  the
         Appellant's case but the fact remains that there  was  an  arguable
         material error of law in the judge's decision  in  not  considering
         and making a finding on a material issue."

7.   The Appellant attended the hearing before us today  unrepresented.  She
    submitted a covering letter and further  documents  relating  to  court
    action being taken by her in India for the recovery of  items  and  for
    the recovery of maintenance.

8.   In submissions, the Appellant relied on the letter and  the  documents.
    Mr Jarvis submitted that even if  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
    unaware of the statement dated 12th May 2014 , in the  context  of  the
    appeal, such evidence would not have made any difference to the judge's
    decision.  The Appellant was represented at the appeal before the First-
    tier Tribunal and the grounds were  particularised  and  there  was  no
    attempt to amend those grounds to include a refugee claim or protection
    claim.  The judge therefore was limited to dealing with the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds.

9.   Considering the evidence in the statement dated 12th  May  2014,  taken
    at its highest, it did not reach  the  high  threshold  such  that  the
    Appellant would be unable to continue her private life if she  returned
    to India.  The case was in fact never put forward on that basis and the
    judge was not obliged to look for further grounds.  The findings on the
    core aspects of the Article 8 claim were lawful.

10.  In response to questions from the Panel, the Appellant stated that  she
    had never seen the first statement, dated 27th January 2013, which  had
    been submitted by her previous solicitors, Malik  and  Malik.  She  had
    only signed the last page, the statement of truth.  She  confirmed  her
    signature on the second statement, dated 12th May 2014, and  said  that
    she was aware of the contents.

Discussion and Conclusions

11.  The judge states at paragraph 5 of  the  decision  that  correspondence
    was received on 13th May 2014  requesting  that  the  case  be  decided
    without an oral hearing as the Appellant was not  well  and  unable  to
    appear at the Tribunal. This letter enclosed the second statement dated
    12th May 2014 and a skeleton argument, but the judge makes no reference
    to the enclosures. At paragraph 11  the  judge  states:  "I  have  read
    through the statement provided by the Appellant.  I have also read  the
    documents that she has provided in support."

12.  Since there were two statements before the judge it is not clear  which
    statement the judge is referring to in paragraph 11.  It could well  be
    that she was unaware of the second statement on which the Appellant now
    relies, even though she was aware of the covering letter enclosing  the
    second statement. The issue therefore is whether the judge  could  have
    come to a different conclusion  if  she  had  taken  into  account  the
    evidence in the second statement of 12th May 2014.

13.  We accept Mrs Kaur's explanation  that  she  had  not  seen  the  first
    statement and there is a letter from her to her previous solicitors  on
    the court  file  requesting  the  return  of  documents.   She  changed
    solicitors and the second statement was submitted on her behalf.

14.  The difficulty in this  case  is  that  appeal  before  the  judge  was
    advanced on private life and Article 8 grounds.  Therefore,  the  issue
    for the judge was whether the evidence before her  was  such  that  the
    Appellant's removal to India would  endanger  her  moral  and  physical
    integrity in breach of Article 8.

15.  The issue of domestic violence was raised  at  a  late  stage  and  the
    documentary evidence which was before the judge was contradictory.  The
    Appellant did not give evidence and she has not made a claim for asylum
    or humanitarian protection.  The evidence in the second  statement  did
    not amount to exceptional, compelling  or  compassionate  circumstances
    such  as   to   render   the   decision   to   remove   the   Appellant
    disproportionate.

16.  Having seen the evidence in the second statement and taking it  at  its
    highest, we are of the view that there  was  insufficient  evidence  to
    conclude that the Appellant would be at risk of  domestic  violence  on
    return to India or that  her  removal  would  endanger  her  moral  and
    physical integrity. The documents submitted today were not  before  the
    judge and did not advance the Appellant's case in relation to  domestic
    violence in any event.

17.  The Appellant has not made an asylum or humanitarian  protection  claim
    and it is open to her to do. We are of the view that  the  evidence  in
    the second statement of 12th May 2014 was insufficient, in  itself,  to
    enable the judge  to  conclude  that  the  Appellant  was  in  need  of
    international protection.

18.  We find that there was no  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Judge's
    decision because looking at all the evidence in the round, the  judge's
    conclusion that the private life factors relied  on  by  the  Appellant
    were outweighed by the public interest was a finding which was open  to
    her. We find that the evidence in the second statement could  not  have
    lead to a different conclusion. Accordingly we find that there  was  no
    material error of law in the decision dated 10th September 2014 and the
    appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 1st June 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


We have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 1st June 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
