

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/28978/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 17th January 2017                     |On 19th January 2017              |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               BILAL JABARKHEL
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Malik, instructed by Kothala & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The claimant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 5th March 1992.  He
       came to the UK in April  2006  when  he  was  14  years  old  as  an
       unaccompanied minor asylum  seeker.  He  was  granted  discretionary
       leave, but refused asylum in November 2010.  He  says  he  is  in  a
       relationship with Ms Alina Andreea Mitrea, a Romanian  national  who
       is exercising Treaty rights in UK as a self-employed person. He says
       they have cohabited since June 2014, and in March  2015  he  applied
       for an EEA residence card on the basis  that  he  is  in  a  durable
       relationship and thus comes within the  definition  of  an  extended
       family  member  under  Regulation  8  of   the   Immigration   (EEA)
       Regulations 2006. This application was refused on 11th august  2015.
       His  appeal  against  the  decision  was  allowed  under   the   EEA
       Regulations by First-tier Tribunal Judge Metzer in  a  determination
       promulgated on the 12th August 2016.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Saffer on 14th December 2016 on the basis that it was arguable  that
       the First-tier judge had erred in law as arguably there was no right
       of appeal given the claimant had applied to remain  as  an  extended
       family member; and if there was jurisdiction to hearing  the  appeal
       then arguably the appeal should only have been allowed to the extent
       that the matter was remitted to the respondent to consider issuing a
       residence permit  given  the  factual  findings  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal that the claimant is in  a  durable  relationship  with  Ms
       Mitrea.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law

Submissions

    4. In the grounds of appeal the Secretary  of  State  argues  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal errs  in  law  because  having  found  that  the
       claimant and his partner were in a durable relationship  the  First-
       tier Tribunal had to remit the matter to the Secretary of  State  to
       consider the exercise of discretion to issue a residence  permit  as
       there  had  been  no  previous  decision  on  whether  to   exercise
       discretion. This was in accordance  with  Regulation  17(4)  of  the
       Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 and the guidance in Ihemedu (OFMs
       - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340.

    5. Mr Nath also relied upon Sala (EFMs: Right of  Appeal)  [2016]  UKUT
       00411 (IAC) which holds that there is no jurisdiction for the First-
       tier Tribunal to have heard an appeal like the claimant's  based  on
       his being an extended family member.

    6. Mr Malik tried to argue that I should somehow preserve the  positive
       factual findings of the First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusions - Error of Law & Remaking

    7. In the case of Sala the Upper Tribunal found that there was no right
       of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  under  Regulation  26  of  the
       Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 for a person  who  is  refused  a
       residence card as an extended family member. As such  there  was  no
       jurisdiction for the First-tier Tribunal to have heard this  appeal,
       and judicial review or a  new  application  are  the  only  remedies
       against such a refusal.

    8. I thus find that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law  in  hearing
       this appeal, and I set the decision aside and  substitute  one  that
       there was no valid appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.   In  this
       circumstance there is no possibility that I can legally preserve any
       of the factual findings of the First-tier Tribunal.

    9. It will be for the claimant and his lawyers  to  decide  whether  to
       lodge a judicial review  challenge  against  the  decision  of  11th
       August 2015 refusing a residence permit, however this would  clearly
       now on the face of it be very substantially out of time, and a fresh
       application for a residence permit to the respondent, including  all
       the evidence adduced at appeal and updating evidence up to the  date
       of application, might be an alternative.



          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision.

   3. I re-make the decision in the appeal by finding  there  was  no  valid
      appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date: 17th January 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley




