
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28120/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2nd April 2014                               |On 03rd April 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                               MS FAKHAR NISA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan (instructed by Haq Hamilton, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal, with  permission,  against
    the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  A  J  M  Baldwin)
    promulgated on 10th February 2014 by which it dismissed the Appellant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse her leave to
    remain as a parent under Appendix FM.

 2. Although not specifically referred to in the grounds or  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal,  there  is  an  obvious  point  material  to  the
    determination in this case.

 3. The Appellant, a citizen of Pakistan came to the  UK  on  5th  December
    2012, with leave to enter as a family visitor accompanying her  British
    son.  Her son was born in Pakistan on 30th November 1999.  His  father,
    the Appellant's ex-husband is British and said to be in the UK.

 4. The Appellant then applied to remain with her son who  had  started  in
    education in the UK.  She applied under Appendix FM as a parent.

 5. When one looks at the Letter of Refusal, apart from the first  sentence
    that correctly identifies the application, the whole  of  the  decision
    relates to an application as a partner.   The  letter  goes  on,  after
    refusing the application to say that there has been consideration as to
    whether there are exceptional circumstances rendering it appropriate to
    consider outside the Immigration Rules  and  under  the  ECHR  and  the
    decision reached that there are not. The  Letter  of  Refusal  says  in
    terms that "you have no children in the UK  and  so  do  not  meet  the
    requirements of Ex.1".  That is a factual error  on  the  part  of  the
    decision maker.

 6. Furthermore if the decision maker had not made that factual error  then
    when looking at exceptional circumstances they may  well  have  noticed
    that, if her claim is correct, the facts of the case  would  mean  that
    the Appellant has  a  derivative  right  to  remain  in  the  UK  under
    Regulation 15A of the EEA Regulations.

 7. I find that to decide an application that had not been made and to fail
    to decide the actual application on a  misunderstanding  of  the  facts
    renders the decision unlawful.  Mr Saunders sought to defend it arguing
    that the Appellant could not have succeeded because she was in  the  UK
    as a visitor.  That, I find cannot render the  decision  lawful.   Even
    given that the Appellant could  not  succeed  on  that  basis,  if  the
    decision maker had been aware of the child who is British they may have
    realised the situation with the EEA  Regulations  which  have  no  such
    requirement.

 8. Accordingly the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to  recognise  the
    unlawfulness of the decision and so I set it aside.

 9. In re deciding the appeal I allow it to the extent that the application
    remains outstanding and awaits a lawful decision by  the  Secretary  of
    State.




Signed                              Date 2nd April 2014



Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
