
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
IA/28887/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 9th June 2017                      |       On 20th June 2017              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                               mr Saleem raja
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 1st January  1970.   The
    Appellant has an extensive immigration history.  Having entered the  UK
    in December 2000 illegally through an agent he married his wife G A  on
    27th June 2002 and on 6th February 2003 their daughter H was born.   As
    is pointed out to me H is now over 14 years old.  On 13  November  2003
    Mr Raja applied for leave to remain as the spouse of a  settled  person
    and this was granted on 4th March  2005  and  in  accordance  with  the
    appropriate practice was for a  two  year  period.   It  is  Mr  Raja's
    evidence to me that in 2007 he suffered a very serious knife injury  to
    his hand but despite this he did submit an application to the Secretary
    of State but was advised that the application, which I  assume  was  to
    continue his leave, was not processed until 2011.  That evidence is not
    supported by the Secretary of State.  It is the  Secretary  of  State's
    position that Mr Raja remained an overstayer and on  2nd  May  2014  he
    submitted an application for family and private life  leave  to  remain
    which was refused in July 2014.  On 12th March 2015 he was listed as an
    absconder  after  failing  to  adhere  to   his   temporary   admission
    restrictions.  On 1st April 2015 he made a human rights application for
    leave to remain on the basis of his family life and that was refused by
    Notice of Refusal dated 19th May 2015.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Herbert sitting at Taylor House on 20th October 2016.  In
    a decision and reasons promulgated on 7th November 2016  Judge  Herbert
    dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules but allowed the appeal
    under Article 8.

 3. The Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    on 16th November 2016.  Those grounds contended that there had  been  a
    failure to engage with the requirements  of  Section  117B(6)  and  the
    guidance set out in MA (Pakistan) and Others [2016] EWCA Civ 705 taking
    into account the Appellant's poor  immigration  history  including  the
    fact that he absconded  and  the  fact  that  he  had  previously  been
    arrested for common assault against his wife and balancing this against
    whether it would be reasonable to expect the children to leave  the  UK
    Article 8 was engaged.

 4. On 28th April 2017 Judge P  J  M  Hollingworth  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  In doing so Judge Hollingworth considered that it was arguable
    that the judge, having found that the Appellant  was  not  telling  the
    complete  truth,  but  telling  a  partial  truth  about  his  personal
    circumstances, fell into error at  paragraph  23  of  the  decision  by
    concluding that the Appellant had developed a  significant  family  and
    private life with  his  children  given  the  ambit  of  the  available
    evidence.  Judge  Hollingworth  noted  that  at  paragraph  27  of  the
    decision the judge had described it as a finely balanced case and  that
    the judge stated that he had listened carefully  to  the  evidence  and
    made an assessment based on the Appellant's answers to questions  which
    was far more detailed in relation to his relationship with the children
    than it was to his relationship with the wife.  The judge had  gone  on
    to state that the judge found that the Appellant was not being entirely
    truthful and that the judge did not find that he  was  currently  in  a
    relationship with his wife but found it was more probable than not that
    he lived in the same household with the children and therefore  had  an
    intimate knowledge of them.  The judge considered that it was  arguable
    that the judge had attached insufficient weight to the factors weighing
    against the Appellant in terms of the balance with the public  interest
    and consequently granted permission to appeal.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  matter  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  in  person  and  is
    accompanied by his wife.  The Secretary of State appears  by  her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer Ms Isherwood.  For the purpose of  continuity
    in the appeal process Mr Raja is referred to herein  as  the  Appellant
    and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 6. As a preliminary issue I explained to the Appellant the issue that  was
    outstanding before me, namely whether or not there was a material error
    of law.  He indicated he understood the process and I further indicated
    to him that once I had heard full submissions  from  Miss  Isherwood  I
    would listen to anything else he had to say without interruption.

Submissions/Discussion

 7. Ms Isherwood advises that she relies on the  Grounds  of  Appeal.   She
    points out that paragraph 2 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision
    sets out his  immigration  history  and  indeed  paragraph  2  reflects
    matters that I  have  referred  to  in  the  first  paragraph  of  this
    decision.  She goes on  to  contend  that  the  judge  finds  that  the
    Appellant's leave was not precarious and she submits that  that  cannot
    be the case bearing in mind that it is reflected at paragraph  27  that
    the Appellant only had leave for two years and  that  thereafter  there
    was a period of some seven years when the Appellant was  an  overstayer
    and that consequently his position must have been precarious throughout
    that period.  Consequently she submits that  following  the  Rule  i.e.
    paragraph 117B little weight should be given to the Appellant's private
    life.  She contends that the judge is  wrong  to  have  described  this
    matter as finely balanced and refers me back to the Notice  of  Refusal
    pointing out that the Appellant was written  to  on  two  occasions  to
    produce documentary evidence and that he failed to  do  so  other  than
    some photographs from a  mobile  phone,  and  that  neither  his  wife,
    teenage daughter nor his son was called to give any  further  evidence.
    She submits that there was a material error of  law  therefore  in  the
    finding of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and asked me to set aside  the
    finding of Judge Herbert allowing the Appellant's appeal under  Article
    8.

 8. The Appellant and his wife, whilst failing to produce  any  documentary
    evidence, makes it clear that their belief was that there was a further
    application pending before the Secretary of State and  that  they  were
    advised it would take some four years for this to be  processed.   They
    indicated at that stage that they placed reliance on lawyers  but  they
    acknowledge that they have no correspondence to support  the  position.
    Further they point out that they are a well-established family and that
    their  daughter  has  lived  here  all  her  life  and  has  been  here
    consequently now for over fourteen years.  They appear somewhat bemused
    by the current legal process.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

11. It is important to remember what I am being asked to do in this matter.
     I am being asked to find that there has been a material error  of  law
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Much depends on  the
    precariousness of the first Appellant's status.  I am mindful  that  it
    was not challenged in 2005 that the Appellant was married with a  child
    and applying for settlement and whilst it is difficult to prejudge  how
    an application for settlement thereafter, if made promptly, would  have
    been addressed by the Secretary of State, there appears  to  be  little
    reason to suppose that providing the Appellant showed that the marriage
    was subsisting that his application  would  thereafter  succeed.   What
    appears to have taken place is a difference of opinion  as  to  whether
    any application was made.  It is not my job to rule on that factor  but
    I do emphasise the point that there appears to be no evidence  produced
    to show that that application was  made  despite  the  protest  of  the
    Appellant and his spouse that there was such an application.   In  such
    circumstances at paragraph 22 where the First-tier Tribunal Judge finds
    that prior to 2014 the Appellant's status  was  not  precarious  is,  I
    agree with the submissions  of  Ms  Isherwood,  inconsistent  with  the
    immigration history which clearly  indicates  that  the  Appellant  had
    never had indefinite leave to remain and had always been  dependent  on
    further  leave  being  granted  to  allow  him  to  stay  in  the   UK.
    Consequently his status had always been precarious  and  little  weight
    should have attached to his private life  under  Section  117B(5).   To
    this extent I am satisfied that in finding that the Appellant's  status
    was not precarious constituted a material error of law.

12. It seems clear that part of the problem that has arisen  in  this  case
    has  been  the  failure  of  the  Appellant  to   provide   appropriate
    documentary evidence and it is clear also from oral testimony  that  he
    and his spouse provide that  they  are  reluctant  to  spend  money  on
    solicitors.  With respect to the Appellant it is for him to present his
    case.  It is for him to show that there is genuine family  and  private
    life and I note that in dealing with the appeal the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge has not engaged with the requirements of Section 117B(6) and  the
    guidance set out in MA (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  taking  into
    account the Appellant's poor immigration  history  and  balancing  this
    against whether it would be reasonable to expect the children to  leave
    the UK if Article 8 was engaged.

13. I am consequently assisted by Ms Isherwood's comment  that  she  agrees
    that if I find there is a material error of law  it  is  not  for  this
    court at this stage to address the position because  the  matter  would
    require further evidence.  I am satisfied therefore  that  the  correct
    approach for the above reasons is to find a material error of  law  and
    to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge with none of
    the findings of fact to stand and to remit the matter  back  to  Taylor
    House to be heard with an ELH of two hours.  It is not for the Tribunal
    to give advice per se to the Appellant but I hope he has taken on board
    the recommendation I gave to him that if this matter is remitted, as it
    is, that it would be in his best interest  to  instruct  respected  and
    responsible solicitors to lodge and file evidence on his behalf and  to
    represent him before the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and is set aside.  The matter is remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
at Taylor House with the following directions:

 1) None of the findings of fact are to stand.

 2) The matter to be heard at Taylor House before any  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge other than Immigration Judge Herbert on the first available  date
    28 days hence.

 3) That there be leave to  either  party  to  file  and  serve  additional
    subjective and or objective evidence upon which they seek  to  rely  at
    least seven days prior to the restored hearing.

 4) That if the Appellant seeks  an  interpreter  to  attend  the  restored
    hearing then he must do  so  within  seven  days  of  receipt  of  this
    decision advising the Tribunal as to  the  language  (presumably  Urdu)
    required.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed D N Harris                            Date 15th June 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.

Signed D N Harris                            Date 15th June 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

