
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/28804/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 August 2015                     |On 21 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                              THI TUYET NGA LE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Sharma, of Matthew Cohen Associates Ltd,
Aberdeen
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McGavin dated 23 October  2014,  dismissing  her  appeal  against
    refusal of leave to remain in the UK as a spouse under the  Immigration
    Rules and on human rights grounds.

 2. The respondent refused the appellant's application because the  English
    Test Certificate on which she relied was not from  a  provider  on  the
    Home Office approved list.

 3. The test certificate is dated and issued  on  10  May  2011,  when  the
    provider was on the approved list.  I find that the relevant  date  for
    validity of the certificate is when it is issued, not the date on which
    an  application  is  made  to  the  respondent  or  the  date  of   the
    respondent's  decision.   Any  other  date  would   have   the   absurd
    consequence of a certificate moving in  and  out  of  validity  as  the
    provider went on and off the list.  That finding is  in  line  with  an
    unreported  decision  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Clive  Lane,  Mahmood
    OA/00985/2013, promulgated on 23 January 2014, and with  an  unreported
    decision by the President, the Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey,  Pinder
    IA/13236/2013, promulgated on 24 July 2014.  The President indicated at
    paragraph 3, obiter, that subject to further argument in a future  case
    he would have been minded to follow Mahmood.  Mr Mullen put forward  no
    argument to the contrary.

 4. In the alternative, I would have allowed the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds outwith the Immigration Rules on the basis of the principle  in
    Chikwamba [2008] Imm AR 700.  While I think the  appellant  has  rather
    exaggerated the difficulties to her and her husband and children if she
    were to return to Vietnam to apply for entry clearance, it is  accepted
    that there is no reason to think that an  entry  clearance  application
    from abroad  would  not  succeed;  there  is  nothing  adverse  in  the
    appellant's immigration history; and there is no  good  reason  in  the
    public interest to insist  on  such  an  application  being  made  from
    abroad.  Mr Mullen acknowledged that if the  case  reached  that  stage
    there was no reason why the principle in Chikwamba should not apply  in
    favour of the appellant.

 5. I raised one point arising from the determination which  is  not  dealt
    with in the appellant's grounds of appeal and which is also  overlooked
    in the Secretary of State's Rule 24 response.  The Judge  at  paragraph
    21 was not prepared to accept that the test certificate  dated  10  May
    2011 had been submitted with a previous  application  and  accepted  as
    valid at that time.  Having entered the UK in 2010  on  an  EEA  family
    permit, the appellant unsuccessfully sought leave to remain in  the  UK
    on the basis of her marriage, returned to Vietnam  and  was  granted  a
    visa as a spouse valid from 10 February 2012.  Mr  Mullen  acknowledged
    that there was no good reason to think that the certificate of  10  May
    2011 was not  the  one  used  for  that  application.   This  point  is
    therefore no barrier to the determination being reversed.

 6. The determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.   The
    following decision is substituted: the appeal, as originally brought to
    the First-tier  Tribunal,  is  allowed  under  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Alternatively, the appeal would  have  been  allowed  on  human  rights
    grounds, applying Chikwamba.

 7. No anonymity order has been requested or made.

           [pic]


           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
           19 August 2015
