
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
IA/28955/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |          Decision & Reasons          |
|                                    |Promulgated                           |
|On 8th May 2017                     |          On 31st May 2017            |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                               mr saleem butt
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R. Manning (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Heatherington sitting at Birmingham on 7th  October
    2016.  The matter relates to an application to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis human rights grounds pertaining to a marriage that
    the Appellant had with a British citizen.  The grant of  permission  in
    this case by Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Sheridan  noted  that  the
    majority of the grounds appeared to be weak. Nonetheless,  because  the
    grounds of appeal arguably showed that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    had applied the wrong test by referring to the Appellant's presence  in
    the United Kingdom "not being  conducive  to  the  public  good",  then
    permission was granted on all grounds.
2    At the hearing before me today,  Ms  Manning  relied  on  her  detailed
    grounds of appeal dated 28th February 2017 and she also amplified those
    grounds at the hearing during her submissions.  She said that there was
    an unlawful finding at paragraph 8.4 of the judge's decision. There was
    no question of deportation in respect of this case and so the incorrect
    legal test had been applied and therefore the whole decision fell to be
    set aside.  She submitted that the matter ought to be remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  She said there were additional matters which were
    there for the judge to take into account as well.  This was obviously a
    matter relating to Article 8 but there were matters in respect  of  the
    Appellant's Article 8 rights when taking into account  the  Appellant's
    wife's personal circumstances.  She referred to  the  judge's  decision
    which seemed to accept that the financial requirements would be met and
    indeed would the English language requirements if there had  to  be  an
    application for entry clearance.  There was a fear from the Appellant's
    wife of being left alone as she was the salary provider.  She could not
    accompany the Appellant to Pakistan whilst he made an  application  for
    entry clearance.

3.   It was submitted that the House of Lords decision in  Chikwamba  [2008]
    UKHL 40 should have been taken into account. It was submitted that  the
    factual matrix had not been properly considered.  The judge's  starting
    point was that this was a hopeless application and he had  applied  the
    wrong test.  It may have tainted the judge's decision.

4.   In reply, Mr Wilding said that there was no material error of  approach
    or error in respect of  the  findings  or  indeed  in  respect  of  the
    conclusions  reached  by  the  judge.   The  Appellant's   difficulties
    notwithstanding the "non-conducive" phrase was that here there  was  no
    sufficient basis  upon  which  it  could  be  said  that  it  would  be
    disproportionate for the Appellant to be removed. Mr Wilding said there
    was no real analysis to show an identification of an error of law.   It
    was an attempt really to give additional reasons as to why it would  be
    disproportionate to remove the Appellant.  When one reads the whole  of
    paragraphs 8.1 to 8.4 it was said there was more than  sufficient  here
    with  the  judge's  decision.   The  judge  has  squarely  focused   on
    proportionality and the correct  test  had  been  applied  for  a  non-
    deportation case.  It was submitted that the judge was well aware  that
    this was not a deportation case requiring consideration of Rules 399 or
    398 or the like.  It was submitted that at its highest paragraph 8.4 of
    the judge's decision was not  a  material  error  of  law  but  it  was
    submitted it was not even an error.

5.   Insofar, as the other aspect of the grounds in relation  to  the  House
    of Lords decision in Chikwamba at that date when this  application  had
    been brought at that date the Appellant  and  his  wife  had  not  been
    married and therefore this was the basis upon which the matter  had  to
    be considered.  The legal marriage happened after the  application  had
    been made.  The bulk of the challenge complained  about  the  Chikwamba
    aspect but in reality, there was no real  challenge,  if  any,  to  the
    insurmountable obstacles  to  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  going  to
    Pakistan  together.   It  was  suggestive  of   there   being   nothing
    disproportionate  with  the  decision.   It  was  submitted  that   the
    Appellant and his wife could go to  Pakistan  and  an  application  for
    entry clearance  could  be  made.   It  was  a  proportionate  response
    factoring in the Appellant's own immigration history.  It was a  choice
    of  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  rather  than   a   disproportionate
    interference with their Article 8 rights.  It was submitted that  there
    was no material error of law  and  that  the  judge's  decision  should
    stand.

6.   In reply Ms  Manning  said  that  if  the  Appellant  has  to  make  an
    application he would have a prejudicial finding against him namely that
    the Entry Clearance Officer would look at the application and would see
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision which  says  that  it  is  not
    conducive to the public good  to  have  the  Appellant  in  the  United
    Kingdom and that would prejudice the application.  In  response  to  my
    suggestion that that could be corrected by  me  completing  a  decision
    explaining that that would be wrong, Ms Manning quite properly conceded
    that that was indeed quite possible.  What she said though was that her
    primary submission was that the issues in relation to  the  Appellant's
    wife were  not  taken  into  account  when  undertaking  the  balancing
    exercise.   There  had  to  be  consideration  and  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's wife's family and indeed her private life.  The Appellant's
    wife worked as a  nurse  in  the  role  of  a  discharge  officer.  The
    Appellant's wife wanted to and  was  required  to  continue  her  work.
    There was reference to parts of the judge's decision the judge had  not
    made findings in respect of. These were observations that these matters
    had not been assessed in the overall balancing exercise.

7.    I  gave  the  final  word  to  Mr  Wilding  and  he  said  insofar  as
    insurmountable obstacles are concerned one wanting  to  carry  on  with
    their job gets nowhere near the matters  which  require  protection  in
    terms of protected rights for the purposes of Article 8.

8.   Having considered the rival submissions which  the  parties  have  made
    and indeed having considered the documentary evidence, in  my  judgment
    the judge was entirely right at paragraph 2.1 to highlight and to  note
    that the Appellant had been an overstayer since 10th July  2011.   This
    appeal was heard by the judge in October 2016 so the overstaying was  a
    long period of time.  That factor had to be at the forefront  when  the
    judge was considering the appeal before him.  It was a very significant
    factor and there was simply no other way to  look  at  it.  Indeed,  at
    around the time of Ms Manning's grounds of appeal, the Supreme  Court's
    decision in Agyarko and Others was also relevant. The Supreme Court has
    made clear that when looking at an overstayer case it is indeed  highly
    pertinent to consider that as a vital issue.

9.   The real focus in this case however  is  in  relation  whether  or  not
    there was a sufficient consideration of insurmountable obstacles or  of
    the public interest  in  dealing  with  the  overstayer  aspect.   That
    overstayer in this case happens to be married to a British citizen  who
    is a nurse and she would have some difficulties, it appears, if she had
    to live on her own here in the United Kingdom.

10.  The focus of the error is what the judge said at paragraph 8.4  of  his
    decision. That states, "Furthermore the presence of  the  Appellant  in
    the  United  Kingdom  is  not  conducive  to  the  public  good  having
    demonstrated a disregard for the Immigration Rules and the laws of  the
    United Kingdom.  It is undesirable to allow him to remain in the United
    Kingdom".  This was not a deportation case and therefore this  was  not
    the correct test.

11.    I have reflected on the other parts of the decision and it  has  been
    said on numerous occasions Tribunal decisions have to be looked  at  in
    totality and not simply by taking out short extracts to  the  advantage
    of one side or another.  However, in my judgment this particular aspect
    at paragraph 8.4 of  the  judge's  decision  is  of  such   fundamental
    importance that it needs to be given prominence when assessing  whether
    the judge applied the correct legal test or not. Therefore, despite  Mr
    Wilding's persuasive submissions, ultimately I have concluded that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision is such  that  it  does  indeed  show  a
    material error of law.

12.  The error of law is not one which can be disregarded. It relates  to  a
    fundamental basis in respect of the  case.  Although  I  thought  about
    whether I could correct the error if I dismissed the Appellant's appeal
    today by explaining in a decision that the judge had apparently applied
    the wrong test, but I have concluded that if I was to do that, I  would
    merely be acknowledging that the wrong test had been applied.  The fact
    that the judge applied the wrong  test  means  that  the  none  of  the
    decision can stand.  The  whole  of  the  findings  are  tainted  as  a
    consequence. The  application  of  the  deportation  test  for  a  non-
    deportation case shows the error was a material error.

13.  As a consequence the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  has  to
    be set aside in its entirety and that  therefore  there  has  to  be  a
    rehearing.  The appropriate venue for the  rehearing  will  be  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal. The rehearing will be on all issues. None  of  the
    current findings shall stand.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.
There will be a rehearing at the First-tier Tribunal on all matters.

No anonymity direction is made.

.

Signed                                  Date: 8th May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood


