
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/28935/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 September 2014                          | On 10 November 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           MUHAMMAD HASSAN MAHMOOD
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr Z Ali, Denning Solicitors
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whilst this is an appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, for  convenience  I  will  refer  to  the  parties  in  the
    determination as they appeared before the First-tier Tribunal

 2. The appellant, a national  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of State to  refuse  his
    application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  Migrant
    under the Points Based System and to remove him from the UK. First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Oakley allowed the appeal and the Secretary of State now
    appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 3. The appellant was granted leave to enter the UK as  a  Tier  4  General
    Student on 21 August 2010 and was granted further leave  to  remain  in
    the same category until 29 October 2012. The appellant claims to be  in
    receipt of financial support from  his  mother  and  submitted  a  bank
    statement in the name of Shamsad Akhtar. However the respondent did not
    award the appellant the  10  points  claimed  in  his  application  for
    maintenance because the appellant had failed to  provide  the  evidence
    specified in paragraph 13B (a) of Appendix C of the  Immigration  Rules
    to establish his relationship with the account holder for the  purposes
    of financial sponsorship under Tier 4. The appellant submitted a Family
    Registration Certificate but  the  Immigration  Rules  specify  that  a
    relationship  can  only  be  established  using   an   original   birth
    certificate, certificate of adoption or Court document naming  a  legal
    guardian.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted that the  appellant  had  always
    been financially  supported  by  his  mother  in  connection  with  his
    application to enter and previous application to remain in the  UK  and
    that he had on those previous occasions used  the  Family  Registration
    Certificate as evidence  of  his  birth  and  relationship.  The  Judge
    accepted that the appellant had completed this application himself  and
    that  as  the  Family  Registration  Certificate  had  previously  been
    accepted he assumed that it would be satisfactory on this occasion. The
    Judge accepted  that  the  appellant  has  completed  his  ACCA  and  a
    postgraduate diploma in management in the UK and that  he  was  in  the
    process of completing his MBA when he made this application. The  Judge
    accepted that the appellant has since completed the MBA and now intends
    to study for a PhD in finance and would prefer to undertake this course
    in the UK. The letter from Habib Bank submitted  with  the  application
    said that the customer, Shamshad Akhtar, has availed of a loan to  meet
    the further studies of her son, Muhammad Hassan Mahmood.

 5. The appellant produced a birth certificate at the appeal hearing in the
    First-tier Tribunal but the Judge  said  that  he  was  precluded  from
    taking it into account as it  was  submitted  after  the  date  of  the
    decision.

 6.  The  Judge  decided  that  the  appellant  had  submitted   a   Family
    Registration Certificate which had previously been accepted and  was  a
    document in the wrong format. He decided that the  Secretary  of  State
    could have requested the submission of further documents to clarify the
    Family Registration Certificate. The Judge also decided that the letter
    from Habib Bank clearly shows that  the  money  is  available  for  the
    appellant's studies. The Judge allowed the appeal.

Error of Law

 7. Mr Ali accepted that the provisions of the Immigration Rules considered
    by the Secretary of State and the Judge are the appropriate  provisions
    applicable in this case.

 8. The grounds of appeal submitted by the Secretary of State contend  that
    the Judge erred by taking into account evidence which was  inadmissible
    under section 85A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
    by allowing the appeal on the basis that the Secretary of State did not
    request the birth certificate.

 9. Mr Ali submitted that the Judge could take the birth  certificate  into
    account under section 85A (4) (c) in  order  to  demonstrate  that  the
    Family Registration Certificate  is  genuine.  I  do  not  accept  this
    submission. Firstly the Judge  did  not  say  that  he  was  so  doing.
    Secondly, the birth certificate was a required  document  and  was  not
    produced to prove that the Family Registration Certificate  is  genuine
    but to try to meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  In
    deciding that he was satisfied  that  the  appellant  and  the  account
    holder were related as claimed as required by the Rules the Judge  must
    have indirectly taken the birth certificate into account despite  being
    precluded from doing so.

10. Mr Ali submitted that the appellant relied on the  Family  Registration
    Certificate in his previous applications.  I  asked  him  if  the  same
    provisions of the Immigration Rules applied to those  applications  and
    he said that whilst he had no information about the  Immigration  Rules
    which applied to those applications he understood that they were likely
    to have been the same. This is not sufficient evidence  to  demonstrate
    that the evidential requirements for the previous applications were the
    same as those for this one. In any event Ms Everett submitted that each
    application is dealt with individually under the Immigration Rules.  Mr
    Ali submitted that the previous grants created a legitimate expectation
    that  the  Secretary  of  State  should  have   accepted   the   Family
    Registration Certificate again or have written to the appellant to  ask
    for his birth  certificate.  However,  as  the  recent  Upper  Tribunal
    decision in Mehmood (legitimate expectation) [2014]  UKUT  00469  (IAC)
    confirms; "The first question  in  every  case  concerning  an  alleged
    legitimate expectation is whether the public authority  concerned  made
    an unambiguous representation,  promise  or  assurance  devoid  of  any
    relevant qualification". There was no such unambiguous  representation,
    promise or assurance in this case. There was  therefore  no  legitimate
    expectation created by the fact that the appellant had not produced his
    birth certificate in his previous applications.

11. The Judge referred at paragraph 19 to  the  'recent  policy  rules'.  I
    assume he was referring to paragraph 245AA of the Rules. The grounds of
    appeal contend that the Judge misapplied  this  provision  in  deciding
    that the respondent could have easily requested the birth  certificate.
    It is contended by the respondent that paragraph 245AA did not apply in
    this case. Ms Everett submitted that, if paragraph 245AA  had  applied,
    the Judge should have referred the case back to the Secretary of  State
    and not decided it himself.

12. Paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules provides that the Secretary of
    State may contact an applicant to request the correct  documents  where
    the applicant has submitted documents in which;
    "(i)   Some of the documents in  a  sequence  have  been  omitted  (for
         example, if one bank statement from a series is missing);
    (ii)   A document is in the wrong format (for example, if a  letter  is
         not on letterhead paper as specified); or
    (iii)  A document is a copy and not an original document; or
    (iv)   A document does not contain all of the specified information".

13. Mr Ali submitted that the birth certificate in this case  comes  within
    (ii) above. However I do not agree that this applies. In this case  the
    appellant failed to submit the required document, a birth  certificate,
    the Family Registration Certificate is not another format for  a  birth
    certificate. Paragraph 245AA did not apply in the circumstances of this
    application.

14. In light of the above I am satisfied that the Judge  was  precluded  by
    section 85A from taking the  birth  certificate  into  account  as  the
    appellant had not supplied it with the application. Paragraph 245AA did
    not apply in the circumstances and  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not
    therefore obliged to consider contacting  the  appellant  to  seek  the
    correct documentation. The Judge therefore erred in allowing the appeal
    despite the fact that the appellant  has  not  submitted  the  required
    documentation.

15. I therefore set aside the Judge's decision. I remake it  by  dismissing
    it because the appellant did not provide  the  specified  documentation
    with his application as required by the Immigration Rules.



Conclusion:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on point of law.

      I set aside the decision.

      I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.



Signed
                       Date: 7 November 2014

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



