
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/28756/2014
                                                               IA/28758/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 August 2015                    |On 7 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       sheraz ahmed (first respondent)
                      nagina sheraz (second respondent)
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION Not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr I Khan, Immigratin4U


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    described before the First-tier Tribunal, that is  Mr  Ahmed  and  Miss
    Sheraz as the appellants and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

 2. The first appellant was born on 24 April 1980 and is the husband of the
    second appellant, born on 25  February  1988.   They  are  citizens  of
    Pakistan.

 3. The first appellant made an application on 14 June 2014  for  leave  to
    remain under the Tier 1 (General) Migrant points-based  system  scheme.
    The second appellant's application was dependent on that of the first.

 4. The application was refused on 30 June 2014 as the appellant had failed
    to score the sufficient points under the 'previous  earnings'  head  of
    Appendix A and the application was rejected  under  paragraph  245CA(c)
    and Appendix A of the Immigration Rules.

 5. The Secretary of State noted that the appellant had  not  provided  any
    specified documents as set out in Appendix A of the  Immigration  Rules
    to show that he had registered for, or paid National Insurance Class  2
    contributions for the earnings that  he  had  received  from  his  self
    employment.

 6. As the Secretary of State identified the Immigration Rules  specify  as
    follows:

         Appendix A paragraph 19(b)

         The specified documents in paragraph 19(b) are:

         (i) If the applicant's National Insurance is paid by bill, the
         original bill from the billing period immediately before the
         application.

         (ii) If the applicant's National Insurance is paid by direct debit,
         the most recent bank statement issued before the application,
         showing the direct debit payment of National Insurance to HM
         Revenue & Customs.

         (iii) If the applicant has low earnings, an original small earnings
         exception certificate issued by HM Revenue & Customs for the most
         recent return date.

         (iv) If the applicant has not yet received the documents in (i) to
         (iii), the original, dated welcome letter from HM Revenue & Customs
         containing the applicant's unique taxpayer reference number.

 7. The Secretary of State identified that if the  applicant  had  not  yet
    received the documents in  (i)  (ii)  or  (iii)  (above)  or  (iv)  the
    original dated welcome letter  from  HMRC  containing  the  applicant's
    unique tax payer reference number.  The application was refused.

 8. The appellant appealed against the respondent's  decision  of  30  June
    2014 to refuse his application.

 9. Judge Parker of the First-tier Tribunal allowed the appellant's  appeal
    on 2 April 2015 on the basis that the only reason the  application  was
    refused was because of the appellant's apparent failure to provide  one
    of the specific documents referred to above.

10. At the appeal hearing the appellant's evidence was that he submitted  a
    specified document, a namely the welcome letter dated April 2014 on  21
    June 2014. He stated he had already submitted the application  together
    with other supporting documents on 14 June 2014  and  the  respondent's
    decision letter was made on 30 June 2014 but no reference was  made  to
    the welcome letter.

11. The judge set out at 16, 17 and 18 the following:

         "16.     I have carefully considered all the  evidence  before  me.
             The only reason that the application was refused was owing  to
             the appellant's  failure  to  provide  one  of  the  specified
             documents  concerning   his   national   insurance   class   2
             contributions  as  a  self-employed  person.   At  the  appeal
             hearing the appellant claims to  have  submitted  the  welcome
             letter dated April 2014 to the respondent  on  21  June  2014,
             having  submitted  the   application   together   with   other
             supporting documents on 14 June 2014.  His explanation for the
             late submission of this document is that he had  given  it  to
             his accountant with all the other documentation in an envelope
             and it had not been returned to him until the Tuesday after he
             submitted  his  application.   Although   the   document   was
             submitted  late,  it  had  been   submitted   prior   to   the
             respondent's decision having been made (on 30 June 2014).

         17.      Under the points-based system I cannot  consider  evidence
             submitted after the decision.  The appellant  claims  to  have
             submitted his welcome letter of  April  2014  exactly  a  week
             after his application together with  supporting  evidence  was
             submitted but before the decision was made by the  respondent.
             There is no copy of the letter of April 2014 from HM Revenue &
             Customs in the respondent's bundle and there is  no  reference
             to it in the refusal letter.  On the evidence before me  I  am
             satisfied that this was not before the decision maker when the
             decision was made.  However I am  satisfied  that  this  is  a
             genuine (albeit copy) document before me at the hearing and  I
             note that the letter from the appellant's accountants dated 12
             June 2014 refers  to  the  appellant's  unique  tax  reference
             number.  A copy of  this  is  contained  in  the  respondent's
             bundle.

         18.      The appellant's representatives sought to  rely  upon  the
             evidential flexibility policy but I am not satisfied that this
             would have assisted the appellant in the event of the  welcome
             letter having been submitted after the decision was made.   Ms
             Khan had helpfully set out the provisions of  paragraph  245AA
             in their entirety in  her  skeleton  argument.   However  this
             merely confirms the respondent's position,  namely,  that  the
             respondent will only request documents  under  the  evidential
             flexibility policy where  documents  in  a  series  have  been
             omitted (e.g. one bank statement from a series); the  document
             is in a wrong format; is a copy or does not  contain  all  the
             specified  information.   (Paragraph  245AA(b)).   The  policy
             clearly states that documents will not be  requested  where  a
             specified  document  has  not  been  submitted  and  paragraph
             245AA(d) relied upon by the appellant's representative  refers
             to omissions with  a  "specified  document".   However  it  is
             common ground that there was not an error with  the  specified
             document  relating  to  the  appellant's  national   insurance
             contributions - no documentation relating to  this  aspect  of
             the application had been submitted."

12. In essence the judge noted that the welcome letter was addressed to the
    appellant and contained a UTR which was the same as that given for  the
    appellant in the letter from his accountants dated 12 June 2014.

13. The judge found that had the original welcome  letter  from  HMRC  been
    linked with the appellant's application and placed before the  decision
    maker when the decision  was  made  the  application  would  have  been
    successful.  The judge made the following finding at [20]:

         "I am satisfied that  the  appellant  had  submitted  the  original
         welcome  letter  from  HMRC  regarding   his   national   insurance
         contributions to the respondent, as he claims, on 21 June 2014  and
         that this was sent to the respondent before the decision was  made.
         I am satisfied that this document, had it been before the  decision
         maker rather than simply somewhere on  the  respondent's  premises,
         the application would have been granted."

14. The judge further found that the evidential flexibility point  was  not
    relevant.

15. An application for permission to appeal was made on the basis  that  as
    this  was  a  points-based  system  application  Section  85A  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applied and precluded  the
    submission of late documents in this instance.  It was  submitted  that
    the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had no  jurisdiction  to  consider
    the document referred to in paragraph 16 as it was submitted after  the
    application.  Pursuant to Raju and Khatel v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 754 it
    was a matter of settled law that  the  application  date  meant  simply
    that, and was  not  an  ongoing  window  in  which  to  submit  further
    documents unless the documents  fell  within  the  provisions  of  Rule
    245AA.

16. At paragraph 245AA

         "245AA. Documents not submitted with applications

         (a)      Where Part 6A or any appendices referred  to  in  Part  6A
             state that specified documents must  be  provided,  the  Entry
             Clearance Officer, Immigration Officer  or  the  Secretary  of
             State will only consider documents that  have  been  submitted
             with  the  application,  and  will  only  consider   documents
             submitted after the application where they  are  submitted  in
             accordance with subparagraph (b).

         (b)      If the applicant  has  submitted  specified  documents  in
             which:

             (i) Some of the documents in a sequence have been omitted (for
                  example, if one bank statement from a series is missing);

             (ii)      A document is in the wrong format (for example, if a
                  letter is not on letterhead paper as specified); or

             (iii)     A document is a copy and not an  original  document;
                  or

              iv)  A  document  does  not  contain  all  of  the   specified
                  information;"

             the Entry Clearance Officer, Immigration Officer or the
             Secretary of State may contact the applicant or his
             representative in writing, and request the correct documents.
             The requested documents must be received at the address
             specified in the request within 7 working days of the date of
             the request.

         (c)      Documents will not be requested where a specified document
             has not been submitted (for example an English language
             certificate is missing), or where the Entry Clearance Officer,
             Immigration Officer or the Secretary of State does not
             anticipate that addressing the omission or error referred to
             in subparagraph (b) will lead to a grant because the
             application will be refused for other reasons.

         (d)      If the applicant has submitted a specified document:

             (i) in the wrong format; or

             (ii)      which is a copy and not an original document; or

             (iii)     which does not contain all of the specified
                  information, but the missing information is verifiable
                  from:

                  (1) other documents submitted with the application,

                  (2) the website of the organisation which issued the
                  document, or

                  (3) the website of the appropriate regulatory body;

             the application may be granted exceptionally, providing the
             Entry Clearance Officer, Immigration Officer or the Secretary
             of State is satisfied that the specified documents are genuine
             and the applicant meets all the other requirements. The Entry
             Clearance Officer, Immigration Officer or the Secretary of
             State reserves the right to request the specified original
             documents in the correct format in all cases where (b)
             applies, and to refuse applications if these documents are not
             provided as set out in (b).

17. Where part 6A or any appendixes referred  to  in  part  6A  state  that
    specified documents must be provided as the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,
    Immigration Officer or  the  Secretary  of  State  will  only  consider
    documents that haves been submitted with the application and will  only
    consider documents submitted  after  the  application  where  there  is
    submitted in accordance with paragraph 245(b).  In  this  instance  the
    appellant's claim does  not  fall  within  subparagraph  245(b)  and  I
    therefore find there was an error of law.  Paragraph 245CA specifically
    states that to qualify for leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  (General)
    Migrant an applicant must meet the requirements listed below.   If  the
    applicant meets these requirements leave to remain will be granted.  If
    the applicant does not meet these requirements the application will  be
    refused.

18. One of the provisions is that 245CA(c) in all cases the applicant  must
    have 80 points under paragraph 7-34 of Appendix A.

19. Paragraph 19B of  Appendix  A  sets  out  the  specified  documents  as
    detailed above and it is clear that the applicant had not submitted all
    the  relevant  documents  with  his  application.   Following  Raju  an
    application is made when it is said it is made under paragraph 34G.

         34G. For the purposes of these rules, the date on which an
         application or claim (or a variation in accordance with paragraph
         34E) is made is as follows:

               i) where the application form is sent by post the date of
                  posting

              ii) where the application form is submitted in person, the
                  date on which it is accepted

20. At the hearing Mr Khan conceded that the welcome letter from  HMRC  had
    not been  submitted with the application but seven days afterwards.   I
    was invited to look at the purpose of the Rules and  consider  that  it
    was not the case that the  appellant  in  this  particular  matter  was
    attempting to frustrate the Immigration Rules.

21. I  can  accept  the  appellant  is  not  attempting  to  frustrate  the
    Immigration Rules but paragraph  245CA  of  the  Immigration  Rules  at
    subsection (c) confirms that in all cases the applicant  must  have  80
    points under paragraphs 7-34 of Appendix A.  Appendix  A  at  paragraph
    19SDB sets out the specified documents and these include  those  listed
    above.

22. In turn,  paragraph  245AA  states  that  (a)  where  Part  6A  or  any
    appendices referred to in Part 6A state that specified  documents  must
    be provided the Entry Clearance Officer,  Immigration  Officer  or  the
    Secretary  of  State  will  only  consider  documents  that  have  been
    submitted  with  the  application  and  will  only  consider  documents
    submitted after the application were they are submitted  in  accordance
    with paragraph (b).

23. This precludes the submission made by the appellant and it  is  notable
    that further to paragraph 245AA(d) it cannot be said to  be  the   case
    that the appellant had submitted  a  specified  document,  as  Mr  Khan
    invited me to conclude, in  the  wrong  format,  or  which  is  not  an
    original or which does not contain all of the specified information but
    the missing information is verifiable from one other document submitted
    with the application to the website of the  organisation  which  issued
    the document or (3) the website of the appropriate regulatory body.

24. My conclusion in this is reinforced  in  effect  by  EK  (Ivory  Coast)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1517 which emphasises at paragraphs 28 and 29 that  all
    the specified documents must be  submitted  with  the  application  and
    Sales LJ has this to say:

          1. The PBS is intended to simplify the procedure for applying for
             leave to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  in  certain
             classes of case, such as economic migrants and students.  This
             is to enable the Secretary of State to process high volumes of
             applications in a  fair  and  reasonably  expeditious  manner,
             according  to  clear  objective  criteria.  This  is  in   the
             interests of all applicants. It  also  assists  applicants  to
             know what evidence they  have  to  submit  in  support  of  an
             application.

          1. As Sullivan LJ observed in Alam, it is an inherent feature  of
             the  PBS  that  it  "puts  a  premium  on  predictability  and
             certainty at the expense of discretion" (para.  [35]).  Later,
             at para. [45], he said:

                  "... I endorse the view expressed by the Upper Tribunal in
                  Shahzad [Shahzad (s  85A:  commencement)  [2012]  UKUT  81
                  (IAC] (paragraph 49) that there is no  unfairness  in  the
                  requirement in the PBS that an applicant must submit  with
                  his  application  all  of  the   evidence   necessary   to
                  demonstrate compliance with the rule under which he  seeks
                  leave. The Immigration Rules, the Policy Guidance and  the
                  prescribed application form all make  it  clear  that  the
                  prescribed  documents   must   be   submitted   with   the
                  application, and if they are not the application  will  be
                  rejected.  The   price   of   securing   consistency   and
                  predictability is a lack  of  flexibility  that  may  well
                  result in "hard" decisions in individual cases,  but  that
                  is not a justification for imposing an obligation  on  the
                  Secretary of State to conduct a preliminary check  of  all
                  applications to see whether they are accompanied by all of
                  the specified documents, to contact applicants where  this
                  is not the case, and to give them an opportunity to supply
                  the missing documents. Imposing such an  obligation  would
                  not only have significant resource implications, it  would
                  also extend the time taken by the decision making process,
                  contrary to the policy underlying the introduction of  the
                  PBS."'.

25. As stated in Raju an application is made when it says it has been  made
    and further to paragraph 34G of the Immigration Rules it is clear  that
    this application was made on 14 June 2014.  Even it  is  accepted  that
    the documents were sent in on 21 June 2014, they  were  sent  in  seven
    days later and comply with neither the  evidential  requirements  under
    Section 85A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 nor the
    Immigration Rules.

26. In sum the appellants cannot comply with the  Immigration  Rules  under
    Paragraph 245CA.

27. It has been held that Article 8 is not a general dispensing  power  and
    further to Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025  (IAC)  I  am
    not persuaded that there are any valid grounds in respect of an Article
    8 claim.

28. The Judge erred in law materially for the reasons  identified.   I  set
    aside the decision pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE  2007)  and  remake  the  decision  under
    section 12(2) (b) (ii) of the TCE 2007 and dismiss  both  appeals,  the
    second being dependent on the first.

Order

The appeals of Mr Sheraz Ahmed and Ms Nagina Sheraz are dismissed.


Signed      Date 6th October 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed      Date 6th October 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
