
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/28656/2013
                                                               IA/22823/2014
                                                               IA/22846/2014
                                                               IA/22850/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 December 2015                   |On 14 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                  Mr Muhammad AAmir Nawaz - first appellant
                  Mrs amna salah-ud-din - second appellant
                            m j - third appellant
                           h f - fourth appellant
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Heybroek, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The  appellants  are  citizens  of  Pakistan.   The  first  and  second
    appellants are husband and wife and the third and fourth are their  two
    minor  children  born  on  15  December  2008  and  19  September  2010
    respectively, i.e. 6 years and 5  years  old  as  at  the  date  of  my
    consideration.

 2. They appeal with permission the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    Judge I Ross, following an oral hearing of their appeal on 8 July 2014.
     The appellants' representatives  assert  that  the  decision  was  not
    served until March 2015, meaning that the application for permission to
    appeal was made within time.  There is no evidence to  contradict  that
    assertion because apparently the respondent failed to keep  any  record
    as to when they received the judge's decision and the position  is  not
    established by the court  file.   Whilst  the  case  management  system
    refers to the issue of an IA60, the letter accompanying  a  promulgated
    determination, being issued on 18 July 2014 no copy is on file and when
    the Appellants' representative eventually, in February 2015 chased  her
    decision the copy of the IA60 provided, although dated  21  July  2014,
    was clearly produced after that event  containing  within  it  a  clear
    reference to time limits for appeal which were only brought in  by  the
    Procedure Rules of October 2014.  In those circumstances  I  find  that
    the appellant has established late promulgation  of  the  determination
    and the timeliness of the application for permission.

 3. I pause to note that when Judge Ross heard these appeals in  July  2014
    he only had the file  of  the  principal  appellant.   Although  in  an
    earlier Case Management Review the court had directed  that  the  three
    dependent appellants' appeals be linked  with  that  of  the  principal
    appellant and the matters listed  together.   The  parties  accordingly
    turned up at court expecting all four appellants'  cases  to  be  dealt
    with at the hearing.  Unfortunately as a result  of  an  administrative
    error the dependants' appeals remained  separately  listed  in  January
    2015.  Judge Ross, with the consent of the parties, dealt with  all  of
    the appeals and directed that the hearing in January  be  vacated.   In
    the event further administrative errors resulted in a paper disposal of
    the dependants' appeals in January.  There was no issue before me  that
    the erroneous paper disposal of January 2015 is annulity and  there  is
    no need for me to make any further reference to it.

 4. Judge Ross dismissed the appellants' appeal against the decision of the
    respondent refusing this family's application for indefinite  leave  to
    remain.   The  principal  appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom   in
    September 2002 with entry clearance as a  student  which  was  extended
    until 31 July 2004.  An in-time application for further leave to remain
    as a student was refused on 18 November 2004.  The  appellant  did  not
    leave and at that point became an overstayer.  On 28 March  2009,  i.e.
    over four years later the appellant  made  a  further  application  for
    leave to remain as a student, and that  application  was  granted,  and
    subsequently varied to post-study work leave expiring  in  March  2013.
    On 25 September 2012 the first appellant applied for  indefinite  leave
    to remain on the ground of long residence.  The application was refused
    the appellant not succeeding  in  establishing  ten  years'  continuous
    lawful residence in the United Kingdom under paragraph 276B(i)(a) of HC
    395 as amended because of the period  of  overstaying.   The  principal
    appellant's wife and eldest child entered the United Kingdom on 14 July
    2010 as his dependants.  The fourth dependant was born  in  the  United
    Kingdom  shortly  after,  in  September  2010.   The  application   for
    indefinite leave to remain submitted on 25 September 2012  was  refused
    on 26 June 2013, the family have leave to remain having expired  on  22
    March 2013.

 5. The grounds of appeal put  forward  mitigating  circumstances  for  the
    period of overstaying,  complained  that  the  respondent  delayed  and
    should have made a prompt decision prior to  the  expiry  of  leave  in
    March 2013 so as to afford the appellant an  opportunity  of  making  a
    further application  before  the  leave  expired,  and  contended  that
    removal would amount to a breach of Article  8  ECHR.   The  mitigating
    circumstances were that the appellant believed that he  had  instructed
    an "immigration adviser" to make an in-time application.

 6. Judge Ross correctly decided that the appellant could not establish the
    necessary period of lawful residence, the mitigating circumstances  put
    forward being outwith  the  relaxations  of  the  computation  of  time
    permitted within the Rule.

 7. With regard to family and private life none of the "gateways"  provided
    for by Appendix FM.  The judge then turned to  Article  8.   The  judge
    directed at paragraph 12:

         "12. I have carefully considered whether  the  refusal  of  further
             leave would result in an unjustifiably harsh result such  that
             the appeal ought  to  be  considered  under  Article  8  ECHR,
             following the approach set out in Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new
             Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC)."

    The judge then goes on to consider the length  of  residence  including
    the four years overstaying, the temporary  grants  of  leave,  and  the
    application  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  under  the  Rules,  an
    application which was bound to fail.  The judge considered the position
    of the dependent appellants he assessed the best interests of the third
    and fourth appellants to be to remain in their family  unit.   In  that
    regard he took account that the children have both  been  to  Pakistan,
    have been brought up according  to  Pakistani  culture,  and  are  both
    Pakistani citizens.  The judge  took  account  that  the  eldest  child
    attends school and that the youngest at a nursery.  The judge notes the
    presence of grandparents in Pakistan and the ability of the  father  to
    maintain the family as a result of having completed his BA and  Masters
    degrees in the United Kingdom.  In respect of the length of  time  that
    the respondent took to decide the  application  the  judge  found  that
    there was no undue delay and that in any event there was no application
    that the appellant could have made prior to the  expiry  of  his  post-
    study visa expiring on 22 March 2013.  Bearing in  mind  all  of  those
    matters the judge concludes that the refusal does  not  result  in  any
    unjustifiably harsh consequences.  The judge reminds himself that there
    is no Rules based  entitlement  to  remain,  and  notes  there  are  no
    compelling circumstances, and decides "I do not  consider  this  appeal
    separately under Article 8 ECHR."

The Grounds of the Application

 8. Challenging Judge Ross' decision reiterate the grounds  of  appeal  and
    assert that the judge did not correctly consider the Article 8 issue in
    light of the Court of Appeal decision of MF  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 1192 to the  point  that  the  Immigration  Rules  are  not  a
    complete code and the judge was required to conduct a separate  Article
    8 assessment.

 9. Before me Ms Heybroek relied on the judge's self direction with  regard
    to the case of Gulshan as establishing a material error of law.

10. I clarified with Ms Heybroek that the factual matrix considered by  the
    judge was not disputed nor was there any evidence that was relied  upon
    by the appellants as  establishing  that  the  best  interests  of  the
    children were not as found by the judge namely to be with their parents
    wherever their parents lived.  There is no evidence of any  medical  or
    educational needs or concerns capable  of  operating  to  displace  the
    public interest in removing those who have  no  entitlement  to  remain
    under the Rules.  Although the evidence reveals that  the  couple  were
    expecting, in July 2014 to have a third child in  February  2014,  that
    the principal appellant had been in an RTA in February 2004  which  was
    the subject of a compensation  claim,  in  the  context  of  which  the
    medical  evidence  is  that  his  whiplash  injury  had   resulted   in
    physiotherapy, and that the eldest child  had  suffered  and  recovered
    from chickenpox and expected to start  primary  school  those  are  all
    circumstances  which  reflect  nothing  outside  the  usual  sorts   of
    circumstances attendant upon a family going about life in  an  ordinary
    fashion.

11. As can be seen from the judge's self direction he did not impose a test
    of exceptionality but concluded, in  the  context  of  an  unremarkable
    factual matrix, that the application of the Immigration Rules  afforded
    sufficient respect to the family life of these appellants.

12. Were I to reconsider the issue today and in this  regard  there  is  no
    application under Rule 15 for additional evidence to  be  submitted,  I
    could properly come to no other conclusion but that the best  interests
    of the children of this family are  to  continue  to  live  with  their
    parents, in  the  context  of  their  own  private  lives  Ms  Heybroek
    indicated that she was unable to take me to any  evidence  which  might
    show that it would not be reasonable to expect any of the  children  to
    leave the United Kingdom and return  to  Pakistan  with  their  parents
    there being no significant obstacles to their doing  so  and  to  their
    integration and none having a significant  term  of  residence  in  the
    context of the Rules or to qualify them as "qualifying children" in the
    context of Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002 as amended.

13. For those reasons if I were  remaking  the  decision  the  only  proper
    conclusion available to me is that the interference with the family and
    private life of this family is proportionate  in  the  context  of  the
    legitimate aim reflected by the application of  the  Immigration  Rules
    and that the removal of this family does not put the UK  in  breach  of
    any Article 8 obligations.

14. For all the reasons set out above I find that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal does not reveal a material error  of  law  such  that  it
    should be set aside.  The decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ross
    dismissing these appellants' appeals on Immigration  Rules  grounds  as
    well as on Article 8 ECHR stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

