

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/28704/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 May 2016                                |On 19 July 2016               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY

                                   Between

                                TAHIR SIDDIQ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Coleman, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a Pakistani national  born  on  7  August  1989.  On  28
   February 2014 he applied for further leave to remain as  a  spouse  of  a
   person present and settled in the UK. That application was refused by the
   Respondent on 26 June 2014 and directions were given for his  removal  in
   accordance with section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.


2. The Respondent refused the application because it was concluded that  the
   Appellant had obtained his  TOEIC  test  result  through  deception.  The
   Respondent concluded that the Appellant was a person who had sought leave
   to remain by deception  following  information  provided  by  Educational
   Testing Service (ETS) that on  21  November  2012  an  anomaly  with  his
   speaking test indicated the presence of a proxy test taker.


3. The Respondent also  concluded  that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the
   requirements of the Rules for family life as a partner because  he  could
   not meet the eligibility requirements in the light of the  fact  that  he
   had  not  satisfied  the   suitability   requirements.   The   Respondent
   nevertheless considered paragraph  EX.1  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
   concluded that there would be no insurmountable obstacles to family  life
   continuing with his spouse outside the UK. The Respondent also  concluded
   that the requirements of paragraph 276ADE were not met.


4. The Appellant appealed against that decision under s82 (1)  of  the  Act.
   His appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal on  19  August  2015.
   The Appellant then sought permission to appeal this  decision  which  was
   granted on 16 December 2015. Permission was granted as it was found  that
   it was arguable that any alleged deception was not  in  relation  to  the
   application and that it was not open to the Judge to  rely  on  conducive
   grounds where these had  not  been  the  substance  of  the  Respondent's
   decision. Further, it was arguable that the Judge failed to give adequate
   reasons for finding, principally on the strength of the Appellant's vague
   evidence that the Respondent had proved her case.


   The Grounds


5. The grounds contend that  the  Judge  erred  in  his  assessment  of  the
   applicability of the suitability criteria in paragraphs S-LTR.1.2-3.1 and
   its applicability to the Appellant's case. It is argued that it could  be
   seen from the wording of  the  IS  151A  dated  26  June  2014  that  the
   Respondent's case was that the Appellant was considered a person who  had
   sought leave to remain in  the  UK  by  deception.  This  allegation  was
   specifically repeated in the RFRL. It was  at  no  time  alleged  by  the
   Respondent that the Appellant's presence in the UK was not  conducive  to
   the public good. It is asserted that the alleged  deception  was  not  in
   connection with the Appellant's most recent application but related to an
   earlier application made in or around 2012.  It  is  submitted  that  the
   proper course was to find that the Appellant  satisfied  the  suitability
   criteria and allow the appeal and not to do so was a  material  error  of
   law.


6. It is contended that the Judge was not entitled to  raise  the  issue  of
   whether the Appellant's presence in the UK was conducive  to  the  public
   good under paragraph S-LTR1.6 of his own volition and that it involved  a
   careful consideration of  numerous  public  policy  considerations  which
   ought not to have been the role of the First-tier Tribunal. Further it is
   submitted that even if the Judge were entitled to make such a finding  he
   failed properly to do so.


7. It is also submitted that the Judge ignored the  inherent  weaknesses  in
   the Respondent's evidence and the three reasons given in paragraph 17  of
   the decision that formed the basis of the adverse factual  findings  were
   not a sound basis for reaching the conclusion. It is also submitted  that
   the Judge failed to take into account that  the  Appellant,  having  been
   notified of issues in relation to his ETS test, swiftly took another test
   with a different provider and passed the same. It is also submitted  that
   the Judge failed to have regard to the fairly determined efforts  of  the
   Appellant through his solicitors to obtain the  evidence  from  ETS  upon
   which the Respondent's allegations were  founded  and  the  ETS's  rather
   suspect reasons for refusing to provide such disclosure. It is  submitted
   that the  Judge  should  have  had  regard  to  the  attempts  to  obtain
   exculpatory evidence which were a strong  indicator  of  the  Appellant's
   innocence.


   The Rule 24 Response


8. The Respondent submitted that it was open to the Judge to  conclude  that
   the requirements of S-LTR 1.6 pointed towards the Appellant remaining  in
   the UK as being non conducive to the public good. The  Judge  noted  that
   77% of  the  tests  conducted  at  Eden  College  were  invalid  and  the
   Appellant's evidence was lacking in quality. The Appellant's attempts via
   his representatives to obtain copies of his  test  were  not  necessarily
   indicative of his innocence and could have been a ploy on his  part.  The
   evidence before the Judge was sufficient to support  his  conclusion  and
   the grounds were a disagreement with the findings.


   The Hearing


9. Mr Coleman applied to cite the case of Qadir & SM  v  SSHD  IA/31380/2014
   and IA/36319/2014, an unreported decision, pursuant to  paragraph  11  of
   the Practice Directions of the Immigration and  Asylum  Chambers  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal. The Appellant wished to reply
   on the proposition that the generic evidence on which  the  Secretary  of
   State has relied to date in  all  ETS  cases  has  been  demonstrated  as
   suffering from multiple shortcomings and frailties.


10. Mr  Kandola  objected  to  the  unreported  case  being  relied  on.  He
   submitted that Qadir was fact specific and  did  not  assist  the  court.
   Should Qadir be cited he would seek to rely on the  report  of  Professor
   French to show that the Secretary of State's  evidence  had  always  been
   good and adequate which was contrary to the case of Qadir.


11. Paragraph 11.1 of the Practice Directions provides that a  determination
   of the Tribunal  which  has  not  been  reported  may  not  be  cited  in
   proceedings before the Tribunal unless  the  Tribunal  gives  permission.
   Paragraph 11.3 provides that permission will  only  be  given  where  the
   Tribunal considers that it would be materially assisted by  the  citation
   of the determination, as distinct from the adoption in  argument  of  the
   reasoning to be found in the determination. Such instances are said to be
   likely to be rare and that it will be rare for such  an  argument  to  be
   capable of being made only by reference to an unreported determination.

12. I decided not to give permission to cite the  unreported  determination.
   The Upper Tribunal in Qadir heard oral evidence from Secretary of State's
   witnesses Rebecca Collings and Peter Millington and from Dr Harrison  who
   appeared on behalf of  the  Appellants.  The  conclusions  of  the  Upper
   Tribunal were based on the totality of this evidence.   In  view  of  the
   fact that I had to consider whether there was an  error  of  law  in  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal which came to its conclusions on  the
   written testimony of  those  witnesses  and  the  oral  evidence  of  the
   Appellant I concluded that the conclusions  in  Qadir  would  not  be  of
   material assistance.


13. Mr Coleman relied on the grounds  settled  by  Counsel  particularly  in
   relation to the suitability point.  He submitted that it was  clear  that
   he was refused on a discretionary and not a mandatory ground.  The  Judge
   determined in the decision that he was going to widen it out  and  decide
   it on conducive grounds. This was not considered at the hearing. He  went
   from discretionary to mandatory without telling the parties. At the  very
   least he should have given the Appellant an opportunity to deal with that
   and potentially grant an adjournment. As the refusal stood the allegation
   of deception was not made out in respect of this application  because  it
   related to an earlier application.  The  Tribunal  did  acknowledge  that
   scores had to be authenticated but  did  not  take  it  into  account  in
   relation to the balancing exercise as to whether they had  satisfied  the
   requisite standard. He did not state what the standard of proof  was.  Mr
   Coleman relied on the arguments advanced in Qadir. The Appellant had done
   another English language test. The failure to have regard  to  this  made
   the decision unsafe. It was a serious matter. This  was  a  test  he  did
   several years beforehand which he detailed in his witness  statement.  At
   paragraph 6 it stated that he took a new English test. There was  nothing
   vague about the Appellant's evidence. He was clear about  where  he  went
   and that he did not cheat. The Judge had not balanced the  evidence.  All
   of these points were strong points.  The  overall  impact  was  that  the
   parties were not given an opportunity to deal with the points.


14. Mr Kandola relied on the Rule 24 response. He submitted  that  the  case
   turned on credibility and the sustainability of the finding on deception.
   The Judge had said at paragraph 17 that the Respondent had made good  her
   allegation and gave reasons. At paragraph 17 (b) and (c) a fact sensitive
   assessment of the evidence in this case was carried out. He had regard to
   R (on the application of Gazi) v SSHD (ETS - judicial review) IJR  [2015]
   UKUT 327 and Dr Harrison's report and the short-comings of the  evidence.
   He found against the Appellant and found that he exercised deception  and
   that was a sustainable finding. The  grounds  were  a  disagreement.  The
   Judge was entitled to look at the consequences of the  deception  finding
   and look at all of the requirements. The RFRL did not pin point which  of
   the suitability criteria was relied on and at paragraph 7 the  Respondent
   said that in order to be eligible he must not be excluded and  cited  the
   whole breadth the Rule. The Appellant was told that  he  could  not  fall
   foul of any of these provisions and the Respondent's case was wide in the
   RFRL. All the grounds were cited and  although  the  Respondent  was  not
   specific in the RFRL the Appellant was on notice that  if  he  fell  foul
   then he would be refused.


15. Mr Coleman submitted that the first time  the  conducive  criteria  were
   applied was when the Judge decided to write the decision up. It  was  not
   raised by the Respondent in the appeal, there was no reference to  it  in
   the court of proceedings. The Judge should  have  given  the  parties  an
   opportunity to make submissions. It was not fair to raise that at a  much
   later stage when no one had the opportunity to deal with it and that  the
   refusal would be mandatory. He was going off on a jolly of  his  own.  He
   concluded that "arguably" past conduct was conducive to public  good.  It
   was a major error and a fairness point. There was no consideration of the
   behaviour of the Appellant in relation to trying to get the  test  scores
   and in relation to the quality of his English in Court. He  asked  me  to
   find an error and remit it back to the First-tier.


16. I reserved my decision in relation to whether there was an error of  law
   in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


   Discussion and Findings


17. I find that there is force in the Appellant's first ground  in  relation
   to the suitability requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules.  It  is  not
   evident from the RFRL which of the 'suitability' grounds  the  Respondent
   relied on. All are set out in the RFRL. Paragraphs S-LTR.1.1 to S-LTR.1.7
   are  mandatory  and  S-LTR.2.1  to  2.4  are  discretionary.  Whilst  the
   Respondent did not cite a specific paragraph the Appellant  was  informed
   at paragraph 9 of the RFRL that he was considered to be a person who  had
   sought leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  by  deception.  The  same
   wording was used  in  the  IS.151A,  the  notice  informing  him  of  his
   liability to removal.


18. There is no suggestion in  the  RFRL  nor  in  the  submissions  of  the
   Respondent as recorded at paragraph 11 of the decision of the  First-tier
   Tribunal that the Appellant was considered to be a person whose  presence
   in the UK was not conducive to the public good. At paragraph  15  of  the
   decision the First-tier Tribunal concluded that once the  facts  were  in
   play that might found exclusion from an immigration  route,  any  of  the
   suitability  criteria  within  that  route   must   fall   for   judicial
   consideration. The  Judge  concluded  that  "arguably"  past  conduct  in
   obtaining leave to remain by deception amounted to  conduct  rendering  a
   person's exclusion from leave  to  remain  under  the  Immigration  Rules
   conducive to public good.


19. The reason for the switch from one paragraph to  another  was  the  fact
   that the Judge found the Appellant could not be considered to have fallen
   foul  of  the  suitability  requirements  in   paragraph   S-LTR.2.2,   a
   discretionary ground  for  refusal,  because  the  Rule  related  to  the
   submission of false information or a failure to disclose  material  facts
   in relation to "the application". The test results which  the  Respondent
   alleged were obtained by deception related to a previous application.


20. There  is  clear  authority  to  support  the  contention  that  if  the
   Respondent has failed to consider the relevant rule it is the  tribunal's
   task to construe it.  The  Appellant  has  cited  no  authority  for  the
   assertion in the grounds that the tribunal  should  not  be  the  primary
   decision maker in relation to a conducive grounds  refusal.  However,  an
   Appellant may require an adjournment to respond to the  new  issue.  That
   was effectively the Tribunal's view in CP (Dominica)  2006  UKAIT  00040.
   The significance in the instant case of the fact that the  Appellant  did
   not appear to know that he had  a  case  to  answer  in  respect  of  the
   "conducive" paragraph is that it is not a matter that  was  addressed  by
   him in submissions. Whilst a finding of  deception  may  well  warrant  a
   refusal on conducive grounds it is a matter which is open to argument.  I
   therefore find that the allegation of procedural unfairness is made out.

21. The  Judge  gave  his  reasons  for  finding  that  the  Respondent  had
   discharged the burden of proving that the Appellant had used deception at
   paragraph 17 of the decision. Whilst he gave sound  reasons  for  finding
   that he could place weight on the Respondent's evidence in relation to  a
   high rate of dishonesty at Eden College and it was open  to  him  on  the
   evidence he heard to find that the Appellant's evidence was vague, he did
   not engage with the two points raised  in  the  Appellant's  submissions,
   namely that he had taken and passed a language test at  the  Respondent's
   behest and assiduously pursued ETS to provide the voice  recordings  that
   were said to found the case against him.


22. The Appellant produced an  English  language  certificate  from  Trinity
   College London at page 34 of his bundle showing that he had been  awarded
   Grade 2 in Spoken English with distinction in April 2014.  The  Appellant
   also  produced  in  an   additional   bundle   containing   evidence   of
   correspondence between himself and ETS dating January 2015 asking whether
   and why his test certificate had been cancelled and asking for  full  and
   complete details.  This  was  evidence  that  was  certainly  capable  of
   raising an innocent explanation and needed to be addressed. The Judge did
   not allude to this evidence in coming to his conclusions or give  reasons
   for not finding it of relevance.


23. In the circumstances I find that there was a material error  of  law  in
   the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                             Date 19 July 2016



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
