
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28665/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 3 February 2015                         |On 24 February 2015            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                          Ebrahim Sayyad Mogharrab
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. K. Behbahani, Solicitor.
For the Respondent:    Ms. L. Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran, born on 21 August 1948.

 2. On 8  June  2014  his  leave  was  cancelled  on  the  basis  of  false
    representations having been made, or material  facts  not  having  been
    disclosed, or there  having  been  a  change  of  circumstances.   Full
    reasons were set out in a notice of refusal  14  September  2014.   The
    appellant appealed and following  a  hearing  at  Hatton  Cross,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 17 October 2014, Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal A J M Baldwin dismissed the appellant's appeal.  In so doing
    no anonymity order was made and that remains  the  position  before  me
    today as  no  application  was  put  forward  to  justify  the  further
    consideration of such an order.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal and on 19 December 2014 Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Kelly gave permission.  His reasons  for  so
    doing were:-

         "1.  The appellant seeks permission to appeal, in  time  against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Baldwin) who, in  a
             determination promulgated on 17th October 2014, dismissed  his
             appeal against the decision of the respondent  to  cancel  his
             leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a visitor.

         2.   It is arguable, as the application contends, that the Tribunal
             erred in upholding the respondent's  decision  to  cancel  the
             appellant's leave to remain by reference  to  a  retrospective
             application of amendments to paragraph 41 of  the  Immigration
             Rules which had not been in force at the time of the grant."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 5. At the outset I was informed by both representatives that  the  factual
    matrix found by the First-tier Tribunal Judge was not in  dispute.   It
    can be gleaned from paragraphs 9 and 10 of  the  judge's  determination
    which state:-

         "9.  When the Appellant applied for a 5-Year Visit Visa  he  stated
             he wished to visit his sons in the UK for 'therr' (sic) weeks,
             giving the  dates  25.12.11  to  8.1.12.   He  refers  to  ten
             previous visits to the UK.  The Visa  was  not  in  the  event
             issued until 13.2.12 and the visits  which  followed  it  were
             from 26.2.12  to  19.8.12,  25.9.12  to  10.3.13,  30.4.13  to
             27.10.13 and 17.11.13  to  11.5.14.   His  Application  Record
             shows that, when he arrived in the UK on 17.11.13 it was noted
             that he had been spending the majority of his time in  the  UK
             since 12.7.09.  Both the Appellant and the UK Sponsor who  was
             contacted were advised strongly that the Appellant should  not
             continue spending the majority of his time in the UK.  In  the
             event, the Appellant went on to spend c.175  days  in  the  UK
             leaving after approximately 25 weeks, on 11.5.14.  He returned
             to the UK four weeks later, on 8.6.14, when he was interviewed
             with the assistance of a Farsi Interpreter.

         10.  In interview, the Appellant said he wanted to stay  this  time
             for 14 days as one of his sons  here  was  having  matrimonial
             problems.  In the past he had generally stayed for  about  six
             months at a time and he admitted he had been  'living  in  the
             UK' because he liked it here.  He did not know  he  could  not
             stay this long.  In the Grounds of Appeal it is  asserted  the
             Appellant never admitted he considered himself  to  have  been
             living in the UK.  In a Statement he denies ever  having  made
             false representations or failing to  disclose  material  facts
             and had always complied with the 180-Day limit.  He had  never
             been told by officials that his regular visits to the UK  were
             a problem.  He has three sons in the UK,  one  of  whom  is  a
             refugee and they mean the world  to  him.   Two  of  the  sons
             provided a Statement, one of them -  (Reza)  -  attending  the
             Hearing to adopt it as true.   They  express  concern  at  the
             prospect of their father not being allowed to return to the UK
             and they would never be able to travel together to see him  in
             Iran.  Reza told me that there had been small tensions in  his
             own marriage which his wife's family 'made big' and his father
             thought big.  However, his  father  had  formed  this  opinion
             because he had heard him occasionally raise his voice  to  his
             wife in the bedroom.  His father had been  persuaded  and  did
             persuade him they were small matters.  The son told me he  now
             had a good life with his own wife.  The Appellant confirmed he
             had never worked here, or registered with a Doctor, or secured
             a Tenancy, or opened a Bank Account here.  He  said  he  lived
             with his wife in Iran and he wanted to go back as he also  had
             other children there."

    The representatives also agreed before me that prior  to  the  date  of
    refusal the appellant had spent 24 of the previous  27  months  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 6. Mr Behbahani most helpfully provided me with  copies  of  the  relevant
    Rule along with the version of paragraph 41 which came into effect on 6
    April 2013 by virtue of the Immigration Rules HC  1039  which  adds  to
    paragraph 41(ii) "does not intend to live for extended periods  in  the
    United Kingdom through frequent or successive visits;  and".   He  also
    handed up the authorities of Oppong (Visitor - length  of  stay)  Ghana
    [2011]  UKUT  00431   (IAC)   and   Sawmynaden   (Family   visitors   -
    considerations) [2012] UKUT 00161 (IAC).

 7. In making his submissions  Mr  Behbahani  relied  on  the  grounds  for
    seeking permission to appeal.  He noted  that  in  submissions  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal the judge was referred to the change in wording  of
    paragraph 41 on 6 April 2013 and submitted that it was clear  that  the
    wording of paragraph 41 which  applied  to  the  period  in  which  the
    appellant undertook his regular  and  extended  visits  to  the  United
    Kingdom did not include the wording: "... and does not intend  to  live
    for  extended  periods  in  the  United  Kingdom  through  frequent  or
    successive visits".  It was argued that it was on such basis  that  the
    appellant was able to undertake his regular visits under  the  watchful
    eye of the respondent on each occasion when he  entered  and  left  the
    United Kingdom for the purpose of  his  visits.   In  other  words  the
    appellant was not criticised by the  respondent  for  undertaking  such
    frequent and successive visits until the wording of  paragraph  41  was
    changed in April 2013.  Effectively, the appellant had not breached the
    Immigration Rules until  the  wording  to  paragraph  41  was  amended.
    Accordingly the judge erred and it was wholly incorrect for the post  6
    April 2013 paragraph 41 to be applied retrospectively in the  way  that
    it had been by the respondent.  The reason being that it amounted to an
    unreasonable and irrational application of a change in the wording of a
    specific paragraph of the Immigration Rules as it effectively  suddenly
    penalises those who had up until the change of Rule done nothing  wrong
    by engaging in regular visits via  their  five  year  multientry  visas
    which are purchased from the respondent at great expense.   He  further
    argued that the judge had failed to properly consider  this  contention
    and as a consequence had "been complicit  with  the  respondent  in  an
    (sic)  flawed  retrospective  interpretation  and  application  of  the
    wording of post 6 April 2013 paragraph 41 of the  Rules".   He  further
    submitted  that  it  was  grossly  unfair  and  unreasonable  for   the
    appellant, given his age and particular circumstances, to be  penalised
    in such a way  given  his  otherwise  positive  and  clean  immigration
    history.

 8. Mr Behbahani also referred me to Sawmynaden and in particular paragraph
    1 of the head note which I will detail below.  He also argued,  relying
    on Oppong, that it was "wrong to refuse someone entry  clearance  as  a
    general visitor just because they have spent more than six of the  last
    twelve months in the United Kingdom".  He acknowledged the  appellant's
    immigration history over the last fourteen years and the  frequent  and
    lengthy visits made to the United Kingdom.   He  contended  that  there
    should have been no reliance  whatsoever  on  the  post  6  April  2013
    version of the Rules and that the appropriate way would have  been  for
    the Immigration Officer to have given the appellant a stern warning but
    no more.  Furthermore, as in the reported cases, there was  an  element
    of a family emergency in the United Kingdom which the  appellant's  son
    gave evidence about in relation to marital breakdown.  Finally he  made
    submissions in relation to the issue of "intention" and submitted  that
    there was nothing within the Immigration Rules to say that  "intention"
    must be maintained throughout entry clearance.  The appellant has  been
    wrongly penalised by the application of the new Rules.

 9. Ms Kenny emphasised that on his own admission the appellant  had  spent
    the vast majority of his time during the last  fourteen  years  in  the
    United Kingdom and that prior to refusal 24 of the previous  27  months
    had been spent there.  The Immigration Rules changed in 2013 and it was
    seven months  thereafter  that  the  appellant  was  given  a  warning.
    However, he did not heed the advice which was also given to the sponsor
    that the appellant should not continue spending  the  majority  of  his
    time in the United Kingdom.  Having confirmed that  he  understood  the
    respondent's position and that  he  would  comply  in  the  future  the
    appellant then went on to stay for just six days short  of  six  months
    before returning to Iran for just four  weeks  and  then  back  to  the
    United Kingdom on 8 June 2014.  She argued that following the change in
    the Immigration Rules the appellant could  not  assume  that  he  could
    continue as  under  the  old  Immigration  Rules.   In  any  event  the
    appellant's intention did not change.  His visa was  cancelled  because
    of a change in circumstances in that he applied  to  visit  the  United
    Kingdom for a period of three weeks but spent substantially longer time
    there.  The judge was right to find at paragraph 21 that the  appellant
    blatantly ignored the clear advice he and the sponsor  were  given  and
    that having chosen to ignore that advice  it  would  have  been  wholly
    inappropriate for an Immigration Officer to  waste  his  breath  giving
    another warning when the appellant returned to the United Kingdom after
    just 28 days in Iran having spent the previous 25 weeks in  the  United
    Kingdom.  She too  referred  me  to  the  case  of  Sawmynaden  and  in
    particular paragraphs (iii), (v)  and  (vi)  of  the  head  note.   She
    contended that it was plain  that  the  appellant  was  not  a  genuine
    visitor to the United Kingdom and that his appeal should be dismissed.

10. In response Mr Behbahani argued that the  correct  approach  the  judge
    should have adopted was to look at intention  in  the  sense  of  going
    forward rather than by looking at previous conduct.





11. The head note to Sawmynaden states:-

         "(i) There is no restriction on the number of visits a  person  may
             make to the UK, nor any requirement that a specified time must
             elapse between successive visits.

         (ii) The periods of time  spent  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
             country of residence will always be important.

         (iii)    Both the expressed purpose  of  the  visit  and  what  the
             appellant has done in the past and intends to do in the future
             is material, together with the length of time that has elapsed
             since previous visits.  In cases of this type,  the  appellant
             will be visiting a relative, often a parent visiting a son  or
             daughter, often a son or daughter visiting a parent.   In  the
             case of a parent visiting a son or daughter, the  parent  will
             often fully participate in helping  in  the  house,  providing
             child care.  In the case of  a  son  or  daughter  visiting  a
             parent,  the  adult  child   will   often   assist   in   care
             arrangements.  None  of  these  activities,  for  that  reason
             alone, will take the individual outside the  definition  of  a
             genuine visitor.

         (iv) The links that the  appellant  retains  with  her  country  of
             residence will be a material consideration.  The  presence  of
             other family members will be a material consideration.

         (v)  The Tribunal is required to ascertain what is the  reality  of
             the arrangement entered into between  the  appellant  and  the
             host in the United Kingdom.  Is the reality that the appellant
             is resident in the United Kingdom and intends to  be  for  the
             foreseeable future?

         (vi) The issue may be approached by considering whether the reality
             is that the appellant is now no more than  a  visitor  to  her
             country of residence as the purpose  of  the  return  home  is
             confined to using his or her  presence  there  solely  as  the
             means of gaining re-admission to the United Kingdom.

         (vii)    This does not preclude the appellant from remaining in the
             country of residence for the least amount of  time  sufficient
             to maintain her status as a genuine visitor.

         (viii)   Family emergencies, whilst likely to result  in  a  longer
             visit than the established pattern, should not be regarded  as
             taking up residence without adequate  supporting  evidence  to
             that effect.  Thus, the pregnancy of a daughter or daughter-in-
             law or the aftermath  of  the  birth  might  explain  a  more-
             protracted stay (within  the  6-month  duration  of  a  single
             permitted visit); so, too, a serious medical condition.

         (ix) There may be comparisons with the person who owns homes in two
             different countries.  Is he resident in both or a  visitor  to
             one of them?"

12. To the extent that the First-tier Tribunal Judge relied on a version of
    paragraph 41 which came into effect on 6 April 2013  by  reason  of  HC
    1039 I find that that wording postdates the issue  of  the  appellant's
    five year visa  and  relying  on  Odelola  [2009]  UKHL  25  the  judge
    materially erred in dismissing the appellant's appeal  on  that  basis.
    Accordingly the making of the previous decision involved the making  of
    an error on a point of law and in due course I will set it  aside.   It
    is therefore open to me to remake the decision which I do on the agreed
    factual  matrix  as  found   in   the   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge's
    determination.

13. In so doing  I  reject  Mr  Behbahani's  submission  that  the  correct
    approach is to look forward without any reference  to  the  appellant's
    previous conduct.  I am aware of  factors  to  be  taken  into  account
    including those highlighted by Ms Kenny in the head note to  Sawmynaden
    and in particular the fact that periods of time  spent  in  the  United
    Kingdom in the country of residence will always be important, the  fact
    that the express purpose of the visit and what the appellant  has  done
    in the past and intends to do in the future is material  together  with
    the length of time that has elapsed since previous visits, the  reality
    of the arrangement entered into between the appellant and the  host  in
    the United Kingdom, whether the issue may be approached by  considering
    whether the reality is that the appellant is now no more than a visitor
    to his country of residence as  the  purpose  of  the  return  home  is
    confined to using his or her presence there  solely  as  the  means  to
    gaining re-admission to the United Kingdom.

14. On the factual matrix here I accept all  the  submissions  made  by  Ms
    Kenny in relation to these issues and  consider  these  to  be  factors
    which are material in assessing whether  this  appellant  is  genuinely
    seeking entry as a general visitor for the limited time stated by  him,
    not exceeding six months and intends to leave the United Kingdom at the
    end of the period of the visit as stated by him.  This is an  appellant
    who on his own admission spent the  majority  of  time  in  the  United
    Kingdom over a considerable period  of  time  and  admits  having  been
    living in the United Kingdom.

15. I find this is  an  appellant  who  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 41 insofar as he is a genuine visitor who  intends  to  leave
    the United Kingdom at the end of the period of his visit as  stated  by
    him.





Notice of Decision

I remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 23 February 2015.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
