
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28381/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25th April 2014                            |On 15th May 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                    miss Kemisha Chantelle Shena Plummer

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Poynor of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born on 25th August 1982.

2.   The appellant sought to remain in the United Kingdom on  the  basis  of
    her long residence.  That application was refused by the respondent  in
    a detailed decision of 24th June 2013, when a decision  to  remove  the
    appellant from the jurisdiction was also made.

3.   The appellant sought to appeal against that decision which appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Vaudin  d'Imecourt  on  14th  January
    2014.

4.   The appeal was presented to the Judge as can be seen from the  skeleton
    argument, on the basis that the appellant had been lawfully resident in
    the United Kingdom for in excess of ten years and therefore fell to  be
    granted leave to remain under paragraph 276B of the Immigration  Rules.



5.   The Judge was not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  been  lawfully
    resident for that period and dismissed that appeal.  He also  dismissed
    the appeal in respect of Article 8 of the ECHR.

6.   A complaint is made however in the grounds of  appeal  that  the  Judge
    failed to address the decision made by the respondent  under  paragraph
    276ADE, in particular 276ADE(1)(vi), namely to analyse whether  or  not
    the appellant had any ties to Jamaica.  It was further argued that  the
    Judge had misunderstood the number of occasions that the appellant  had
    been to Jamaica in any event.

7.   Leave to appeal was granted on that basis.  It  is  understandable  why
    the  Judge  should  focus  upon  long  residence,  as  under  the   old
    Immigration Rules, because that was the basis of the argument which was
    addressed to him both in the skeleton argument and in submissions.

8.   Paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules  had  been  considered  by  the
    respondent in detail in the reasons for refusal letter and thus  it  is
    entirely right that findings should be made upon that.

9.   The respondent however  went  on  to  consider  the  matter  under  the
    current Immigration Rules, in particular paragraph 276ADE.

10.  It seems to me, therefore, that it was  incumbent  upon  the  Judge  to
    have acknowledged that fact and indeed to have made findings upon it.

11.  What seems not to be in issue is that generally speaking the  appellant
    would meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE with the exception of:-



         "(vi)    is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously  in  the
             UK for less than  twenty  years  (discounting  any  period  of
             imprisonment) but has no ties (including social,  cultural  or
             family) with the country to which  he  would  have  to  go  if
             required to leave the UK."

12.  It was not accepted in the reasons for refusal that the  appellant  had
    severed all ties with the country.   Therefore the issue of  ties  with
    Jamaica was an important  and  key  factor  to  be  considered  in  the
    determination.

13.  Mr Nath, who represents the respondent, sought to argue that the  Judge
    had made sustainable findings on the issue of ties and  therefore  that
    it was academic that he had not considered 276ABD because the appellant
    would have been unable to satisfy that requirement in  any  event.   He
    argues that, although the Judge may have been in error in  not  dealing
    specifically with that Rule, there has been no material irregularity in
    the outcome.

14.  Ms Poynor, who represents the appellant,  argued  that  had  the  Judge
    realised the importance of that issue to  the  outcome  of  appeal,  he
    would have been more focused upon it.  In any event there  were  errors
    involved  in  the  findings  that  were  made.   Paragraph  41  of  the
    determination said that  her  application  showed  that  the  appellant
    visited Jamaica on a number of occasions between  March  2008  and  May
    2011.  In fact the application gave the date of her absences  from  the
    United Kingdom but did not specify where the visits were  to  be  made.
    Only on one occasion was that a holiday in Jamaica as can be seen  from
    her passport.  Other occasions were holidays to Portugal skiing and  to
    Greece.

15.  The determination is a detailed and careful one.  No  issue  was  taken
    as to the findings made as to long residence under the old  Immigration
    Rules.  The real   concern  is  to  what  extent  the  new  Rules  were
    considered and the outcomes of the same properly dealt with.

16.  It seems to me as a matter of procedural fairness that element  of  the
    respondent's  decision,  which  dealt  with  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules, should have  been  specifically  considered  by  the
    Judge, particularly when there would seem to be one live issue standing
    between the refusal and the grant, namely whether or not the  appellant
    had ties to Jamaica.

17.  In the case of Olufisayo Olatuboshun Ogundimu v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2013] UKUT 00060  (IAC)  it  was  found  that  the
    natural and ordinary meaning of the  word  "ties"  in  the  Immigration
    Rules imports a concept involving something more than merely remote  or
    abstract links to the country  of  proposed  removal.   It  involves  a
    rounded assessment of all the relevant circumstances and is not  to  be
    limited to "social, cultural and family" circumstances.  I find that in
    the circumstances of this particular case that degree of attention  was
    not forthcoming.  Had the  Judge  realised  the  significance  of  that
    issue, I have no doubt that he, being a very experienced  Judge,  would
    have focused more particularly on that issue.

18.  Clearly there is some evidence on that matter  but  it  was  considered
    more in the context of an Article 8 application, rather than a specific
    requirement under the Rules.  In such circumstances the evidence may be
    less extensive than otherwise might be the case.  This is  particularly
    so if compounded by the error on the number of visits made to  Jamaica.
    It is common ground that the appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  in
    March 2002 and generally has remained  since  that  time.   Her  mother
    remains in Jamaica and she has a number of aunts living in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It is noted in the  course  of  the  determination  that  the
    appellant has developed strong ties with her Aunt Angela,  particularly
    now that her father died in August of last year.

19.  The finding that the appellant may be  a  highly  qualified  individual
    who could find employment in  Jamaica  and  who  may  be  able  to  re-
    establish her private life in Jamaica, does not address the  issues  of
    ties which is the focus of the decision in Ogundimu.

20.  In the circumstances, therefore, I  consider  particularly  by  way  of
    procedural fairness that the decision  should  be  set  aside  although
    certain of the findings are to be retained.  Ms Poynor,  on  behalf  of
    the appellant, accepted that there was no error in the  approach  taken
    by the Judge to the long residence provisions as set out  in  276B  and
    therefore the findings of that matter should be  preserved.   Similarly
    the  detailed  evidence  of  many  witnesses   is   recorded   in   the
    determination.  There was no challenge  to  their  credibility  and  no
    doubt therefore that evidence can be adopted upon any rehearing.

21.  In the circumstances I indicate that there should  be  a  rehearing  of
    the appeal focused particularly upon 276ADE and upon Article 8  of  the
    ECHR.

22.  As to 276ADE it is my reading from the refusal decision that  the  only
    issue that is joined between the appellant and the respondent was  that
    she has no ties with Jamaica.  I cannot find any  indication  that  she
    fails to meet the requirements otherwise set  out  in  the  Rule.   If,
    however, it is  to  be  the  contention  of  the  respondent  that  the
    appellant fails to meet other ingredients of the Rules such  that  even
    were a decision made in her favour on ties that would not  resolve  the
    issue, notification of that position and  the  reasons  why  should  be
    given to all parties without delay and certainly no  later  than  three
    weeks before the hearing.

23.  I would expect also that there be further evidence from  the  appellant
    or other sources as to her links with Jamaica.  It would  be  necessary
    to examine the wider family profile, particularly the relations of  her
    aunt who remain in Jamaica or indeed  relatives  of  her  parents.   It
    would be helpful, therefore, to have some detailed evidence  about  the
    lifestyle of her mother and her family and of the links that they  have
    with the community in Jamaica.  Such evidence should be served no later
    than five days prior to the hearing.  The hearing is scheduled to  take
    place on 31st July 2014.

24.  It will also be helpful to maintain that time estimate, that  there  be
    a limitation as to the number of witnesses who are to be called to give
    oral evidence.  As I have indicated, a number gave evidence  which  was
    recorded in the determination.  Unless they wish to give  substantially
    different evidence to that which was given before, I see no reason  why
    those relevant paragraphs in the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Vaudin d'Imecourt should not  be  incorporated  as  part  of  the
    evidence in this appeal.  That would save time and save the unnecessary
    attendance of witnesses to repeat that which they have already given.

25.  Any further directions should be issued from the  First-tier  Tribunal.



26.  I send the matter back for rehearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    having regard  to  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Directions and the necessity  to  make  primary  findings  of  fact  on
    important issues.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
