
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/28372/2013
                                                               IA/45150/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th September 2015               |On 4th November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                     mrs savitri parey (first appellant)
                     mrs david parey (second appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss E King, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Trinidad and Tobago born respectively on
    14th January 1980  and  13th  March  1975.   This  matter  has  a  very
    extensive history.  The actual issues of which are  set  out  in  great
    detail in previous determinations  and  in  particular  the  First-tier
    Tribunal determination of Judge  MPW  Harris  promulgated  from  Hatton
    Cross on 1st October 2014.  That determination allowed the  Appellants'
    appeals pursuant to Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  of  Human
    Rights.  Judge Harris noted that the credibility of the Appellants  had
    not been challenged by the Respondents in  the  appeals  and  that  the
    second Appellant's case was dependent upon that of the first Appellant.
     Judge Harris found at paragraph 40 of  his  determination  that  there
    were such compelling  circumstances  arising  from  the  delay  of  the
    Respondent as to render her decisions in respect of the first Appellant
    to be disproportionate and in breach of Article 8 and on that basis her
    appeal was allowed.  Thereafter he analysed at paragraphs 42 to 58  the
    position of the second Appellant and made a similar finding.

 2. On 1st October 2014 Grounds of Appeal were lodged by the  Secretary  of
    State to the Upper  Tribunal  and  on  12th  November  2014  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge McDade granted permission to appeal.  Judge McDade noted
    that the grounds of application for permission to appeal asserted  that
    the Judge was not justified  in  finding  delay  on  the  part  of  the
    Secretary of State as a basis to allow  the  appeals.   The  Respondent
    asserted that there was no such delay and that the Judge was  therefore
    not justified in allowing the appeals  as  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances to engage Article 8 private and family life.

 3. A  very  detailed  Part  24  response  was  filed  and  served  by  the
    Appellants.  That Rule 24 response effectively constituted  a  skeleton
    argument and analysed the meaning of delay, the evidence regarding  the
    process  of  the  application   and   its   outcome   and   exceptional
    circumstances.  The Rule 24 response pointed out  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had now on two occasions  found  that  the  feature  in  these
    appeals of the delay in the  consideration  of  the  first  Appellant's
    application leading to a brief period  without  leave  did  not  render
    removal disproportionate and that was a finding properly  open  to  the
    Judges to conclude.  The matter was quite  properly  thereafter  listed
    for consideration as to whether there was a material error  of  law  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge before the Upper Tribunal
    and the appeal came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly sitting at
    Field  House  on  16th  December  2014.   In  a  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 15th January the appeal of the Secretary  of  State  was
    allowed to the extent that the Judge found a material error of  law  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and Judge Kelly quite  properly
    went on to indicate that the matter would  be  retained  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal and to be reheard following a further hearing.

 4. It is appropriate to note the view expressed at paragraph 17  of  Judge
    Kelly's error of law finding and to set it out:

         "Nevertheless, following a careful analysis of  the  evidence,  the
         Tribunal made findings of fact that are not  challenged  and  which
         should therefore be preserved.  I  do  not  therefore  consider  it
         appropriate to remit the matter to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
         complete rehearing.  On the other hand, I consider that it would be
         inappropriate for the Upper Tribunal to decide the  appeal  without
         conducting a further hearing of its own.  This is because,  despite
         the number of hearings that have taken place  already,  there  does
         not appear to have been  any  significant  investigation  into  the
         question of the  Respondent's  social  and  family  connections  to
         Trinidad, or to the extent to which they might face difficulties in
         reintegrating into the society  of  their  country  of  origin.   I
         therefore direct that there be  a  further  hearing  in  the  Upper
         Tribunal, with a time estimate of one and a half  hours,  at  which
         the Respondents may present further evidence."

 5. The matter was therefore relisted for hearing  and  then  unfortunately
    had a chequered history in that there were adjournments on  15th  April
    and 14th May before the matter came back yet again before  Judge  Kelly
    on 14th July.  However at that hearing it  was  not  possible  for  the
    appeal to be reheard but  the  appeal  did  take  a  slight  change  of
    direction.  Firstly it was conceded by the Secretary of State that  the
    second Respondent Mr David Parey now met the requirements of  paragraph
    276B(i) of the Immigration Rules and secondly directions were given  as
    follows:

      i) The resumed hearing of the appeals do  stand  adjourned  until  the
         first available date after 8th September 2015.

     ii) The Appellant (and I note that of  course  the  Appellant  in  this
         matter is the Secretary of State) shall given written notice to the
         Respondents (i.e. Mr and Mrs Parey) and  to  the  Tribunal  of  any
         reason or reasons why it is said that

          a) the second Respondent (David Parey) ought not  to  be  granted
             leave to remain by reference to  sub-paragraphs  276B(ii)  and
             (iii) of the Immigration Rules and/or

          b) the first Respondent ought not to be granted leave  to  remain
             as the dependant of the second Respondent.  This direction  is
             to be complied with by 25th August 2015.

    iii) In the event that the Appellant does not comply with the  direction
         in paragraph 2 above the Tribunal may assume  that  the  Respondent
         does not have any objection to leave to remain being granted on the
         above basis to either or both of the Appellants.

 6. It is on that basis that the appeal comes back before  me  for  further
    consideration.  I note that this is an appeal by the Secretary of State
    but for the purpose of continuity throughout the appeal process I refer
    to Mr and Mrs Parey herein as the Appellants and the Secretary of State
    as the Respondent.  The Appellants appear by their  instructed  Counsel
    Miss King.  Miss King is familiar with this matter having  appeared  on
    several occasions before the Tribunal and is also  the  author  of  the
    Rule 24 response.  The Secretary of State appears by  her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Kandola.

Submissions/Discussions

 7. Miss King starts by  pointing  out  that  this  is  supposed  to  be  a
    substantive rehearing and that  Mr  Parey  meets  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules and that he should  be  granted
    indefinite leave to remain thereunder on the grounds of long  residence
    on the basis that he has had at  least  ten  years'  continuous  lawful
    residence in the United Kingdom and that there are no  public  interest
    reasons  why  he  should  not  be  allowed  to  remain.    Mr   Kandola
    acknowledges that Mr Parey has no dependants  and  that  there  are  no
    adverse conduct issues and acknowledges on behalf of the  Secretary  of
    State that Mr Parey's application can be allowed under the  Immigration
    Rules.  His concern relates to that of the first  Appellant  Mrs  Parey
    pointing out that she needs to meet the requirements of Appendix FM-SE.
     He points out that Mrs Parey is able to make a fresh application under
    paragraph FM-SE within 28 days and that she has a remedy in-country.

 8. Miss King accepts that that is an accurate reflection and that it would
    be open to Mrs Parey to apply as a dependant.  However she  points  out
    the basis upon which this appeal was brought back before  the  Tribunal
    today and that there is no reason why the appeal cannot  proceed  today
    pursuant to Article 8.

 9. Mr Kandola challenges that pointing out that Mrs Parey had applied  for
    indefinite leave to remain and she now wishes  to  switch  pursuant  to
    Section 120 grounds but that she cannot succeed today as she  does  not
    have the evidence.  He points out that I am being asked  to  allow  the
    appeal under Article 8 and that the basis upon which I am  being  asked
    to allow is not a compelling reason.

10. Miss King indicates that as an alternative it would be  appropriate  to
    give directions that the matter can be addressed and dealt  with  under
    the Immigration Rules.  She points out that Appendix FM-SE requirements
    including the provision of bank statements and payslips  for  the  past
    six months.  Mr Kandola indicates that he would  be  content  for  this
    matter to be dealt with on the papers in an attempt to avoid having  to
    bring this matter back before the Tribunal for yet another hearing.

Findings and Directions

11. The history of this matter is extensive.  However the basis upon  which
    this matter came back before the Upper Tribunal has changed since Judge
    Kelly gave his directions.  Firstly it  is  accepted  that  Mr  Parey's
    appeal should be allowed under the  Immigration  Rules.   Secondly  the
    question thereafter arises as to whether or not  the  first  Appellant,
    Mrs Savitri Parey,  could  have  her  appeal  dealt  with  pursuant  to
    Appendix FM-SE of the Immigration Rules as a family member of Mr  Parey
    or  whether  she  should  proceed  under   Article   8.    Both   legal
    representatives are in agreement that the more logical approach  is  to
    accept Mrs Parey's appeal be addressed under Appendix FM-SE as a family
    member rather than under Article 8 and it is agreed that  whilst  there
    is no objection to that raised by Mr Kandola on behalf of the Secretary
    of State the evidence is not there today for this to take place.  I  am
    agreeable that such a course of action should take place.   I  am  also
    conscious of the fact that despite Judge Kelly's direction no  evidence
    was served by the Secretary of State to Mr Parey being granted leave to
    remain by reference to paragraph 276B  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    indeed that is orally confirmed today by Mr Kandola.  On that basis  it
    seems appropriate for the appeal of the first Appellant to be addressed
    pursuant to Appendix FM rather than pursuant to Article 8.  I thus make
    orders and directions accordingly.

Decision and Directions

12. The appeal of the second Appellant is  allowed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

13. That the appeal of the first Appellant be  addressed  pursuant  to  the
    Immigration Rules on the basis that the Appellant seeks leave to remain
    in the United Kingdom as a family member pursuant to Appendix FM-SE  of
    the Immigration Rules.

14. That  the  first  Appellant  do,  through  her  solicitors,  serve  the
    Secretary of State within fourteen days of receipt of these  directions
    oral evidence upon which she seeks to rely  in  order  to  satisfy  her
    application with regard to the  financial  requirements  she  needs  to
    address pursuant to Appendix FM-SE of the Immigration Rules.

15. That the Secretary of State do within  ten  days  of  receipt  of  that
    documentation either advise the first Appellant's solicitors that  they
    are satisfied with the evidence and  that  they  will  not  oppose  the
    appeal or they set out their written reasons of objection.

16. That in the event that the Secretary of State is not satisfied that the
    first Appellant meets the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM-SE  that  the
    matter be thereafter  listed  for  further  consideration  reserved  to
    either Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly or Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
    Harris sitting at Field House on  the  first  available  date  28  days
    thereafter with an ELH of two hours.

17.  That  in  the  event  of  the  matter  being  relisted   for   further
    consideration that there be leave to both parties to file and serve  at
    least seven days prehearing further bundles  of  documents  upon  which
    they seek to rely, such bundles to include any skeleton  arguments  and
    authorities.

18. That the application made herein for a  wasted  costs  order  do  stand
    dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
