
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/28372/2013
     ia/45150/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 March 2014                              |On 28 March 2014             |
|Prepared 12 March 2014                        |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              mrs Savitri Parey
                                 David Parey

                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms E King, of Counsel instructed by The Sethi
Partnership

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against  decisions  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Dickson and Designated  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Manuell who in  determinations  promulgated  on  13
    December 2013 and 8 January 2014 allowed the  appeals  of  Mrs  Savitri
    Parey and her husband Mr David Parey against decisions of the Secretary
    of State to refuse them leave to remain in Britain.

2.   The appeal of Mrs Savitri Parey was heard first, by Judge Dickson.   He
    allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.  Because Mrs Parey's appeal
    had been allowed on human rights  grounds  Judge  Manuell  allowed  the
    appeal of Mr Parey.

3.   Mrs Parey came to Britain as a visitor  in  June  2002  and  thereafter
    made various applications for leave to remain as a  student.   She  was
    eventually granted leave to  remain  until  31  January  2009.   On  30
    January 2009 she made an application for further leave to remain  as  a
    student.  That application was not dealt with promptly by the Secretary
    of State and because Mrs Parey  had  arranged  some  considerable  time
    before to marry Mr Parey in Trinidad and Tobago on 26  July  2009  -  a
    date which had been arranged a  long  time  in  advance  to  suit  both
    families and also because  it  was  an  auspicious  day  in  the  Hindu
    religion - Mrs Parey withdrew her application for leave to remain as  a
    student on 14 July 2009 so she could travel to Trinidad and Tobago  for
    the wedding.

4.   Mrs Parey had met Mr Parey in 2005 and they had  decided  to  marry  in
    October 2008.  Mr Parey had entered Britain as a  working  holidaymaker
    in 2005, had then received a student visa followed by a work permit  in
    2009 which expired in 2012.  After the wedding  they  had  returned  to
    Britain together, Mrs Parey having  received  leave  to  enter  as  the
    spouse of a work permit holder.  Mr Parey had applied for further leave
    to remain in Britain before the expiry of his leave -  his  application
    was based on his being a dependant of Mrs  Parey.   Consequently  after
    her application had been refused on 17 June 2013  his  application  was
    refused on 14 October 2013.

5.   As stated above their appeals were  not  heard  together;  Mrs  Parey's
    appeal was  heard first.

6.   Judge Dickson had before him a  detailed  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter
    relating to Mrs Parey's application for indefinite leave to  remain  on
    the basis of her legal residence in Britain for ten years.  The refusal
    was focussed on the fact that she had left  Britain  on  19  July  2009
    without existing leave to remain and had then  returned  on  17  August
    2009 as a visitor with leave until 17 February  2010  but  that  on  15
    February 2010 she had left Britain with existing leave returning  on  2
    April 2010 with entry clearance as a spouse  until  8  May  2013.   Her
    application for indefinite leave to remain had been  made  on  24  July
    2012.  Under the provisions of paragraph 276B she had to show that  she
    had had ten years' continuous lawful residence  in  Britain  and  under
    paragraph 276A(a) continuous residence  and  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom  for  a  unbroken  period  although  a  period  should  not  be
    considered to have broken where an applicant  would  have  been  absent
    from the United Kingdom for a period of six months or less at  any  one
    time provided that the applicant had had existing  leave  to  enter  or
    remain upon their departure and return.  It was stated  that  when  Mrs
    Parey  had left Britain on 19 July  2009  she  had  returned  within  a
    period of less than six months but she had  not  had  existing  limited
    leave to enter or remain upon departure and therefore  she  had  broken
    her continuous lawful residence and therefore any point  prior  to  her
    departure would not count towards long residence.  She  was  therefore,
    it was considered, unable to demonstrate ten years'  continuous  lawful
    residence and her application was refused.  It was also considered that
    she could not meet the requirements of Article 8 of the ECHR as set out
    in the Immigration Rules.

7.   Judge Dickson referred to the terms of  the  Rules  and  concluded  the
    appellant could not meet the requirements therein.

8.   Without reference to the Rules he also  considered  the  issue  of  Mrs
    Parey's rights under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  under  the  structured
    approach set out in the judgment of the House of Lords in Razgar [2004]
    UKHL 27.

9.   In paragraphs 24 onwards of his determination he set out  his  findings
    of fact and conclusions.  In paragraph 28 he stated:-

         "The appellant told Miss Harris (Mrs Parey's Counsel) that  she  is
         the manager of a restaurant a part  owner  of  the  business.   She
         referred to the bundle of documents concerning her student studies.
          She has also worked as a part-time administrator".

10.  He noted that there were good reasons why Mr and Mrs Parey  had  wanted
    to get married in Trinidad and Tobago, that they had expected that  Mrs
    Parey would have leave to remain by the time the wedding took place but
    that having made the arrangements she felt compelled  to  withdraw  the
    application and then return.  In paragraphs 33, 34 and 35  he  set  out
    his conclusions as follows:-

         "33. Miss Harris submitted that the Home Office should  have  dealt
             with  the  application  before  the  Appellant  departed   for
             Trinidad and  Tobago  in  July  2009.   She  referred  to  the
             withdrawal of the application by the  Appellant  as  'a  small
             disproportionate  glitch'.    I   would   agree   with   these
             submissions.  However 'continuous residence' is defined  under
             paragraph 276A.  It states  that  continuous  residence  means
             residence in the United Kingdom for an unbroken period and  if
             the applicant is absent from the United Kingdom for  a  period
             of six months or less,  it  shall  not  be  considered  broken
             provided that the applicant had existing  leave  to  enter  or
             remain upon his or her departure and return.  In this case  as
             the Appellant had withdrawn her application, she had no  leave
             to remain in the United Kingdom after 31st January 2009.


         34.  With regard to the human rights claim it is quite  clear  that
             while the  Appellant  cannot  succeed  under  the  Immigration
             Rules, she and her husband have a strong  family  and  private
             life.  It is relevant  that  they  would  have  qualified  for
             indefinite leave to remain had it not been  for  the  dilatory
             and unacceptable behaviour of UKBA.  It is quite apparent that
             both the Appellant and her husband have at all times  complied
             with the immigration requirements of the United Kingdom.  They
             are hardworking members of  the  community.   The  Appellant's
             husband hopes to qualify as  an  accountant  within  the  next
             twelve months and they both  wish  to  remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom where they have many family members and friends.


         35.  It is an extremely strong  Article  8  claim.   I  have  quite
             satisfied that the Appellant has a private and family life and
             the interference has consequences of such gravity as to engage
             the operation of Article 8.  On any balancing exercise, I find
             that   the   interference   is    wholly    unnecessary    and
             disproportionate having regard to the particular circumstances
             of this case."

11.  Designated Judge Manuell, when dealing with  Mr  Parey's  case  on  the
    papers allowed his appeal for the sole reason that Mrs  Parey's  appeal
    had been allowed.

12.  The respondent appealed, emphasising that the Immigration Rules were  a
    detailed expression of government policy on controlling immigration and
    protecting the public and that  the  Rules  now  showed  how  "broadly"
    public policy considerations are weighed against individual family  and
    private life rights in assessing Article 8 in any individual case.

13.  The grounds asserted, incorrectly, that after the  marriage  Mrs  Parey
    had delayed for six months,  until  April  2010,  before  returning  to
    Britain.  That assertion, Ms Isherwood, accepted, was completely wrong.

14.  It was stated that the judge had been wrong to refer to  the  delay  in
    dealing with Mrs Parey's  application  for  an  extension  of  stay  as
    "dilatory and unacceptable" - a number of cases relating to delay  were
    listed  - before it was asserted that there was a material misdirection
    in law and that the judge  had  failed  to  point  to  any  exceptional
    factors which meant that it was appropriate to allow the  appeal  under
    Article 8 when the appeal  had  not  succeeded  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

15.  Before the hearing a Rule 24 response was submitted.  That referred  to
    the finding of Blake J in MM [2013] EWHC 1900 (Admin) and the  judgment
    of the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192,  the first
    of which had stated that the "exceptional circumstances" route was  not
    sufficient to render the decision making process lawful in an Article 8
    case and the second of  which  stated  that  exceptional  circumstances
    might render deportation disproportionate notwithstanding  the  failure
    to meet the criteria set out in paragraphs 339 and  339A of the  Rules.
    It was argued that EX.1 did not adequately reflect the jurisprudence of
    Article 8 with relation to  delay  and  that  there  was  case  law  to
    indicate  that  an  Article  8  assessment  should  be    carried   out
    independently from how closely an appellant came to meeting the  Rules.
    It was argued that the judgment in Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720  considered
    that EX.1 did not contain a complete  code  for  the  consideration  of
    proportionality of removal.  It was submitted the judge had taken  into
    account all relevant factors making findings that were properly open to
    him and given adequate  reasons  for  his  findings  particularly  with
    regard to when Mrs Parey had left Britain and returned.  He had reached
    proper conclusions on the issue of  delay.   It  was  argued  that  the
    grounds of appeal were wrong in that Mrs Parey had had 3C  leave  after
    she had made her application in January 2009.  It was argued  therefore
    that there was no material error of law.

16.  At the hearing before me Ms Isherwood relied on the grounds  of  appeal
    with the exception that the assertion that Mrs Parey had  left  Britain
    in July 2009 and not returned until April 2010 was wrong.  However  she
    stated the fact was that that Mrs Parey had not  had  leave  to  remain
    when she had left the country and indeed that she had come  back  in  a
    totally different capacity.  She pointed out that there was nothing  in
    the evidence to support the belief by the  judge  that  Mrs  Parey  had
    formed a business here and she  said  that  he  had  clearly  erred  in
    considering the issue of  Article  8  under  the  Rules.   He  had  not
    explained how the Article 8 rights of Mrs  Parey  outweighed  the  fact
    that she did not qualify for leave to remain outside  the  Rules.   She
    referred to the determination of the Tribunal in Gulshan (Article  8  -
    new Rules -  correct  approach)  Pakistan  [2013]  UKUT  640  where  at
    paragraph 24 the Tribunal had stated that

         "(b) after applying the requirements of the Rules,  only  if  there
             may arguably be good grounds  for  granting  leave  to  remain
             outside them is it necessary for Article 8 purposes to  go  on
             to  consider  whether   compelling   circumstances   are   not
             sufficiently recognised under them."

    She stated moreover that there  was  no  indication  of  insurmountable
    obstacles to  family  life  taking  place  elsewhere.   There  were  no
    compelling circumstances which should mean that the appellant should be
    allowed to remain given that Mrs Parey had been in Britain as a student
    with no legitimate expectation of leave to remain and  that  thereafter
    she had been treated as the dependant of her husband when he was a work
    permit holder.

17.  In reply Ms King stated that the judge had  properly  directed  himself
    on the law setting out the  relevant  requirements  of  the  Rules  and
    dealing carefully with the relevant test.  He was clearly aware that it
    was only in the small minority of cases that the Article 8 rights of an
    appellant would outweigh the fact that an appellant did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules.  She stated that the judge was  entitled  to
    place weight on the delay and it  has  it  not  been  argued  that  the
    judge's findings of facts were wrong.  Indeed the  conclusions  of  the
    judge were open to him.  She refers to  the  Immigration  Directorate's
    Instructions on long residence suggesting that a gap of less  than  180
    days should not be taken into account.  The  appellants  had  built  up
    private life here and the judge was correct to find that that should be
    respected.

Discussion

18.  I consider that there are material errors of law in  the  determination
    of  Judge  Dickson  when  he  dealt  with  the  consideration  of   the
    proportionality of the removal of Mrs Parey.   He  did  not  take  into
    account the factor that Mrs Parey had been in Britain as a student with
    no expectation of indefinite leave to remain and indeed that  Mr  Parey
    had been in Britain as a work permit holder again with  no  expectation
    of leave to remain.  He did not assess the circumstances  in  which  Mr
    and Mrs Parey are now living.  He appears to have accepted an assertion
    that Mrs Parey was working but there seemed to be no evidence  to  back
    up the fact that that was the case - the only evidence relating to  her
    work which is on the file relates to periods of  employment  while  she
    had been studying here.  The judge did not enquire as to whether or not
    Mr Parey had worked or indeed how the couple supported  themselves.   I
    consider without a full evaluation of the facts of the case he was  not
    entitled merely to consider that the fact that an  application  for  an
    extension of stay had not been dealt with promptly by the Secretary  of
    State - although there is evidence on the file that  the  Secretary  of
    State was asking for further information regarding Mrs Parey's  studies
    - was a reason to  find  that  because  Mrs  Parey  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules it would be appropriate for her to be granted
    leave to remain on Article 8 grounds.  Without a full assessment of the
    circumstances of both Mr and Mrs Parey I cannot see how he  could  have
    concluded that Mrs Parey's removal would be disproportionate.

19.  Similarly the determination of Judge Manuell does not  appear  to  take
    into account any information before him other than the  fact  that  Mrs
    Parey's appeal had been allowed.  The fact  that  Mrs  Parey  had  been
    allowed  to  remain  would  not  automatically  entitle  Mr  Parey   to
    permission to remain - there appeared to be no evidence  considered  by
    Judge Manuell as to how Mr Parey could have met the requirements of the
    Rules.

20.  I therefore consider that the decisions in both  determinations  should
    be set aside.

21.  I do have some sympathy with Mrs Parey  given  that  she  withdrew  her
    application for an extension of stay as a student because  she  had  to
    travel and I can fully understand why she did not want or indeed  could
    not  have  changed  her  wedding  arrangements.   I  therefore  do  not
    substitute my own decision dismissing this  appeal  as  I  consider  it
    appropriate that there should be a full consideration of  all  relevant
    factors in this case including the work being undertaken by Mrs  Parey,
    her qualifications, whether or not Mr  Parey  has  any  opportunity  to
    continue working here and indeed the life which they have built up here
    over the last few years.  I therefore consider that it  is  appropriate
    that in this case the appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  for  a
    hearing afresh in that I  consider  that  the  provisions  of  Practice
    Directions  7.2  of  the  Senior  President  of   Tribunal's   Practice
    Directions are met.


Decision

This appeal is allowed to the limited extent that  it  is  remitted  to  the
First-tier for hearing afresh on all issues.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

