

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: ia/28316/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 May 2013                                |On 4 June 2013               |
|Prepared 31 May 2013                          |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



                                 ROMA SARWAR
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


For the appellant:           Ms Tanner, Presenting Officer
For the respondent:          Mrs S Ali, Counsel, instructed by Shezad Sajid


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, who was not represented before the  First-tier,  appeals
    with permission against the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Adio promulgated on 8 April 2013 allowing the respondent's appeal
    against the decision of the appellant  made  on  21  November  2012  to
    refuse to vary her leave  to  remain  and  to  remove  her  by  way  of
    directions pursuant to  section  47  of  the  immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The respondent is a citizen of Pakistan. She most recently entered  the
    United Kingdom with leave to remain as a student on  25  October  2008.
    Her mother has indefinite leave to remain here, as has her brother. Her
    sister also lived here. Her father, his second wife and their  children
    live in Italy.  It is her case that she has established a private  life
    in the United Kingdom and also a family life with her  mother  who  has
    cared for her all her life. She has no family  to  look  after  her  in
    Pakistan, and has few ties there. She submitted  that  in  consequence,
    her removal to Pakistan would be in  breach  of  the  United  Kingdom's
    obligations pursuant to article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

 3. The appellant refused the application on the basis that the family life
    claimed did not constitute family life as set out in Appendix FM of the
    Immigration Rules and  that  she  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules.

 4. On appeal against that decision, the  judge  heard  evidence  from  the
    respondent and submissions from Mrs Ali. The appellant did not  attend,
    and there is no indication that she made any further submissions.

 5. The judge allowed the appeal, finding that:

      i) The respondent's immediate family were all  living  in  the  United
         Kingdom [8];


     ii) The respondent did not meet the requirements of paragraph  276  ADE
         [9], finding that she had cultural ties to Pakistan as well as some
         relatives with whom she was not on good terms;

    iii) The respondent has a private life in the United Kingdom [10];

     iv) The respondent has a family life in the United  Kingdom  [11]  with
         her mother, is not living an independent life, and that her  mother
         has  (apart  form  3  years)  always  been  responsible   for   her
         upbringing;

      v) Removing the respondent to Pakistan would interfere with her  right
         to  respect  for  her   private   and   family   life   which   was
         disproportionate to the legitimate aim of removing her [14,15]

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal against that decision on  the
    grounds that:

      i) The judge had erred in failing to give adequate reasons for finding
         that the respondent's article 8 rights would be infringed; that she
         had had no legitimate expectation of  remaining  her  indefinitely;
         and, the judge had failed to identify any private life  rights  she
         had established at the date of hearing.


     ii) The judge had erred in finding that the respondent had  established
         a family life, no compassionate circumstances being put forward  to
         show established ties over and above emotional ties; and, erred  by
         placing inordinate weight  on  the  respondent's  mother's  witness
         statement.

    iii) The judge had been inconsistent in finding that the respondent  had
         not  severed  all  ties  in  Pakistan  and  so  did  not  meet  the
         requirements of paragraph 276 ADE, and his findings at paragraph 13
         (corrected to paragraph 9 by Ms Tanner); that the respondent  would
         be able to re-establish links  with  family  members  in  Pakistan,
         would not be a single woman without family support,  and  would  be
         returning to live in the same circumstances as before. It  is  also
         claimed that  the  judge  failed  to  give  proper  weight  to  the
         respondent's legitimate aim in maintaining immigration control.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Parkes on 25 April 2013.

Did the determination of the First-tier Tribunal involve the  making  of  an
error of law?


 8. Ms Tanner sought to expand the grounds of appeal, seeking to argue that
    the judge had erred in failing to take into account the nature  of  the
    appellant's leave to remain  in  assessing  proportionality;  and,  had
    erred in failing to take a two-stage approach to that assessment, first
    under the immigration rules, and then whether, following  the  guidance
    published by UKBA, there are exceptional circumstances, the  appellants
    case being that exceptional means that  there  would  be  unjustifiable
    harshness in removing in an individual.

 9. I do not accept that  it  is  implicit  within  the  grounds  that  the
    appellant's challenge to the assessment of proportionality should  have
    taken into account the nature of  the  respondent's  leave  to  remain.
    While her leave is mentioned [1] that is in the context of  her  having
    no legitimate expectation of remaining her indefinitely.

10. Further, no prior application was made to amend the grounds  of  appeal
    was made, nor had the proposed amendments been reduced to  writing,  or
    prior notice of this given to the respondent. I was not satisfied that,
    in all the circumstances of this case, particularly when the  appellant
    had elected not to be represented before the First-tier Tribunal,  that
    it was in the interests of  justice  to  permit  an  amendment  of  the
    grounds of appeal.

Ground 1

11. There is no merit  in  this  ground.  The  judge  identified  that  the
    respondent had established some private life here [10], but the  appeal
    was allowed on the  basis  of  his  finding  that  the  respondent  had
    established a family life in the United Kingdom.  It  is  not,  in  the
    light of MF (Article 8 - new  rules)  Nigeria  [2012]  UKUT  00393(IAC)
    properly arguable that paragraph 276 ADE  is  the  end  point  for  the
    consideration of any private life.

Ground 2

12. While I note Ms Tanner's submission that the judge failed  properly  to
    have regard to the decision in Kugathas, it is nonetheless evident from
    his consideration of the facts of this case that he had had  regard  to
    and had applied the principles set out in Gurung & Ors  v  SSHD  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 8 (applying in that respect Ghising (family life -  article  8
    Gurkha policy) Nepal  [2012]  UKUT  160  9IAC)).   The  judge  directed
    himself properly as to the factors to be considered,  and  reached  the
    conclusion open to him that  the  respondent's  family  life  with  her
    mother had not yet ceased, and indeed continued,  taking  into  account
    the particular circumstances of the case [11,12]. The  submission  that
    he should not have placed so  much  weight  on  the  statement  of  the
    respondent's mother is simply an argument about weight which could  and
    should have been made to the judge, and again, has no merit. Weight was
    a matter for the judge, and it is not arguable that  on  the  facts  of
    this case, the weight attached to family life was open to him.

Ground 3

13. I consider that there is, in reality, no inconsistency with the finding
    that the requirements of paragraph  276  ADE  are  not  made  out,  yet
    finding  that  the  appellant  cannot  proportionately  be  removed  to
    Pakistan. As noted above, paragraph 276ADE sets out a  particular  view
    of what constitutes a private life; the learning on  this  matter  from
    the relevant case law which the judge was bound to follow  demonstrates
    that this goes wider.  Further,  as  is  noted  above,  this  case  was
    determined primarily on the basis of a finding of family life, and thus
    any error, if it existed, cannot properly be said to be material.

14.  This  ground   in   effect   challenges   the   judge's   finding   on
    proportionality, yet the points made about the respondent being able to
    re-establish herself in Pakistan were not put in the refusal letter, or
    in any other submissions to the judge. Had she  wished  to  make  these
    points, she could have done so, but, as noted above, she elected not to
    attend the hearing or make  any  written  submissions.   The  appellate
    stage is not the place in which a party can seek to  make  points  that
    should have been made below.

15. It is evident from the determination that, contrary to the  submissions
    made, the judge did take into account the legitimate aim of maintaining
    immigration control [14, 15].  Further, as noted above,  the  appellant
    had not accepted that family life had been established, and had made no
    submissions in the alternative, were that conclusion not to be made. It
    is not properly arguable that, on the facts of  this  case,  the  judge
    erred  in  placing  insufficient  weight  on  the  legitimate  aim   of
    maintaining immigration control.

16. In conclusion, the it is evident from the determination that the  judge
    directed himself properly as to the law, and reached conclusions which,
    although they are not ones to which I would have come, were open to him
    on the evidence before him and for which he gave adequate reasons.  The
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal therefore did not involve  the
    making of an error of law and I uphold it.

Summary of conclusions

     1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
        making of an error of law and I uphold it.



Signed                       Date:  30 May 2013


[pic]
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
