

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Promulgated on               |
|On 28 July 2014                               |On 29 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between


                              MYHAMMAD ASIF GUL

                                 ILYAS AHMAD
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms Choudhry of A M Legal Consultants
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. These are appeals against the decision promulgated on 10 February  2014
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Monro which refused the appeal against the
    Secretary of State's decision dated 28  June  2013  refusing  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrants.

 2. The respondent refused the applications as it was not  found  that  the
    appellants had shown that the required amount of finance was  available
    or that these funds were available to be  transferred  to  them.  Those
    points fell away when Judge Monro found in the  appellants'  favour  at
    [15] and [16].

 3.  The  respondent  also  refused   the   applications   as   the   legal
    representative's  letter  provided  did  not   meet   the   documentary
    requirements of the Immigration Rules as it did not confirm the pace of
    issue and dates of issue and expiry of the sponsors' passports.

 4. Also, the third party declaration signed by the third  party  sponsors,
    here the parents of Mr Ahmad, did not also contain  the  signatures  of
    the appellants.

 5. It was common ground at the  hearing  before  me  that  both  of  these
    requirements were contained within the Immigration Rules  in  paragraph
    41 of Appendix A.

 6. Ms Everett conceded for the respondent that the alleged shortcoming  in
    the legal representative's  letter  would  have  fallen  to  have  been
    addressed by the respondent under paragraph 245AA  of  the  Immigration
    Rules if the issue concerning the required funds had  not  led  to  the
    application being refused summarily. The numbers of  the  passports  of
    the sponsors were contained in the third party declaration. Even though
    the required details of the passports were not included  in  the  legal
    representative's letter it was obvious  that  those  details  could  be
    provided if requested. The policy guidance  on  evidential  flexibility
    supported this approach, indicating at page 5 that information of  this
    sort would be requested by the respondent. The dispute  concerning  the
    legal representative's letter therefore also fell away.

 7. The remaining point relates to the signatures of the appellants on  the
    third party declarations. There is no doubt that  the  signatures  were
    not on the third party declaration submitted  to  the  respondent.  The
    appellants maintain  that  they  could  not  have  complied  with  this
    evidential requirement as they were in the  UK  and  the  sponsors  and
    lawyer  attesting  to  the  third  party  declaration  in   the   legal
    representative's letter were in Pakistan. It did not appear to me  that
    the Immigration Rules required the legal representative in Pakistan  to
    be attesting to the signatures of the  appellants,  merely  that  their
    signatures were on the document.  As above, they were not.

 8. It remains the case that the appellants also approached this  issue  in
    another way. Both provided the respondent with an  affidavit  dated  27
    April 2013 containing  their  attested  signatures  and  confirmed  the
    financial arrangements in place with  the  sponsors  for  the  business
    venture in the UK. It was common ground before me that these affidavits
    were before the respondent prior to the date of the decision  and  they
    were included in the respondent's bundle of materials produced for  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing.

 9. It appeared to  me  that,  with  the  additional  affidavits  from  the
    appellants, the respondent had  before  her  the  required  documentary
    details and information as set out in paragraph 41 of Appendix A. If  I
    am wrong on that, the same reasoning that  allowed  the  respondent  to
    accept that the shortcoming in the legal representative's  letter  fell
    to be remedied by a request  in  line  with  paragraph  245AA  and  the
    respondent's guidance on evidential flexibility also appeared to me  to
    apply to the question of the signatures of the appellant's on the third
    party declaration. If I am wrong on that, it was also my view that  the
    discretion  in  paragraph  245AA  (d)  fell  to  be  exercised  by  the
    respondent as the required information  was  available  albeit  in  the
    format of the third party declaration and affidavits of the  appellants
    and, if the outcome of the appeal turned  on  this  point,  the  appeal
    would have to be remitted for the respondent to deal with  this  point.
    The facts here, where the appellant's had  provided  all  the  required
    details prior to the respondent's decision, can be  distinguished  from
    those in the reported case of  Akhter  and  another  (paragraph  245AA;
    wrong format) [2014] UKUT 00297 (IAC). This case therefore turns on its
    own particular facts.

10. For these reasons, I accepted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    finding against the appellants on the legal representative's letter and
    third party declaration not meeting the documentary requirements of the
    Immigration Rules. I set aside that part of the decision,  remaking  it
    as allowed, again for the reasons set out above.

11.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on a  point
    of law and is set aside. I re-make the appeal, allowing  it  under  the
    Immigration Rules.


Signed: [pic]                                         Date: 28 July 2014
UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT










