
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA 28071 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 April 2014                              |On 25th June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                       Mrs Esther Amarachukwu Nwaneri
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     The appellant did not appear and was not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a female citizen of Nigeria against a decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against a decision of the
    Secretary of State to refuse her a residence card as the family  member
    of an EEA national.

 2. The appellant did not appear before me. A message was given to my clerk
    from her former solicitors indicating that they were not acting for her
    but that the appellant would represent herself at  the  hearing  before
    me.  She did not appear but notice of hearing was sent out on  1  April
    2014, and, given the solicitors' comments, I was satisfied that she had
    proper notice of the  hearing  in  accordance  with  the  Rules  and  I
    continued in her absence.

 3. Mr Duffy had to concede that the First-tier Tribunal had made an  error
    of law.  The core problem in the application is that the  Secretary  of
    State did not believe  the  evidence  that  the  EEA  relative  of  the
    applicant was in fact employed as claimed.  The Secretary of State  was
    asking herself if the EEA national was  employed  by  Horizon  Cleaning
    Services which had  been  identified  as  an  employer  on  an  earlier
    occasion.

 4. However, this application  was  not  based  on  employment  at  Horizon
    Cleaning Services but on employment with Biottha Limited.

 5. There is documentation before me in the form of an  employment  letter,
    payslips and matching bank statements indicating that for at least some
    of the time the sponsor was employed by Biottha  Limited.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge appreciated that that was the  sponsor's  case  but
    went on to say that the skeleton argument did not explain

         "how any of the evidence in the  appellant's  bundle  explains  the
         fact that the respondent had been unable to contact the employer at
         the number provided by the sponsor, why that number was ringing out
         as unobtainable why the phone number provided was linked to several
         different companies and also why the address given for that company
         was a residential property".

 6. Given that the Secretary of State was concerned with  Horizon  Cleaning
    Services rather than Biottha that criticism rather loses its force, and
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge regrettably did not apply his mind to the
    actual issues in the case.  The reasons given for being unimpressed  by
    the evidence were clearly misconceived.

 7. It follows therefore that I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  This is the sort of case where normally the  Upper  Tribunal
    would wish to make a decision itself.  It would save time.  However,  I
    decline to do that on this occasion.  The  appellant  is  not  here  to
    argue her case.  I think it would be helpful to the Tribunal if she did
    attend although of course she cannot be  made  to  attend.  Further  Mr
    Duffy had not seen a copy of the appellant's bundle and  has  therefore
    not been able to initiate any checks or form a  view  on  the  evidence
    provided and he wanted an opportunity to do those things.

 8. As the First-tier Tribunal did misunderstand the case completely it  is
    appropriate to go back to the First-tier Tribunal and I so  direct.   I
    also record that it is my intention this morning to  ask  my  clerk  to
    make a copy of the appeal bundle  and  give  it  to  Mr  Duffy  so  the
    Secretary of State should be in a perfectly good position to review the
    case when it finds its way back to the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside  and  the  appeal
    allowed to the extent that it is remitted to  be  heard  again  at  the
    First-tier.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 24 June 2014                   |



