
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28951/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|Heard on 8th of May 2017            |                                      |
|Prepared on 9th of May 2017         |on 10th 0f May 2017                   |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                         MR ASIF SALEEM KHAN CHEEMA
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 23rd of  October  1988.
      He appeals against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Anstis sitting at Taylor House on  24th  of  June  2016  in  which  he
      dismissed an appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated 7th  of
      August 2015. That decision was to refuse the  Appellant's  application
      to vary leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  a  consequent
      decision to issue directions for removal.


   2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 15th of May  2011  with
      leave to enter valid until 1st  of  June  2013.  He  was  subsequently
      granted further leave to remain until 27th of June 2014. On  that  day
      the Appellant applied to vary his leave and it was the refusal of this
      application which gave rise to the present proceedings. The Respondent
      refused the Appellant's application on the basis that  in  an  earlier
      application of 28th of May  2013  (which  resulted  in  the  extension
      granted until 27th of June 2014) the Appellant had relied on  a  TOEIC
      certificate from ETS and that on the basis of the information provided
      to the Respondent by  ETS  the  Respondent  was  satisfied  that  that
      certificate had been fraudulently obtained.


   3. As false documents had been  submitted  the  application  was  refused
      under paragraph 322 (2) of the Immigration  Rules.  This  subparagraph
      provides grounds on which leave to remain and variation  of  leave  to
      enter or remain should normally be refused, that is that there  is  an
      element of discretion. The grounds will be made out  where  there  has
      been the making of false representations or a failure to disclose  any
      material fact for the purpose  of:  obtaining  leave  to  enter  or  a
      previous variation of leave or obtaining documents from the Respondent
      or a third party required in support of the application for  leave  to
      enter or a previous variation of leave.


   4. The burden of proof of establishing that rests upon the Respondent and
      whilst the standard of proof is the usual civil standard of balance of
      probabilities, the more serious the allegation  the  more  cogent  the
      evidence to support it must be. That however was not the  only  ground
      on which the Appellant's application had been  refused.  He  had  also
      been  refused  on  the  basis  that  the  sponsor  who  provided   the
      certificate of acceptance for  studies  ("CAS")  relied  upon  by  the
      Appellant in his application was not listed as a registered sponsor at
      the time the application for leave was considered  by  the  Respondent
      and thus the CAS was not valid.

The Proceedings at First Instance

   5. The Appellant (who was unrepresented at the time) appealed against the
      Respondent's decision in brief grounds at paragraph 8 of form IAFT -1.
      He did not agree with the Respondent's allegation that he had employed
      a proxy test taker he had never used any  deception.  His  grounds  of
      appeal did not refer to the 2nd objection to his application, the lack
      of a CAS.


   6. Following receipt of the application to appeal the Tribunal sent out a
      notice on 23rd of May 2016 that the Appellant's appeal would be  heard
      the following month on 24th of June 2016  at  Taylor  House.  The  day
      before  the  hearing  the  Appellant  made  an  application   for   an
      adjournment sending a fax at 2.33pm  to  the  Tribunal.  He  gave  two
      reasons why he wanted an adjournment. The first was  that  his  mother
      had died in Pakistan on 16th of June, a week before, and he was unable
      to travel to Pakistan. He had not had a chance to  see  her  one  last
      time. As a result he said he was going through a deep trauma,  sadness
      and depression. The 2nd reason he gave was that due to  the  death  of
      his mother he was suffering bad health with a high temperature, nausea
      and diarrhoea. He appended a death certificate for his  mother  and  a
      letter from the Appellant's GP dated 22nd of June 2016. This confirmed
      the Appellant's attendance at the surgery on 22 June (the day  before)
      and that  the  GP  was  arranging  investigations  for  the  Appellant
      symptoms of abdominal pain with fever and insomnia. According  to  the
      GP it was unclear how  long  the  Appellant  symptoms  would  take  to
      resolve but he planned to review the Appellant in a week adding at the
      end "at this point we can decide if further time off is  required".  I
      take that to mean that the GP had signed the Appellant off  from  work
      for one week.


   7. In the remainder of the written application the Appellant  had  argued
      with the Respondent's decision to refuse his  application  because  of
      the allegation of a proxy test taker saying it was beyond  doubt  that
      he the Appellant had a very good  command  of  the  English  language.
      Again, no reference was made to the refusal to grant leave because  of
      an invalid CAS.


   8. The application for an adjournment went before the Designated Judge at
      Taylor House who made a decision the same afternoon on 23 June in  the
      following terms: "These  sad  events  are  regrettably  no  reason  to
      adjourn. Adjournment refused". As the Appellant had paid the  fee  for
      an oral hearing, the case was listed before Judge Anstis although  the
      Respondent for her part consented to the matter  being  determined  on
      the papers by telephone and  thus  there  was  no  representation  for
      either for either party when the matter came before the Judge.


   9. At paragraph 7 of his determination the Judge noted that there was  no
      further application to adjourn before  him.  He  directed  himself  in
      accordance with rule 28 of the Procedural Rules that if a party  fails
      to attend the hearing the Tribunal may proceed with the hearing if the
      Tribunal is satisfied that the party has been notified of the  hearing
      and considers that it is in the interests of justice to  proceed  with
      the hearing.


  10. At paragraph 10 the Judge gave his reasons why he was not prepared  to
      adjourn the matter stating: "there has previously been application for
      adjournment which has been refused by the Tribunal  and  there  is  no
      renewed application for an  adjournment  before  me.  Rule  2  of  the
      Tribunal's Rules of procedure sets out the overriding objective, which
      includes  "avoiding  delay,  so  far   as   compatible   with   proper
      consideration of the issues".  In  those  circumstances,  and  bearing
      bearing in mind the need to avoid delay,  I  consider  it  is  in  the
      interests of justice to proceed with the hearing".


  11. He referred to the Appellant not submitting any evidence  relevant  to
      the substance of the appeal and referred to  the  Respondent's  bundle
      which included the look up tool that showed that the Appellant's  test
      result was invalid. He quoted at some  length  from  the  case  of  SM
      [2016] UKUT 229 and noted that the Upper Tribunal  had  said  in  that
      case that every case belonging to the TOEIC stable would invariably be
      fact sensitive. Every appeal would be determined on the basis  of  the
      evidence adduced by the parties. In the instant case  before  him  the
      Judge  noted  that  the   Respondent's   evidence   appeared   to   be
      substantially the same as that relied on in SM and he saw no reason to
      depart from the Upper Tribunal's findings that this was sufficient  to
      satisfy the evidential burden on the Respondent. As the Appellant  had
      submitted no evidence to discharge  that  evidential  burden  it  must
      follow that his appeal on that point cannot succeed.


12. At paragraph 18 the Judge went on to consider the 2nd ground of refusal
    stating: "beyond that, there is the additional difficulty in this  case
    that the Appellant did not have a valid CAS, which on its own would  be
    enough to mean that his application must fail.  The  Appellant  has  no
    answer to this. Without a valid CAS his application could  not  succeed
    and his appeal cannot succeed." The Judge noted that Article 8 was  not
    engaged in this case and dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

  13. The Appellant appealed against  this  decision  concentrating  on  the
      refusal of the application for an  adjournment.  He  referred  to  the
      Presidential guidance note of 2014 that a factor weighing in favour of
      adjourning on appeal even at a late stage would be sudden  illness  or
      other compelling reason which prevented the  party  from  attending  a
      hearing. The guidance went on to  say  that  normally  such  a  reason
      should be supported by medical or other relevant evidence unless there
      was insufficient time to obtain such evidence.  However,  where  there
      was no likelihood that the party would be able to attend  the  hearing
      within a reasonable period the Tribunal might proceed in absence where
      the Tribunal considered that this was in the interests of  justice  in
      terms of Rule 28.


  14. Subsequent case law including SH and Nwaigwe  [2014]  UKUT  00418  had
      stressed that the test of whether to adjourn was one of fairness.  The
      First-tier Tribunal  Judge  should  have  considered  the  Appellant's
      mother's sudden death and the medical circumstances and adjourned. The
      Appellant was unable to attend court and the decision under appeal had
      been made without proper consideration. As a result  of  this  failure
      the Appellant had been  deprived  from  the  benefits  he  would  have
      acquired namely being able to concentrate and continue his studies.


  15. The Appellant denied that he had ever used deception. His test results
      were genuinely obtained. He was not aware of  any  malpractice  during
      the test. He had a very good command  of  the  English  language.  The
      Respondent's allegations were made with insufficient clarity.  He  had
      qualifications which proved he  was  competent  to  pass  the  English
      language test. The grounds concluded  with  further  comments  on  the
      refusal to adjourn but noticeably at  no  point  did  the  grounds  of
      onward appeal deal with the 2nd reason why the Appellant's appeal  had
      been dismissed namely the fact that the Appellant had no valid CAS.


  16. The application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers  before
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal O'Garro on 20th of October 2016.  She
      refused permission to appeal noting that in a  well-reasoned  decision
      the Judge had given adequate  reasons  at  paragraph  10  why  he  was
      satisfied that the appeal could be justly determined in the absence of
      the Appellant. There was no  obvious  error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
      decision.


  17. The Appellant renewed his application for permission to appeal to  the
      Upper Tribunal in broadly similar terms to the application  which  had
      not succeeded in before the First-tier. Again, the application to  the
      Upper Tribunal did not in deal in any way with the refusal because  of
      no valid CAS. The application to the Upper Tribunal for permission  to
      appeal came on the papers before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Sheridan
      on 23rd of March 2017. In granting permission to appeal he wrote  that
      the question for the  Judge  to  address  in  considering  whether  to
      adjourn was whether the appeal  could  be  justly  determined  in  the
      Appellant's absence see Nwaigwe. It  was  unclear  if  the  Judge  had
      considered this and therefore there was  an  arguable  error  of  law.
      Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.


  18. The Respondent replied to this grant of  permission  by  letter  dated
      11th of April 2017. The Respondent said she had not seen any documents
      showing that the Appellant  was  unwell  and  therefore  reserved  her
      position on that point. The Judge provided full  reasons  why  he  was
      satisfied  that  the  appeal  could  be  justly  determined   in   the
      Appellant's absence which was allowed under the Procedural Rules.  The
      Judge had directed himself appropriately  and  had  all  the  material
      before him when making a decision which he was entitled to make.

The Hearing Before Me

  19. As a consequence of the grant of permission the matter came before  me
      to determine whether there was an  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
      determination such that it fell to  be  set  aside.  Counsel  for  the
      Appellant relied upon his skeleton  argument  which  referred  to  the
      death of the Appellant's mother and that as a result  the  Appellant's
      own health took a turn and he started to suffer from high-temperature,
      nausea and diarrhoea. The skeleton  argument  referred  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal decision of the Nwaigwe to argue  that  it  was  perverse  to
      continue with the appeal in the absence of the  Appellant.  There  was
      judicial criticism of cases brought by the  Respondent  when  alleging
      proxy test takers. If the Respondent had satisfied the initial  burden
      by showing that a prima facie each case had been made out  the  burden
      swung  to  the  Appellant  to  provide  an  innocent  explanation.  By
      proceeding in the Appellant's  absence  the  First-tier  deprived  the
      Appellant of the opportunity to answer questions relating to his  test
      in 2013 and therefore the  opportunity  to  put  forward  an  innocent
      explanation for what had happened.


  20. The allegation which the Appellant appealed against was a serious  one
      with  Draconian  consequences  which  included  a  lengthy  period  of
      exclusion from the United Kingdom and the real possibility of  causing
      the Appellant difficulties in other areas of his life. The  importance
      of the proceedings was  a  factor  that  required  consideration  when
      deciding whether an  adjournment  was  appropriate.  The  decision  to
      proceed under rule 28 of the Procedure Rules constituted an  error  of
      law  on  the  part  of  the  Judge.  The  grounds  also  repeated  the
      Presidential Guidance  note  which  I  have  referred  to  above  (see
      paragraph 13 above).


  21. In oral submissions it was argued that there was a  relatively  narrow
      point in issue: whether the First-tier could proceed in the absence of
      the Appellant. It was not disputed that the Appellant was aware of the
      hearing. Paragraph 10 of the determination  did  not  show  sufficient
      consideration  of  the  issue.  There   was   a   minimum   one   year
      disqualification for the Appellant if the decision at  first  instance
      remained. Had the Appellant been able to  attend  he  would  have  put
      forward his  case.  The  Judge  was  aware  that  there  had  been  an
      application for an adjournment. There was no medical evidence to  show
      that the Appellant's psychological problems.


  22. In reply, the Presenting Officer argued that the  application  for  an
      adjournment had been made against a background that  no  evidence  had
      been submitted by the Appellant for  the  appeal.  In  any  event  the
      appeal had also been refused because the  Appellant  did  not  have  a
      valid CAS, see  paragraph  18  of  the  determination.  Therefore  the
      question of  an  adjournment  in  relation  to  the  TOEIC  issue  was
      irrelevant as the appeal was doomed to failure. In  response  to  that
      last point counsel said he had no instructions on the CAS issue but if
      the Respondent did not succeed on the dishonesty issue  the  Appellant
      would be able to make a further  application  while  he  continued  to
      enjoy section 3C leave.

Findings

  23. There are 2 separate issues in this case. The  first  is  whether  the
      Judge should have adjourned the hearing or whether he was entitled  to
      proceed as he did.  The  2nd  quite  separate  issue  is  whether  the
      Appellant  has  any  explanation  to  counter  the  decision  of   the
      Respondent to refuse to grant the Appellant leave  to  remain  because
      the Appellant did not have a valid CAS.


  24. That last point can be very simply  answered.  The  Appellant  has  no
      answer to the objection of the Respondent. The Presenting Officer  was
      quite correct in his submission to me that this was an appeal that was
      always doomed to fail. At no point has the Appellant ever said that he
      had an answer to the objection that he had no CAS.  He  did  not  make
      that point in his appeal against the Respondent's decision, he did not
      make that point in his letter asking for  an  adjournment  or  in  the
      statement he made in preparation for  the  hearing  before  me  (which
      largely  dealt  with  the  adjournment  request  and  the  Appellant's
      knowledge of  English).  Counsel  indicated  in  the  course  of  oral
      submissions that he had no instructions on the point.


  25. There was no  error  of  law  on  the  Judge's  part  to  dismiss  the
      Appellant's appeal for failure to comply with the immigration Rules by
      not having a valid CAS.  The  issue  is  thus  whether  it  makes  any
      difference whether the Judge did or did not adjourn the matter. If  it
      did make a difference was the Judge nevertheless entitled to  adjourn?
      If it did make a difference and the Judge was not entitled to  adjourn
      then there would be a material error of law such that the decision  of
      the First-tier should be set aside. As I indicated during  the  course
      of submissions if the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  set
      aside on the grounds of procedural unfairness the  correct  course  of
      action would be to remit the appeal back to the First-tier to be heard
      again. On the other hand if there had been  no  procedural  unfairness
      then in any event the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  must  stand
      since the Appellant's appeal could not succeed.


  26. I do not accept the argument  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      should be set aside simply because the Appellant might otherwise  have
      difficulties in making a fresh application with a  valid  CAS  in  the
      future. If the Appellant was not entitled to leave to  remain  because
      of the  absence  of  a  valid  CAS,  the  Appellant  could  make  such
      application as he sees fit (but it would not carry a right  of  appeal
      in the event of a further refusal from the  Respondent  regardless  of
      whether there was or was not an allegation of proxy test taking).


  27. It does not matter whether the Judge adjourned the case or  not  given
      that this was a hopeless appeal which the Appellant himself was not in
      effect contesting since at no point has he sought  to  argue  that  he
      could meet the objection of no valid CAS. However even if I  am  wrong
      on that point, I do not consider that the Judge made a material  error
      of law in proceeding with the appeal in the absence of the Appellant.


  28.  Firstly,  the  Appellant  did  not  produce  any  evidence  with  his
      application for an adjournment to show that he was unfit to attend the
      court. There was no psychological evidence produced either at the time
      or since to show that the Appellant was so upset by what had  happened
      to his mother that he was quite incapable  of  presenting  a  case  in
      court. Even if there was no time before the hearing, which  I  do  not
      accept because it could have been mentioned by the GP in  his  letter,
      there has been ample time since the hearing  in  the  run  up  to  the
      appeal hearing to obtain some psychological evidence.


  29. It is clear that the  Tribunal  carefully  and  not  without  sympathy
      considered the adjournment request when a decision  was  made  by  the
      Designated Judge on 23rd of  June that what were described as the  sad
      events (that is the passing of the Appellant's mother) was regrettably
      no reason to adjourn. That was a judicial decision and  there  was  no
      reason why the First-tier Tribunal Judge at the  hearing  should  have
      reversed  that  decision  of  the  Designated  Judge.  The  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge's view was that there was no fresh  application  before
      him to adjourn following the refusal by the Designated Judge. For  all
      that the First-tier Tribunal Judge knew the Appellant had accepted the
      decision of the Designated Judge.


  30. That of itself is a powerful consideration but even if it is not,  the
      Judge was faced with a situation where he had no medical  evidence  to
      show that the Appellant was unfit to attend  court.  He  had  evidence
      that the Appellant had had a stomach upset of some sort and  had  seen
      the GP about that but the GP had not said that the Appellant was unfit
      to attend. As I have pointed out there was no evidence even  from  the
      GP confirming that the Appellant  was  distressed  or  psychologically
      incapable of presenting his case.  In  the  absence  of  a  reasonable
      explanation for the Appellant's absence the Judge was  quite  entitled
      to proceed under Rule 28 where the Appellant had been notified of  the
      hearing.


  31. In addition to the absence of medical evidence there was an absence of
      the Appellant's evidence. The  Appellant  had  had  over  a  month  to
      prepare for the hearing and the events to which he referred  had  only
      occurred in the last week of that month. The Appellant had  had  ample
      time before that to begin his preparation for the appeal but there  is
      no evidence to show that he had done anything during  that  time.  The
      Judge was thus faced with a situation where there  was  an  incomplete
      application for an adjournment which had been rejected and no  further
      application made.  There  was  little  to  show  to  what  extent  the
      Appellant had engaged in the appeal proceedings. Even now it cannot be
      shown  that  the  Appellant  has  properly  engaged  in   the   appeal
      proceedings since he still cannot rebut the Respondent's  charge  that
      there was no valid CAS.


  32. Any refusal of an application for leave could be said to have  serious
      consequences for the individual concerned but the Appellant has  known
      throughout that his appeal was not going to succeed because  he  could
      not produce a valid CAS. That he feels aggrieved that his  application
      for an adjournment was refused is in my view neither here  nor  there.
      No useful purpose would have been  served  by  adjourning  a  hopeless
      appeal. Given that the application for the adjournment  was  itself  a
      weak one  for  the  reasons  I  have  given  (because  unsupported  by
      appropriate medical evidence), the Judge was correct to  proceed  with
      the appeal on the day.


  33. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that  the  determination
      arguably did not reveal that the Judge was aware of  or  had  directed
      himself that the test of whether to adjourn following Nwaigwe was  one
      of fairness. A careful reading of paragraph 10  of  the  determination
      shows this not to be the case.  The  Judge  was  fully  aware  of  the
      overriding objective. It was not necessary for  him  to  set  out  the
      whole of Rule 2 of the Procedural Rules to demonstrate that.  What  he
      referred to was Rule 2(2)(e) which defines what is  meant  by  dealing
      with the case fairly and justly that  is  avoiding  delay  so  far  as
      compatible with proper consideration of the issues.


  34. I do not consider there is any difference between the ratio in Nwaigwe
      and the  overriding  objective  as  expressed  by  Rule  2.  The  Rule
      emphasises that the case must be dealt with fairly indeed it  mentions
      that twice because it goes on to refer to a "proper  consideration  of
      the issues". An unfair hearing is clearly not a  proper  consideration
      of the issues. The Judge was fully aware of the requirement  that  the
      test for an application for an adjournment was one of fairness. It  is
      correct that the Judge wished to avoid  unnecessary  delay,  that  was
      particularly so given that the Appellant's appeal was bound to fail as
      he had no answer  to  the  CAS  point.  Nevertheless,  fairness  still
      required the Judge to consider whether there should be an  adjournment
      and whether if no adjournment  was  granted  the  Appellant  would  be
      deprived of a fair hearing. The Judge was aware of those issues  hence
      his quotation from the overriding objective. I do not  consider  there
      was any breach of the ratio in Nwaigwe.


  35. Even if I was of the view that there  was  an  error  of  law  in  not
      adjourning the case, I would not have set aside the  decision  of  the
      First-tier because the Appellant has no case (regarding the  CAS)  for
      the reasons I have given. The  decision  of  the  First-tier  did  not
      therefore involve the making of an error  of  law  and  I  uphold  the
      decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed


I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 9th of May 2017


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal there can be no fee award.


Signed this 9th of May 2017


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

