
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28130/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25th June 2014                               |On 26th June 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                         Ms florence mwabuje edozie
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Nicholson (instructed by Trinity, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Respondent with regard to a determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Howard) promulgated on 28th March 2014. For the sake of  clarity
    and continuity however, I shall continue to refer to the  Secretary  of
    State as the Respondent and Ms Edozie as the Appellant.

 2. In his  determination  Judge  Howard  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's refusal to grant her indefinite  leave
    to remain on Article 8 grounds.

 3. The background to this case is that the Appellant arrived in the United
    Kingdom on 17th July 2005 with a  valid  visit  visa.  She  overstayed.
    Although her visa was apparently a multi-entry visa her leave to  enter
    must have expired in January 2006.

 4. In the United Kingdom the Appellant met the man who is now her husband.
    He is a British citizen. They underwent a customary marriage in Nigeria
    and now have three children, all of whom are British. They were born in
    November 2008, June 2010 and more recently April 2014. At the  time  of
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the  Appellant  was  heavily
    pregnant with her third child.

 5. In the Letter of Refusal  the  Secretary  of  State  alleged  that  the
    marriage certificate from Nigeria was counterfeit and  then  considered
    the  application  under  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE  of   the
    Immigration Rules. In a decision dated 26th June 2013  the  application
    was rejected.

 6. In the determination Judge Howard considered  and  concluded  that  the
    Appellant could not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  or
    Appendix FM and considered Gulshan (Article 8 -  new  Rules  -  correct
    approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) . He considered that there were  good
    grounds for granting outside of the Immigration Rules and so considered
    Article 8 under ECHR.

 7. He started by looking at the question of the Appellant's  marriage  and
    concluded that the marriage was genuine and gave detailed  reasons  for
    doing so. That finding is not challenged by the Secretary of State.

 8.  What  is  challenged  by  the  Secretary  of  State  is  the   Judge's
    consideration of Article 8 under the ECHR.  His consideration starts at
    paragraph 27 where he works through the  five  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27
    questions reaching proportionality.  He did deal  with  proportionality
    in fairly brief terms at paragraph  27  (4)  where  he  said  the  only
    interest cited by the Respondent was effective immigration control.  He
    went on to note that there was no evidence that the  Appellant  had  in
    any way been an economic burden on the State.  The  husband  works  and
    always has done and provides for his family from his wages.  They  live
    in a rented home and his bank statements indicate that the family lives
    within its means. Were the Appellant to be removed then her husband and
    children as British citizens would be entitled to remain and the  Judge
    found that it would then  be  likely  that  the  State  would  have  to
    shoulder some responsibility for their support  as  the  husband  would
    then be unable to work  full  time.  Also  the  Judge  considered  that
    requiring the Appellant to leave her children for whom she provides all
    the love and support reasonably expected of a mother would  not  be  in
    their best interests. He  concluded  that the only way which the family
    life that has now been established could then be maintained would be by
    the husband  and  children  relocating  to  Nigeria  which  was  not  a
    realistic option given that they are young children born in the UK to a
    British citizen father.

 9. The Secretary of State in seeking permission to appeal  argued  firstly
    that the Judge had misdirected himself by failing to  consider  whether
    the Appellant's case raised compelling circumstances  not  sufficiently
    recognised in the Immigration Rules giving arguably good grounds for  a
    grant of leave outside the Rules. The second ground was that the  judge
    had  failed  to  properly  consider  the  wider  public   interest   of
    immigration control in accordance with Shahzad [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC).

10. What seems to have escaped the notice of  the  Secretary  of  State  in
    deciding this  application  in  the  first  place  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in determining the appeal was that this application  was  made
    on 7th July 2012, two days before Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE were
    added to the Immigration Rules and therefore fell to be  decided  under
    the old Rules. That being the case neither Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new
    Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) nor Nagre [2013] EWHC
    720 (Admin) had any application  and  therefore  the  first  ground  is
    misconceived.

11. So far as the second ground is concerned Ms Holmes argued that although
    Shahzad looks at the new Immigration Rules  it is still incumbent  upon
    a Judge, when considering Article 8 to  conduct  a  balancing  exercise
    balancing the competing interests  of  the  State  with  those  of  the
    Appellant. In this case the Judge had not done so.

12. I indicated that so far as ground 2 was concerned I agreed that it  was
    incumbent upon a  Judge  in  considering  Article  8  to  carry  out  a
    balancing exercise balancing the  points  in  favour  of  allowing  the
    appeal against those against which would include the interests  of  the
    State. However, when considering any error in failing to  carry  out  a
    proper balancing exercise in this case  I  am  unable  to  find  it  is
    material. The judge was faced with a situation whereby while it is true
    that the Appellant had overstayed since January  2006,  she  was  in  a
    genuine relationship with a British citizen and had by the time of  the
    hearing before me, three children with  him.  All  three  children  are
    British and on the basis of the case law which  was  relevant  to  this
    appeal, in particular ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4,  Beoku-Betts  [2008]
    UKHL 38   and Chikwamba [2008] UKHL40  it would be wholly  unreasonable
    to expect this Appellant, who would meet all the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules save for the fact  that  she  is  in  the  UK  as  an
    overstayer, to return to  Nigeria  to  make  application  as  a  spouse
    leaving behind three young children one  of  whom  is  a  newborn.  Her
    husband and children are British. They  are  a  self-sufficient  family
    unit that have not been a burden  on  the  state.  Therefore  this  was
    always a case that a Judge, properly applying the jurisprudence,  would
    allow on Article 8 grounds and thus any error in the Judge  failing  to
    specifically spell out the weight to be attached to  the  wider  public
    interest in the maintenance of immigration control, is not material.

13.  I uphold the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  and  the  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Signed                              Date 25th June 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
