
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28748/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 September 2015                  |On 9 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      MR BABS BABARINDE ADEYANJU DAWODU
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Colemen, Counsel, instructed by Adonal Beulah
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    (the Secretary of State) against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge J Bartlett, promulgated on 12 February 2015 in which  he  allowed
    Mr Dawodu's appeal.  That appeal was against the Secretary  of  State's
    decision of 30 June 2014 to remove Mr Dawodu from the United Kingdom by
    way of directions under section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    1999.

 2. Hereafter I refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The Secretary of State is the Respondent Mr  Dawodu  is  the
    Appellant.

 3. The Appellant is a Nigerian citizen born on 30 January 1961.  He claims
    to have been in the United Kingdom for a very long time, although  this
    is apparently still in dispute.

 4. On 7 August 2010 the Appellant made an application to the Respondent on
    human rights grounds. On 16 March 2011 this application was refused  by
    the Respondent, with  no  right  of  appeal.   On  23  March  2011  the
    Appellant sought a reconsideration of his application.  On 30 June 2014
    the Respondent refused  the  application  having  considered  it  under
    Appendix  FM  and  Paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   An
    appealable decision was issued at this time.

 5. Judge Bartlett heard the appeal on 14 January 2015.  At paragraph 3  of
    his decision  he  notes  that  both  representatives  agreed  that  the
    provisions contained in the Statement of  Changes  to  the  Immigration
    Rules HC 194 should not have been applied to the Appellant's case.

 6. At paragraph 6 of his decision Judge Bartlett relied on the decision of
    the Court of Appeal in Edgehill [2014] EWCA Civ 402 and concluded  that
    the provisions of the Immigration Rules were indeed wrongly applied  to
    the Appellant's case.  He therefore allowed the  appeal  on  the  basis
    that the Respondent's decision was not otherwise in accordance with the
    law.  He did not make any findings of fact whatsoever.

 7. The Respondent sought permission to appeal, relying on the recent Court
    of Appeal decision in Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74.  Permission  to  appeal
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert on 20 April 2015.

 8. At the  hearing  before  me  both  representatives  agreed  that  Judge
    Bartlett had been wrong to have relied on and applied the  decision  in
    Edgehill.  This was through no fault of his own because at the time  of
    the hearing before him and at the date his decision was promulgated the
    decision in Singh had not yet come out.  Singh held that the provisions
    inserted into the Immigration Rules by Statement of Changes HC 194  did
    apply to any application where the decision of the Respondent was  made
    after 6 September 2012 (see paragraph 56).  The decision  under  appeal
    to Judge Bartlett was  made  on  30  June  2014  and  so  the  relevant
    Immigration Rules had been properly  applied  by  the  Respondent  when
    making her decision.

 9. Although the Singh judgment postdates the decision of  Judge  Bartlett,
    the Court of Appeal there was simply stating the correct legal position
    as it had always been. Therefore it is clear that Judge Bartlett  erred
    in law and, having not made any findings of fact, his error of law  was
    material to the outcome of the appeal.

10. In terms of disposal,  both  representatives  were  agreed  that  if  a
    material error of law were found the appeal should be remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I agree with this position.  Judge Bartlett  made
    no findings of fact at all and such findings are clearly necessary  for
    the proper disposal of this appeal.  Therefore I remit  the  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The appeal will be heard  before  any  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Bartlett.  A new date will not  be
    fixed at this time.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did/did  not  involve
the making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Directions:

      1. The appeal shall be heard at the Taylor House hearing centre by any
         First-tier Tribunal Judge other than Mr J Bartlett.


Signed   Date: 9 September 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

