
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/28371/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |          Decision & Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 31 July 2017                       |          On 21 September 2017        |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                   mr h S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma of Counsel instructed by HSBS Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of  India  has  permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Hussain sent on 10 November
    2016 dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent  made
    on 30 July 2015 refusing leave to remain.

2.   The appellant's principal ground of appeal was that the judge erred  in
    his assessment of s.117B(6) of the NIAA 2002 in that he  was  wrong  to
    find that it had no application for the  reason that "he  is  not  [the
    child H's] biological father or has any parental relationship with him"
    (paragraph 22(e)).  Mr Duffy, on behalf  of  the  respondent,  conceded
    that the judge's reasoning  was  contrary  to  the  decided  authority,
    namely R (on the  application  of  RK)  v  SSHD  (s.117B(6):  "parental
    relationship" IJR [2016] UKUT 00031 (IAC).  M Duffy also accepted  this
    error was a material one.
3.   I concur with Mr Duffy in considering that the appellant's grounds  are
    made out. The judge's treatment of the issue of  parental  relationship
    was vitiated  by  legal  error  necessitating  that  I  set  aside  his
    decision.

4.   Mr Sharma initially submitted that the case should be retained  in  the
    Upper  Tribunal  and  the  decision  re-made  without  further  ado  as
    s.117B(6) clearly applied to the appellant's case and, by virtue of the
    child H being a British citizen, it was  inevitable  following  SF  and
    others  (Guidance  post-2014  Act  [2017]  UKUT  120  (IAC)R  that  the
    appellant would succeed in his Article 8 grounds of appeal  because  on
    the respondent's own policy it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the
    child to leave the UK or the parent of such a child.

5.   However, following further discussion, Mr Sharma agreed that there  was
    an area of factual dispute that required  careful  examination  in  the
    light of full evidence about the child H's circumstances, including  in
    particular, as regards the extent of the continuing involvement in  the
    life of H of his biological father.  Whether or not the appellant could
    qualify under s.117B(6) was dependent on the  outcome  of  that  fuller
    examination.

6.   Accordingly I have decided to remit the case to be dealt with  de  novo
    by the FtT, not before Judge Hussain.

7.   Any further  evidence  which  the  parties  wish  to  advance  must  be
    submitted 14 days in advance of the date to be fixed for hearing.

8.   For the above reasons:

     The decision of the FtT judge is set aside for material error of law.

     The case is remitted to the FtT.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed
[pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal                      21 September 2017

