
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/28362/2014
     ia/28363/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 December 2014                           |On 20 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                 kunal soni
                                 sheenu soni
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Slatter, Counsel instructed by Silk Route Legal
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The first appellant was born on 30 January 1983 and his wife, who is  a
    dependant upon his claim, the second appellant, was born on 13 November
    1984.  Both are citizens of India.

2.   The first appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  7  August  2005
    with leave to enter as a student until 5 March 2007.   He  was  granted
    subsequent leave as a student until 30 June 2009.

3.   A further application to vary his leave to remain as a  Tier  1  (Post-
    Study Work) Migrant was refused on the basis that he had  relied  on  a
    postgraduate diploma issued by the Cambridge College of  Learning.   It
    was considered by the respondent that such a course was  not  one  that
    was offered and therefore that the claim to have attended such a course
    was false.  The application was refused on  20  January  2009  on  that
    basis.  In March 2009 the appellant  made  a  further  application  for
    leave to remain as a student.  This application was granted until  June
    2010.

4.   A further application to vary his leave as a student was made  in  June
    2010.  That was granted from the period 14 June 2010 to 30 January 2012
    as a Tier 4 Student.

5.   Thereafter the applicant made an out of country application  for  leave
    to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant.  He was granted  leave
    from 9 May 2012 until 25 April 2014.

6.   On 25 April 2014 the appellants made a combined application  for  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom as a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant.
    That application was refused on 23 June 2014  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant had agreed on the application that he had used  deception  in
    order to attempt to gain  leave  in  the  United  Kingdom,  namely  the
    submission of the postgraduate diploma in business management from  the
    Cambridge College of Learning.

7.   In those circumstances the  application  was  refused  under  paragraph
    322(2) of the Immigration Rules.  The  second  appellant's  application
    was refused in line with that refusal.

8.   It was against that decision that the appellantS sought  to  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal, which appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Turquet on 15 September 2014.

9.   Although the first appellant has maintained throughout that he did  not
    exercise deception and that he attended lawfully the Cambridge  College
    Learning to obtain his postgraduate  diploma  in  business  management,
    that is a statement of fact which has been  conclusively  dismissed  by
    the Tribunal on a number of occasions.  A number of  decisions  of  the
    Upper Tribunal and in particular  that  of  NA  and  Others  (Cambridge
    College of Learning: Pakistan) [2009]  UKAIT  00031  have  conclusively
    found that the Cambridge College of Learning never ran a post  graduate
    diploma in business management or a post graduate diploma in IT course.
    Thus  for a person to rely upon a  certificate  or  an  award  of  that
    diploma amounted to a false representation.  As I understand the matter
    the issue was further visited by the Upper Tribunal in the decision  of
    Veerathna (IA/02707/2009] a determination promulgated in November  2014
    which upheld the decision in NA.  Whilst although the  first  appellant
    may claim that he has not used deception, it is clear from the Tribunal
    decisions that he did.

10.  The main plank, therefore,of his appeal was essentially  that  even  if
    the respondent was entitled to  have  refused  his  application  on  20
    January  2009  because  of  the  submission  of   the   post   graduate
    qualification from the Cambridge College of  Learning,  that  situation
    should no longer apply in the decision of 23 June 2014. The reason  for
    that being that since the first refusal on that basis  there  has  been
    three periods of leave granted to the first appellant by the respondent
     choosing not to invoke 322(2) of the Immigration Rules.

11.  In effect, therefore, it is contended that, having waived that  refusal
    or potential refusal on three separate occasions,  it  is  unreasonable
    and/or unlawful for the respondent now to seek to revisit that refusal.

12.  It is the case as advanced on behalf of the first appellant before  me,
    permission to do so having been granted, that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge failed to deal with that issue satisfactorily or at  all  in  her
    decision to dismiss the appeal.

13.  Ms Johnstone, who represents the respondent, stated  firstly  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had indeed considered  the  issue  and  found
    against the first appellant on that issue.

14.  Secondly, in any event, the application was  misconceived  because  the
    three applications made subsequent to  the  refusal  in  2009  had  not
    alerted the Secretary of State to the falsity that had  been  practised
    by the appellant.  There had been  no  waiver  of  the  application  of
    322(2) in any event.

15.  I turn therefore to the first  issue  whether  or  not  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had adequately dealt with the central challenge  to  the
    appeal  before  her  .   Clearly  that  matter  is   raised   for   her
    consideration as is set out in paragraph 10 of the  determination  when
    summarising the grounds of appeal.  Ms Johnstone submits  in  paragraph
    22 that the judge deals clearly  with  that  issue.   It  is  certainly
    correct that the Judge seems to deal with part  of  that  matter.   She
    notes that when  the respondent refused the application of  23  October
    2008 on 20 January 2009 such was under paragraph 322(1A),  a  mandatory
    ground of refusal.  Thereafter, it is  not  clear  what  documents  the
    appellant provided in respect of the  later  application  in  2009  but
    seemingly he did not provide the Cambridge  College  documents.   As  a
    consequence he obtained leave to enter  as  a  Tier  1  (Post  graduate
    diploma in business management-Study Work) Migrant on 9 May  2012.   It
    was noted that an application made on 15 November  2013  for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant was refused on 5  March  2014
    on the basis that he had indicated in his application that he had never
    used deception in an attempt to gain leave in the United Kingdom.   The
    reasons for refusal stated "as false representations had been  made  in
    relation to your application, it is refused under paragraph 322(1A)  of
    the Immigration Rules".  In addition, as stated above, you  made  false
    representations for the purpose of obtaining a  previous  variation  of
    leave.  Those false representations had  been  made  in  respect  of  a
    previous application but it was refused under paragraph 322(2).

16.  Thereafter, however, the judge proceeds to consider in some detail  the
    nature of the falsity, namely the post  graduate  diploma  in  business
    management and considers  in paragraphs 23 to 27 of the  determination.
    The Judge concludes that the respondent has discharged  the  burden  of
    proof to demonstrate that the first appellant  had  used  deception  in
    providing false documents in the past  also  that  the  respondent  was
    entitled to have refused the application on that basis.   It  seems  to
    me, however,  and I so find, that there is merit in the contention made
    on behalf of the first appellant that the judge has not  fully  engaged
    with the argument which was being advanced.  There is no question  that
    the respondent was entitled to refuse an  application  under  paragraph
    322(2).  The issue was whether, having granted three successive periods
    of leave,  it  was  reasonable,  proper  or  fair  or  lawful  for  the
    respondent  to  have,  in  effect,  resurrected  the  issue  to  refuse
    subsequently.

17.   As  to  the  application  made  in  2009  there  is  no  copy  in  the
    respondent's file at present although a copy of the  application  could
    be obtained.

18.  There was however a copy of the application dated  31  May  2010  which
    resulted in the second grant of leave. Although no  reliance  had  been
    placed upon the Cambridge documents in that application, it  is  to  be
    noted that in the course of the application the  appellant  had  ticked
    the box "no" to using deception to stay or  remain.   As  Ms  Johnstone
    submits, there was nothing to alert  the  Secretary  of  State  to  any
    deception having been used.

19.  As to the application made on 9 May 2012  out  of  country,  which  was
    also successful, a copy of  that  document  is  in  the  papers.   That
    document makes no reference to the Cambridge documents or indicates  in
    any way that deception had previously been used.

20.  The first appellant however submits that whatever  is  written  on  the
    applications the respondent would have known  his  immigration  history
    and would have known the reason why an application had been refused  on
    20 January 2009.

21.  Indeed some support for his contention is found within the comments  of
    the Judge in  paragraph  22  of  the  determination.   Following  three
    successful applications a further application was made on  15  November
    2013 for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  and  that
    had been refused on 5 March 2014.  That had been an  application  which
    had not relied upon the Cambridge documents, the  first  appellant  had
    indicated in that application by ticking  the  requisite  box  that  he
    never used deception in an attempt to gain leave in the United Kingdom.
     He ticked a similar box to  the  previous  applications  but  on  this
    occasion clearly the matter  had  been  noted  by  the  respondent  who
    refused that application.  It was refused firstly on the basis that the
    appellant had made a false  application  in  that  application  by  not
    declaring his previous false representation and  also  because  of  the
    false representation that had been previously made.

22.  Thus it was that the appellant  made  his  further  application  on  25
    April 2014, this time ticking the box to indicate  that  deception  had
    been used  previously  by  him.   That  resulted  in  the  same  effect
    seemingly in a decision  of  23  June  2014  refusing  his  application
    because he  had  used  deception,  namely  the  use  of  the  Cambridge
    documents.

23.  It is submitted on behalf of the first appellant that, in refusing  the
    application on 5 March 2014, the respondent had clearly been  aware  of
    the immigration history of the appellant and would have been  so  aware
    on the previous three occasions.   It was  therefore  simply  not  good
    enough for the respondent through Ms Johnstone to argue that the  three
    previous applications had not alerted the Secretary  of  State  to  the
    reality of the situation.

24.  A further potential ground of appeal arises, given the length  of  time
    that has elapsed since the deception and  given  the  grants  of  leave
    subsequently with the appellant running a successful  business  in  the
    United Kingdom with  his  own  funds,   whether  or  not  it  would  be
    appropriate in any event for the prohibition under paragraph 322(2)  to
    be maintained.

25.  The Judge, having failed as I have so found to deal  with  the  central
    plank of the appeal, I find that that is an error of law.

26.  Whether or not there are any merits in the original appeal as  advanced
    is not a matter that can be  easily  resolved  at  this  stage  without
    hearing further argument and considering in detail all the applications
    that were made.

27.  In the circumstances, therefore, I shall set aside the decision  to  be
    remade in the light of arguments to be presented.  Given the  need  for
    further  evidence  that  re-hearing  shall  be  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in accordance with the Senior President's Practice Direction.

28.  It will be necessary for the respondent to supply, within  28  days  of
    the notification of this decision, copies of all relevant  applications
    that were made and  particularly  the  three  applications  which  were
    approved.

29.  A live issue is whether or not the respondent was placed on  notice  by
    such applications or  ought  to  have  known  of  the  reality  of  the
    situation from past records.

30.  Clearly, if any reliance is to be  placed  upon  arguments  based  upon
    Article 8 and private and family  life  in  the  United  Kingdom,  full
    particulars of such matters should be supplied no later  than  14  days
    before the scheduled hearing.

31.  As I indicated  to  Mr  Slatter,  who  represented  the  appellant,  if
    investigations  are  sought  as  to  the  procedures  adopted  by   the
    Respondent in considering the three applications which were  successful
    and why it was that the falsity was not picked up, then that perhaps is
    a matter for further clarification raised as between the parties. It is
    not something that I feel should be the  subject  of  formal  direction
    unless a further application is made.  Clearly an issue in the case  is
    why it was that the respondent  did  not  appreciate  in  granting  the
    applications that they were made by a person to whom refusal  had  been
    made before.

32.  The appeal before the Upper Tribunal is allowed to the extent that  the
    decision of the First tier is set aside to be remade.



Signed        Date 23 December 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

