
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/28870/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 May 2015                                |On 19 May 2015               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     TM
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr Mutebuka (Mutebuka & Co)
For the Respondent:     Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born in 1990.  He claims  to
         have a different identity and date  of  birth  but  this  has  been
         comprehensively disbelieved for reasons I deal with below.

      2. As this decision refers to  confidential  matters  relevant  to  an
         asylum claim I have anonymised my decision.

Procedural history

      3. The appellant's asylum appeal was considered by First-tier Tribunal
         Judge Battersby, having heard from the appellant at a hearing on 18
         August  2011.   In  that   decision   the   Judge   comprehensively
         disbelieved the appellant's asylum claim  and  claimed  alternative
         identity, and dismissed his appeal.

      4. The matter came before Judge Manuel more recently on 25 July  2014.
         Judge Manuel was not dealing with asylum but the appellant's appeal
         against a removal decision dated 18  July  2013,  the  SSHD  having
         refused his application to remain on the basis of his marriage  and
         Article 8 of the ECHR.  Judge Manuel did not regard the appellant's
         marriage to be genuine and subsisting and refused his appeal  under
         the Immigration Rules and Article 8 of the ECHR.

      5. Permission to appeal against this decision was granted by Judge J M
         Lewis on 5 November 2014.  The reason for  granting  permission  is
         unclear but appears to be Judge Lewis's view  that  Judge  Manuel's
         findings were  'not  reasonably  open  to  her'  and  are  'legally
         erroneous'.

      6. The matter now comes before me to  determine  whether  or  not  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
         law.

Hearing

      7. When granting permission Judge  Lewis  observed  the  following  in
         relation to the grounds of appeal:

             "It is difficult to disentangle the  strands  of  the  verbose
             application for permission to appeal and  tempting  to  refuse
             permission on the basis that it does not specify  clearly  and
             coherently with appropriate particulars the errors of law said
             to contaminate the  decision:  Nixon  (Permission  to  appeal:
             grounds) [2014] UKUT 00368 (IAC)."

      8.  I  agree  with  those  observations.   Mr  Mutebuka  prepared   an
         additional single page document narrowing the  grounds  of  appeal.
         This  clarified  the  grounds  to  a  certain  extent  but  further
         clarification was necessary to understand in what specific  way  in
         was alleged the  Judge  erred  in  law.   I  therefore  invited  Mr
         Mutebuka to address each of his  grounds  of  appeal  in  turn,  by
         dealing  with  each  one  separately  and  by  reference   to   the
         determination.  Mr Mutebuka clarified  that  he  relied  upon  four
         discrete grounds of appeal, which I set out  below.   Having  heard
         from Mr Mutebuka I indicated that I only needed  to  hear  from  Mr
         McVeety in relation to the third ground of appeal.   I  then  heard
         briefly from Mr Mutebuka in reply  before  reserving  my  decision,
         which I now provide with reasons.

Ground 1

      9. Mr Mutebuka submitted that  Judge  Manuel  was  wrong  to  consider
         private life outside the Immigration Rules  when  she  should  have
         considered whether the appellant could meet  276ADE.   I  can  deal
         with this ground swiftly.  Judge Manuel  clearly  addressed  276ADE
         within her decision at [38] to [43].  Explicit reference  was  made
         to the meaning of 'ties' [42] and the Judge was  entitled  to  find
         that notwithstanding his lengthy stay in the UK the appellant could
         not meet 276ADE(vi).

Ground 2

     10. Mr Mutebuka made the sweeping submission that the  Judge  erred  in
         relation to her approach to Judge Battersby's determination.  I  am
         satisfied that Judge Manuel directed herself to the proper approach
         to be adopted to findings of fact made in a previous  determination
         [8].  Judge Manuel adequately considered the  submissions  made  on
         behalf of the appellant as to why  she  should  adopt  a  different
         approach  from  that  of  Judge  Battersby  in  relation   to   the
         appellant's identity, and reached  findings  open  to  her  on  the
         available evidence [54-63].

     11. Mr Mutebuka submitted that the Judge ignored relevant evidence that
         post-dated Judge Battersby's determination.   When  I  pointed  out
         that Judge Manuel clearly took into account the statement from  the
         person the appellant claimed is his mother [54] together with birth
         certificates and death certificate [60-61] he  submitted  that  the
         Judge failed to  take  into  account  other  evidence  relevant  to
         confirming the  claimed  mother's  identity.   As  I  said  at  the
         hearing, it is difficult to see how the claimed  mother's  identity
         goes very far in establishing  that  she  is  the  mother  of  this
         appellant.  Judge Manuel clearly regarded the oral and  documentary
         evidence said to support the claimed relationship to be  unreliable
         and for the reasons she  gave,  she  was  entitled  to  reach  this
         finding.  One of the documents relied upon by Mr Mutebuka as having
         been omitted from the Judge's consideration is  an  application  by
         the claimed mother for entry clearance.  It is difficult to see how
         this can be said  to  be  supportive  of  the  appellant's  claimed
         identity when the application makes no mention of him (as her son).

Ground 3

     12. Mr Mutebuka submitted that both Judge Battersby and Judge  Manuel's
         decisions were erroneous because they both drew adverse  inferences
         from the appellant's immigration history,  when  he  arrives  as  a
         minor.

     13. I accept the submission in response to this from Mr McVeety.   When
         the appellant appeared before Judge Battersby he was (even  on  his
         own account) a young adult and not a minor.   He  has  admitted  to
         lying to Judge Battersby about significant and material  events  in
         his life, including the entirety of an asylum claim.  Judge  Manuel
         did not accept the reasons offered by the appellant for taking this
         course.  She noted that the explanation itself was  incredible  and
         inconsistent [48-50].  Judge Manuel disbelieved the  appellant  and
         regarded the evidence he provided to be unreliable not  because  of
         what happened when he was a minor, but because of what he said when
         he appeared before Judge Battersby and her.  Any failure to  direct
         herself to what may have happened to the appellant when  he  was  a
         minor is not a material error on the part of  the  Judge  in  these
         circumstances.  Two judges disbelieved the appellant not because of
         what was said to have happened as a minor but  what  he  told  them
         when he was a young adult.

Ground 4

     14. Mr Mutebuka submitted that the  Judge  Manuel  provided  inadequate
         reasons for concluding that the appellant's marriage is not genuine
         and subsisting.  The reasoning provided by  the  Judge  [26-35]  is
         entirely adequate and the submissions to the contrary  amounted  to
         no more than a disagreement with this.  Mr Mutebuka also  asked  me
         to find that that the Judge was inconsistent in  providing  reasons
         why the marriage was not subsisting [26] and  then  giving  reasons
         why she accepted some aspects of  the  available  evidence  on  the
         marriage [32].  These findings are in no way inconsistent.   Indeed
         they demonstrate an even-handed and thorough approach on  the  part
         of the Judge.  Although she  accepted  certain  evidence  [32]  she
         considered all the 'totality' of the evidence 'in detail' and found
         the relationship not to be genuine and subsisting [35].

Decision

     15. I do not find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains
         an error of law.

     16. I do not set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 15 May 2015
