
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/28883/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 7 July 2015                       |On 13 July 2015                       |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mr EMEKA STANLEY ONYEHARA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Maduforo, Solicitor (Tice Madox Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
         granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cheales on 20 May 2015 against
         the decision and reasons of First-tier Tribunal Judges  Kamara  and
         Harrington who had allowed  the  Respondent's  appeal  against  the
         Appellant's decision dated 30 June 2014  to  refuse  to  grant  the
         Respondent leave to remain under Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
         Rules and/or under Article 8 ECHR and to remove him from the United
         Kingdom. The decision and reasons was promulgated on 18 March 2015.



    2.     The Respondent is a national of Nigeria, born there  on  6  July
         1980.  He had entered the United Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
         Student Migrant in 2010, varied his leave to remain  as  a  Tier  1
         (Post-study Work) Migrant in 2012 and applied for further leave  to
         remain as the spouse of a person settled in the United Kingdom on 2
         May 2014. The Secretary of State refused  the  application  as  the
         Respondent met neither paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM nor  paragraph
         276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  The fact  that  the  Respondent's
         partner was  expecting  a  child  (now  born,  "Abraham")  was  not
         considered to amount  to  exceptional  circumstances  warranting  a
         grant of leave to remain outside the  Immigration  Rules.   It  was
         further considered reasonable  for  the  Respondent  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom and to seek entry clearance before the birth of  his
         child.

    3.     Judges Kamara  and  Harrington  allowed  the  appeal  under  the
         Immigration Rules.  They applied section 85(4) of the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and took into account relevant post-
         decision evidence, namely Abraham's birth.  They found that (a)  it
         would not be reasonable  for  the  Respondent's  child,  a  British
         Citizen, to leave the United Kingdom and (b) the couple would  face
         very serious difficulties in the continuation of their family  life
         in Nigeria.  The judges found that EX.1 of  the  Immigration  Rules
         applied.  They accordingly did not examine the Appellant's  Article
         8 ECHR claim which had been raised in the alternative.

    4.     Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  as  sought  by  the
         Appellant was granted by Judge Cheales because she considered  that
         it was arguable that the judges had misdirected themselves  in  law
         as to the test  for  insurmountable  obstacles  when  allowing  the
         appeal.  No evidence was taken as to whether the Respondent's  wife
         and son would in fact leave the United Kingdom if the  appeal  were
         unsuccessful.

    5.     Standard directions were made by the Upper Tribunal,  indicating
         that the appeal would be reheard  and  remade  immediately  in  the
         event that a material error of law were found.  A  rule  24  notice
         opposing the appeal was filed on behalf of the Respondent, dated 19
         June 2015.

    Submissions - error of law

    6.     Mr Bramble for the Secretary of State submitted that this was  a
         clear case of legal error, as the grant of permission to appeal  by
         the First-tier Tribunal  indicated.   As  the  grounds  of  onwards
         appeal stated, there was no evidence as to whether the  Appellant's
         wife and son would leave the United Kingdom in the event  that  his
         appeal failed.  The reasons given by the judges  for  finding  that
         there were "insurmountable obstacles" were neither obstacles unable
         to be overcome nor did  they  represent  "very  serious  hardship."
         These were questions of choice.  The reasoning was  inadequate  and
         the decision and reasons could not stand.

    7.     Mr Maduforo for the Respondent relied on the rule 24 notice  and
         submitted that there was no  error  of  law  in  the  decision  and
         reasons.  Mr  Maduforo  complained  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
         approach which had ignored the circumstances of  the  mother.   His
         submissions need not be further summarised as they  amounted  to  a
         repetition and reargument of the Respondent's case.

    The error of law finding

    8.     At the conclusion of submissions, the tribunal indicated that it
         found that the judges had fallen into material error  of  law,  for
         the reasons succinctly indicated in  the  grant  of  permission  to
         appeal by the First-tier Tribunal.  It is  important  to  recognise
         that the Upper Tribunal cannot  lightly  interfere  with  decisions
         made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There is  no  scope  for  a  mere
         difference of opinion in areas where a range of reasonable opinions
         consistent with the current law exists.  Here,  however,  it  is  a
         question of the substance of the  First-tier  Tribunal's  reasoning
         and their application of  the  text  of  the  relevant  Immigration
         Rules.  In the tribunal's judgment, the First-tier Tribunal  judges
         gave inadequate reasons for finding that there were  insurmountable
         obstacles which the parties could not overcome nor did the  reasons
         given amount to very serious hardship. The  reasons  given  in  the
         decision  and  reasons  amounted  to  little  more  than  temporary
         inconvenience. The judges omitted to  consider  the  other  obvious
         possibilities for compliance with Appendix FM open to  the  couple,
         such  as  the  temporary  absence  of  the  Appellant  while  entry
         clearance was sought.  The tribunal ruled that the findings of fact
         which had not been challenged by the Secretary of State  should  be
         preserved.  The decision and reasons would otherwise be  set  aside
         and the appeal reheard immediately.

    The rehearing

    9.     For clarity the tribunal will now refer to the parties by  their
         original designations in the First-tier Tribunal.

    10.    Mr Bramble for the Secretary of  State  relied  on  his  earlier
         submissions.  There were no compelling compassionate or exceptional
         circumstances.  The family life could be  lived  elsewhere,  freely
         and safely.  In any event, the child did  not  have  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom as the consequence of the father's  removal  as  the
         father could seek entry clearance from abroad.  His mother who  had
         indefinite leave to remain would be able to  care  for  the  child.
         The interruption to or  interference  with  family  life  would  be
         proportionate and justified.  The appeal should be dismissed.

    11.    Mr Maduforo for the Appellant  submitted  that  the  Appellant's
         Article 8 ECHR rights and those of his family were  crucial.   This
         was a case where there were exceptional circumstances requiring the
         exercise of discretion outside the Immigration Rules.  It was not a
         just question of individual choice.  There was a child now 9 months
         old for whom the father cared.  The mother worked  at  night.   The
         child would have to leave the United Kingdom  if  the  father  were
         removed. The appeal should be allowed.

    Discussion and fresh decision

    12.    There was no significant dispute of fact in this appeal.   On  1
         May 2014 the Appellant married Ms Apie Dominique Irene  Adiko  ("Ms
         Adiko"), a national of Ivory Coast with permanent residence in  the
         United Kingdom acquired through her parents through the Immigration
         (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.   At  the  date  of  the
         marriage the Appellant was not settled in the  United  Kingdom  but
         had temporary leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Post-study  Work)
         Migrant, expiring on 3 May 2014.  He sought to vary that leave on 2
         May 2014 by seeking leave to remain  as  the  spouse  of  a  person
         settled in the United Kingdom.  At the date  of  that  application,
         and at the date of the Secretary of State's decision, Ms Adiko  was
         pregnant.  Abraham was born on 2 October  2014,  a  post-  decision
         fact which the tribunal can and should take into account.   Abraham
         took British nationality, despite the  fact  that  neither  of  his
         parents is a British  Citizen,  because  of  his  mother's  settled
         status.  Ms Adiko is studying nursing and works part time.  It  was
         accepted that her income falls below the requirements  of  Appendix
         FM and there are no relevant savings.   The Appellant  looks  after
         Abraham when Ms Adiko is at work. Ms Adiko's  parents  hold  German
         nationality.  Both her parents are working and live in  the  United
         Kingdom. The Appellant's parents live in Lagos, Nigeria, with their
         five children.

    13.    The Appellant sought to rely on  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
         Immigration Rules, which is in the following terms:

         Section EX: Exceptions  to  certain  eligibility  requirements  for
         leave to remain as a partner or parent

         EX.1 This paragraph applies if

             (a)

                  (i) the applicant has a genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a child who -

                      (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was  under  the
                      age of 18 years when the applicant was first  granted
                      leave on the basis that this paragraph applied;

                      (bb) is in the UK;

                      (cc) is a British Citizen or  has  lived  in  the  UK
                      continuously for at least  the  7  years  immediately
                      preceding the date of application; and

                  (ii) it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                  leave the UK;

                  or

             (b) the applicant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
             with a partner who is in the UK  and  is  a  British  Citizen,
             settled in  the  UK  or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or
             humanitarian  protection,   and   there   are   insurmountable
             obstacles to family life with that partner continuing  outside
             the UK.

         EX.2.  For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable
         obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which  would  be
         faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their  family
         life together outside the UK and which could  not  be  overcome  or
         would entail very serious  hardship  for  the  applicant  or  their
         partner.

    14.    The tribunal finds that there was no evidence produced on behalf
         of the Appellant showing that it  was  necessary  for  his  British
         Citizen child to leave the United Kingdom in  the  event  that  the
         Appellant left or were removed.   There  was  equally  no  evidence
         produced showing that the Appellant and his wife  and  child  could
         not settle freely and  safely  in  Nigeria,  the  Appellant's  home
         country where the Appellant has close family.  The Appellant was in
         the United Kingdom on a temporary basis  at  all  stages  when  his
         relationship with Ms Adiko was  formed.   He  married  her  shortly
         before his leave was due to expire and thus he and she knew that he
         would have return to Nigeria unless he could satisfy Appendix FM.

    15.    Whether the couple remain in  the  United  Kingdom  or  move  to
         Nigeria, it is obvious that  that  choice  would  involve  physical
         separation from one half  of  the  relevant  wider  family  circle.
         There is no real connection between the Appellant  and  the  United
         Kingdom, his studies and post  study  work  having  concluded.   Ms
         Adiko lived in Ivory Coast where she was born  and  also  lived  in
         Germany for 11 years.   Her  connection  with  the  United  Kingdom
         consists mainly of her studies and the presence of her parents.

    16.    The tribunal finds that the choice of going to Nigeria  to  live
         there as a family is plainly open to the Appellant  and  his  wife.
         Her  current  studies  would  be  temporarily  interrupted  but  no
         evidence was produced to show that they could  not  be  resumed  in
         another country with credit for examinations passed to date.

    17.    Equally plainly, the Appellant and his wife prefer not  to  make
         that choice.  Nor, it seems, are they willing for the Appellant  to
         return to Nigeria to seek entry clearance from there,  because  the
         financial requirements of Appendix FM cannot be  satisfied  at  the
         present time.  But the tribunal finds that these, too, amount to no
         more than  questions  of  personal  choice.   Ms  Adiko  can  defer
         completion of her current studies and seek employment in the United
         Kingdom at a rate sufficient to meet  the  sponsorship  requirement
         laid down by parliament in Appendix FM.   That  will  involve  some
         delay in that the documents required to  evidence  compliance  must
         cover a period of 6 months.  Such  work  may  involve  payment  for
         child care for Abraham however that is a normal incidence of having
         young children, when both parents often have to work to provide for
         themselves and their children as they  may  wish.   Some  employers
         provide cr�ches at work and there may be  other  solutions.   There
         was no evidence that any such solution has been  explored  or  even
         examined by the Appellant and his wife.  Equally the Appellant  can
         return to work in Nigeria and transfer savings to his wife  with  a
         view to her future sponsorship.

    18.    None of these matters in the tribunal's judgment is  capable  on
         the facts of this appeal of amounting to  "very  serious  hardship"
         within the terms of paragraph EX.2.  The  hardships  identified  on
         behalf of the Appellant and his  family  amount  in  summary  to  a
         modest income, a wish not to disrupt Ms Adiko's studies and a young
         child.  Any difficulties which result are far from unusual for  any
         young couple and all of which are  capable  of  being  overcome  by
         various simple and straightforward means.  The  Appellant  and  his
         wife elected to marry and to procreate knowing that  the  Appellant
         would require a variation of leave to remain  under  the  stringent
         provisions of Appendix FM.  The appeal under the Immigration  Rules
         fails.

    19.    Article 8 ECHR was raised as a separate ground  of  appeal.   No
         specific private life claim was pursued on the Appellant's  behalf,
         no doubt because it would be met by Nasim and  Others  (Article  8)
         [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC), which applies to the  Appellant's  private
         life in the United Kingdom.  Family life was the  principal  claim.
         The live  issue  applying  the  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27  tests  is
         proportionality.  SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 provides  a  guide
         to the principles which apply.

    20.    An essential element of the proportionality  assessment  is  the
         best interests of Abraham. There was  in  fact  no  evidence  which
         showed that the best interests of Abraham required him to remain in
         the United Kingdom.  His best interests are plainly to reside  with
         his loving and competent parents, wherever that might happen to be.
          It is entirely  foreseeable  that  the  Appellant's  extensive  IT
         qualifications  might  lead  to  attractive  job  offers  in   many
         different countries.  Ms Adiko  also  no  doubt  has  relevant  and
         marketable skills, linguistic and  otherwise.   Families  regularly
         move whole continents in search of better employment,  as  was  the
         case with Ms Adiko's parents who have moved countries twice.  There
         was no suggestion that Ms Adiko suffered from leaving the  land  of
         her birth and living in two foreign countries,  so  far.    Abraham
         will, of course, retain his British Citizenship wherever he  lives,
         but it is more important for him to be with  his  parents  than  to
         remain in the United Kingdom.  Zambrano [2011] EUECJ C-34/09 is  of
         no direct relevance as he is not facing removal as  such.   Nor  is
         his mother.

    21.    The fact that the Appellant meets some of the factors listed  in
         section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,
         e.g., he speaks English, does not create a right for him to stay in
         the United Kingdom.  They are merely factors which  must  be  taken
         into consideration, and the tribunal has done so.

    22.    The legitimate objective under Article 8.2 ECHR  is  immigration
         control, which embraces many related matters.  An important  aspect
         of immigration control for the purposes of the  present  appeal  is
         that the decision as to which non citizens are permitted to  settle
         in the United Kingdom is not a matter of private choice, whether or
         not there will be any measurable cost or indeed potential  economic
         benefit  from  such  settlement.    There  has  to   be   a   rule,
         democratically determined, which  applies  to  all.   Those  rules,
         already strict, were made far stricter by parliament  from  9  July
         2012 onwards, a process which continues.

    23.    In the tribunal's view, the proportionality balance  is  against
         the Appellant.  He and his family  are  simply  being  required  to
         comply with the Immigration Rules which  apply  to  everyone.   His
         departure or removal to his home country to await  entry  clearance
         when he is in a position to satisfy Appendix FM of the  Immigration
         Rules cannot  be  regarded  as  unreasonable  nor  will  it  create
         consequences which can sensibly be considered as unduly  harsh  for
         him or his family.  Whether they  separate  temporarily  or  remain
         together is their choice.

    24.    Thus, however the Appellant's appeal is analysed, it must fail.

    25.    There was no application for  an  anonymity  direction  and  the
         tribunal sees no need for one.

    DECISION

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.  The tribunal allows the onwards appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, sets aside the original decision  and  remakes  the  original
    decision as follows:

    The appeal is dismissed






    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell








    TO THE RESPONDENT
    FEE AWARD

    The appeal was dismissed.  There can be no fee award






    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
