
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber    Appeal Number: IA/28876/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 July 2015                      |On 21 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


                                   Between

                                    S A S
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          Determination and Reasons

Anonymity

Although no Rule 14 anonymity order was  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge and there was no request for one before  us,  we  have  considered  it
appropriate to issue one to protect the identity of  the  applicant's  young
child.



Details of appellant and basis of claim

 1.   This matter comes before us following  the  grant  of  permission  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins  on  29  April  2015  in  respect  of  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Thomas  who  dismissed  this
    article 8 appeal by way of a determination promulgated on  17  November
    2014.

 2.   The appellant is a Guyanese national born on 11 February  1987.   She
    arrived in the UK in 2005, aged 18, as a dependant  of  her  mother,  a
    work permit holder, and her leave was subsequently  extended  until  30
    April 2010. Thereafter  three  applications  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain were refused. The third one gave rise to appeal hearings  before
    Immigration Judge Cheales in 2010 and Upper Tribunal Judge Waumsley  in
    March 2012. The appeal was dismissed on both occasions. On 12 July 2012
    the appellant made a further application which was refused  on  3  July
    2012 and forms the basis of the present appeal.

 3.   The appellant has a son, J, born on 5 September 2011. He is dependent
    upon her application. The appellant's  case  is  that  she  has  mental
    health problems and that she cannot look after her son. The grounds for
    permission argued that the child looked to the appellant as his  sister
    and to her mother and step father as his  parents  and  that  a  social
    worker had identified that it would be in the  child's  best  interests
    for him to stay with his grandparents. Permission to appeal was granted
    on the basis that the judge had arguably not had proper regard  to  his
    rights and his best interests. Additionally, it was considered that the
    appellant's assertion that she was only able to cope with the  help  of
    her mother was not adequately examined.

Appeal hearing

 4.   At the hearing before us on 13 July 2015, we heard  submissions  from
    the parties. The applicant was present during the proceedings.

 5.   Mr Pipe took issue with the manner in which the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had dealt with the J's rights (at paragraphs 34  and  35  of  the
    determination).  He  submitted  that  there  had  been  an   inadequate
    recitation of the social worker's report (specifically the contents  at
    pp 41, 42, 45, 47 and 48 of the appellant's bundle) and  no  assessment
    of how the applicant would cope with the child if removed (at paragraph
    10; determination). He submitted that the  fact  that  the  applicant's
    mother was a British citizen had  not  been  considered  and  that  the
    evidence had not been properly analysed. A simplistic approach had been
    taken with the conclusion that the applicant's mother  could  accompany
    her daughter and grandson to Guyana.  He  submitted  that  any  resumed
    hearing could proceed on the basis of submissions although there may be
    a need for some updated evidence on the child's schooling.

 6.   In response, Mr Bramble relied on the respondent's Rule 24  response.
    He pointed out that the judge had used the  words  "if  possible"  when
    considering the relocation of the child's grandmother; she had not made
    an automatic assumption that the grandmother could go.  The  judge  had
    properly considered the child's best interests.  He  conceded  that  if
    paragraph 34  was  taken  in  isolation,  he  would  have  difficulties
    defending it however he urged us to consider  the  determination  as  a
    whole. The judge had taken the earlier decision of the  Upper  Tribunal
    as a starting point  and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Waumsley  had  raised
    serious credibility issues in his decision. Notably, there had  been  a
    finding that the grandmother was not solely responsible for the child's
    care. The information provided to the medical personnel  therefore  had
    to be treated with caution. He submitted that the judge had found  that
    the applicant and J would be returning  to  other  family  members  and
    would not be on their own (at paragraphs 26-28).  He  argued  that  all
    component factors had been considered, and  that  the  summary  of  the
    social worker's report contained the salient points. There was no error
    of law.

 7.   Mr Pipe briefly replied. He repeated his earlier submission that  the
    social worker's report had not been adequately considered and  had  not
    been given as much weight as the psychiatric reports. Whilst there  was
    consideration of family members in Guyana, there was no engagement with
    the bond between J and his grandmother. The  findings  were  inadequate
    and that affected the article 8 assessment.

 8.   That completed the submissions. At the conclusion of the  hearing  we
    reserved our determination which we now give.

Findings and conclusions

 9.   We make the following findings based on the submissions made  by  the
    parties and the evidence before us.

10.   The judge's findings are set out at paragraphs 17-37. Plainly she was
    right to take account of the  adverse  credibility  findings  of  Judge
    Waumsley in the March 2012 determination when reaching her  conclusions
    and we note that he raised several  serious  credibility  issues  which
    were not resolved before Judge Thomas. Particularly, there are concerns
    over the change in focus of the appeal with no mention  of  any  mental
    health difficulties being raised on  the  appellant's  behalf  at  that
    hearing.

11.   Nevertheless, we are in agreement  with  Mr  Pipe's  submission  that
    there has been an inadequate engagement with the report of Sheila Hira,
    a social worker, which is contained at pp.  34-52  of  the  appellant's
    bundle.  Despite Mr Bramble's able submissions, we do not consider that
    a brief summary  of  the  report  early  on  in  the  determination  is
    indicative of the judge's consideration of same. There is,  we  accept,
    an engagement with the evidence of Dr Purdy, Dr Persaud and Dr  Silvert
    but only a brief reference to Ms Hira's report  at  paragraph  34.  The
    judge only considers that the applicant has not caused J any  harm  but
    she fails entirely to deal with the  issue  of  whether  the  appellant
    would be able to cope with J if removed and what the effect would be on
    him if she was unable to.  We  accept  Mr  Pipe's  submission  that  no
    thought has been given to the close bond between J and his  grandmother
    and that there is no engagement with what the situation would be for  J
    if his grandmother did not accompany him and the appellant  to  Guyana.
    Her own ability to do so and whether such an expectation is  reasonable
    are also matters that do not form part of the  judge's  assessment.  As
    such we must find that her findings  and  conclusions  are  flawed  and
    cannot stand. In accordance with  Mr  Pipe's  submissions,  we  do  not
    preserve any findings made and the determination is only relevant as  a
    record of proceedings.

12.   We have given thought to Mr Pipe's preference for a  resumed  hearing
    without oral evidence however in view of the serious credibility issues
    raised in respect of both  the  appellant  and  her  mother,  we  would
    suggest he reconsiders his position. At the very least we require  full
    witness statements from both the appellant and  her  mother  addressing
    the credibility points raised by the Upper Tribunal in March  2012  and
    full directions are set out below.

Decision

13.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge made errors of law and her decision  is
    set aside to be remade at a later date to be notified.

Directions

14.   No later than seven working days before the hearing the appellant  is
    to file and serve on  the  parties  all  further  documentary  evidence
    relied on including a skeleton argument and witness statements from the
    appellant and her mother. The statements shall include an update of the
    position  regarding  J  and  the  appellant  and  shall   address   the
    credibility issues raised by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Waumsley.  All  the
    evidence shall be served in duplicate on  the  Tribunal  and  shall  be
    contained in an indexed and paginated bundle.






    Signed:


    Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?


    20 July 2015
