
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28870/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th April 2017                     |On 19th May 2017                     |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               Mr NARESH KUMAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Vencatachellum (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Phull, promulgated on 5th September 2016, following a hearing  at
    Birmingham, Sheldon Court on 2nd August 2016.   In  the  determination,
    the judge allowed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Respondent
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen  of  India,  who  was  born  on  9th
    September 1979.  He appealed against the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 5th August 2015 to refuse his application  for
    leave to remain on the basis of his family  and  private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom, such a claim being based upon his relationship with his
    partner, Neelam Chopra, who  is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that Neelam has three  children,  two  from  a
    relationship with Mr Chopra, and a third one, Hamza Malik, a  son,  who
    was born from a relationship with a Mr Malik.   The  Appellant  himself
    met Neelam Chopra in India because their fathers are friends.  In India
    Neelam became very ill and the Appellant helped administer her medicine
    and helped with the oxygen tank for her breathing.  After she had  come
    to the UK they kept in touch and she asked him to visit.  The Appellant
    entered the UK on a visitor's visa which was valid from  22nd  December
    2014 to 15th June 2015.  He himself arrived in the UK on 22nd  December
    2014.  Neelam herself became ill, bedridden, and had mobility problems,
    and the Appellant came to her assistance, making life as comfortable as
    possible for her,  and  a  close  relationship  started  amongst  them.
    Neelam suffers from arthritis.  Therefore, the Appellant helps to  wash
    her, bathe her and administer  medication  to  her.   He  prepares  her
    breakfast, shops for her, and cleans the house.  He also  engages  with
    the children, and in particular with Hamza, because the older  children
    are independent.  They cannot live together in India because Neelam  is
    ill and needs medical treatment in the UK.  He could not leave to apply
    for entry clearance because she could not  survive  without  him.   His
    claim is that they love each other dearly and he  would  like  to  stay
    here with her.  These matters are set out in the determination of Judge
    Phull (see paragraphs 2 to 9).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge heard the appeal in the absence of a Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer, such that the Appellant's evidence, and that of his sponsoring
    partner, Neelam, could not  be  tested  under  cross-examination.   The
    judge went on to conclude that,

         "The Appellant and Neelam are a couple, they  entered  a  religious
         marriage ceremony.  I accept that to all extents and purposes  they
         consider themselves married.  The Appellant lives with  Neelam  and
         her son, Hamza.  I also find that in the  time  the  Appellant  has
         lived in the UK he has established some private  life  ties  within
         the community he  lives  in.   I  therefore  find  on  balance  the
         Appellant enjoys a private life and a family life with his  partner
         and stepson sufficient to engage Article  8  ECHR"  (see  paragraph
         30).

    The judge then went on to decide that the decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State was not in accordance  with  the  law  "because  the
    Respondent's decision fails to  take  account  of  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant's   stepson   is   a   British   citizen"   (paragraph   32).
    Consideration was  given  by  the  judge  to  Section  117B(6)  of  the
    Immigration Rules, and the judge concluded that  "the  public  interest
    does not apply in this case because I find on balance and  accept  that
    Hamza is  a  British  citizen  and  enjoys  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with the Appellant, and therefore the question of  removal
    does not apply" (paragraph 34).

 5. The judge went on to allow the appeal.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds allege that the judge failed  to  consider  the  issues  in
    dispute, failed to give adequate reasons, and failed  to  give  reasons
    why compelling circumstances existed so as to make the decision of  the
    Respondent unlawful.

 7. On 9th January 2017 permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 24th  May  2017,  Mr  Mills,  appearing  as
    Senior Home Office Presenting  Officer,  relied  upon  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal.  He submitted that it was unfortunate that at the hearing there
    was no Home Office Presenting Officer in attendance,  but  the  refusal
    letter still required detailed consideration when it asserted that  the
    relationships alleged were not accepted by the  Respondent.   Mr  Mills
    directed my attention to page 10 of  2  of  the  refusal  letter  which
    states at the bottom of the page that,

         "The nature of your claimed relationship with your partner has been
         considered.  You have not provided any documentation to demonstrate
         that you are residing with Neelam  Chopra.   It  is  therefore  not
         accepted that your relationship with your partner  is  genuine  and
         subsisting".

 9. Mr Mills submitted that the basic criticism of  the  determination  was
    that the judge simply reaches findings of fact  without  providing  the
    reasoning process behind those findings.  It is simply not possible  to
    know how the judge concluded that the Appellant and  the  Sponsor  were
    living  together  or  that  they  were  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.  Indeed, the judge makes very  little  reference  to  the
    refusal letter.  She does not engage with it.

10. Second, whereas it is accepted that if the child, Hamza, was a  British
    citizen, then he would be a  "qualifying  child",  and  whereas  it  is
    accepted that if as such, he were to  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with the Appellant, then  the  Home  Secretary  would  not
    consider removing the Appellant back to India, all these matters needed
    proper determination and analysis before it could be so concluded.  The
    judge provided no analysis and no reasoning for her decision.

11.  Finally,  the  judge  had  given  citations  of  the  law  which  were
    antiquated.  If one looks at paragraphs 26 to 27, there is a  reference
    to case law that suggests that the Rules are not a complete  code,  but
    even by that stage the Court of Appeal had stated  a  number  of  times
    that, if one cannot fall  within  the  Rules,  then  one  has  to  show
    "compelling  circumstances"  before   an   appeal   can   be   allowed.
    Thereafter, of course, the Supreme Court in Agyarko [2017] had affirmed
    precisely that, but even at the time of  the  decision  of  the  judge,
    there were a whole list of Court of Appeal decisions which  pointed  in
    that direction.  The failure of the judge to focus on  the  requirement
    of  "compelling  circumstances"  suggested  that  she  had  misdirected
    herself.

12. For her part, Ms Vencatachellum on behalf of the Appellant, stated that
    if the Secretary of State was not represented by a Presenting  Officer,
    then the Appellant should not be blamed for  any  shortcomings  arising
    from the non-attendance of an advocate on  behalf  of  the  Respondent.
    Second, if that was the context  in  which  Judge  Phull  had  to  make
    findings of fact, then that was the context, and within  that  context,
    Judge Phull had proceeded to hear the evidence of  both  the  Appellant
    and the Sponsor.  She did  not  just  consider  the  witness  statement
    evidence but she also herself asked  a  number  of  questions  of  both
    witnesses.  This is clear at paragraphs 16 to 17 of the  determination.
    At paragraph 16 she states, "in oral evidence Neelam said she has three
    children ...".  At paragraph 17 she states, "in answer to my questions,
    Neelam said that the Appellant takes Hamza to school ...".

13. Before then, the judge makes it clear that, "I heard oral evidence from
    the Appellant and his wife ..." (paragraph  4).   Having  done  all  of
    this, the judge then concluded (at paragraph 18) that,

         "Prior to a relationship with the Appellant she was receiving  help
         and assistance from her daughter, Ganga.  She did not  receive  any
         practical  support  from  Social  Services  other  than  aids   and
         adaptations such as a footstep, a chair, and a  toilet  seat.   The
         Appellant does everything for her, wash and bathe her and  prepares
         her food.  She helps her to dress because she has a lot of pain  in
         her shoulders.  If she wets the bed he changes it  ..."  (paragraph
         18).

    Ms Vencatachellum  submitted  that  these  were  very  highly  personal
    matters  which  the  judge  probed  and  heard  evidence  on   and   it
    demonstrates the closeness of relationships possible between two caring
    couple.

14. Third, insofar as consideration of Section 117B(6)  is  concerned,  the
    judge did properly take this into account,  and  having  addressed  it,
    concluded that "the public interest does not apply in this case because
    I find on balance and accept that Hamza is a  British  citizen  and  he
    enjoys a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  the  Appellant"
    (paragraph 34).

15. Fourth, that left the question of whether  the  judge  had  misdirected
    herself by referring to  antiquated  case  law.   Insofar  as  this  is
    concerned, if there is an error  here,  she  submitted,  it  is  not  a
    material error of law because the result would have been no  different,
    once the judge had made the findings  of  fact  that  she  had.   These
    findings were sustainable on the evidence that the  judge  herself  had
    elicited from the witnesses before her.

16. In reply, Mr Mills submitted that it was of course the  case,  that  if
    the judge had accepted oral evidence, then she need not rely  upon  any
    other documentary evidence or otherwise, but  only  provided  that  she
    gives her reason for that decision.  Here the  judge  had  simply  made
    findings of fact without providing any reasons.

No Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision  and  re-make  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  It is well established that  the
    jurisdiction of this Upper Tribunal is supervisory.  The  words  of  LJ
    Brooke in R (Iran) [2005] EWCA  Civ  982  are  instructive.   Here  his
    Lordship stated that, "it is well-known that 'perversity' represents  a
    very high hurdle" (at paragraph 11).  His Lordship went on  to  explain
    that, "far  too  often  practitioners  use  the  word  'irrational'  or
    'perverse'  when  these  epithets  are  completely  inappropriate"  (at
    paragraph 12).  I find the same to be the case here.

18. The judge in this matter was confronted  with  a  situation  where  the
    Respondent was unrepresented.  The best the judge  could  do  in  these
    circumstances was to raise issues with respect to the relationship  and
    the  alleged  Article  8  claim  directly  with  the  witnesses.    She
    questioned both the Appellant and the Sponsor (see paragraph  4).   She
    found the evidence of the Appellant (set out  at  paragraphs  5  to  9)
    consistent with the evidence of the Sponsor (set out at  paragraphs  10
    to 18).  After that she heard submissions from Ms  Vencatachellum  that
    the relationship was genuine and subsisting and one  could  not  expect
    reasonably that the family would return to India because  "the  Sponsor
    and her children are British and settled in the UK,  and  the  youngest
    child attends school here" (paragraph 19).  The judge  did  not  ignore
    the reasons set out in the refusal letter  but  expressly  referred  to
    them (at paragraphs 22).

19. It was then concluded, "the Appellant lives with Neelam  and  her  son,
    Hamza" and that "the Appellant enjoys a private life and a family  life
    with his partner and stepson  sufficient  to  engage  Article  8  ECHR"
    (paragraph 30).  The judge also concluded  that  the  decision  by  the
    Respondent was not in accordance with the law because it had failed  to
    take  into  account  the  Appellant's  stepson  as  a  British  citizen
    (paragraph 32).

20. Consideration was then given to Section 117B(6) and it  was  held  that
    public interest did not militate against the Appellant (paragraph  34).
    Mr Mills submitted that it is not clear from these conclusions if there
    is a parental relationship that the Appellant enjoys with his  stepson.
    It is not clear if the Appellant is cohabiting with Neelam  Chopra,  as
    this was a contested matter in the refusal letter.  All one can say  is
    that it is plainly to be inferred from the  determination  taken  as  a
    whole, that the judge does find this to be the case, having  heard  the
    evidence from  both  parties,  which  was  not  cross-examined,  before
    concluding that, "the Appellant lives with Neelam and her  son,  Hamza"
    (at paragraph 30).

21. That leaves the question of whether the judge had  misdirected  herself
    by stating the law in a manner which did not refer to  the  requirement
    of "compelling circumstances" before there could be  a  departure  from
    the Immigration Rules.  Whereas  there  may  be  substance  in  such  a
    criticism, the error, such as it is, would not have led to a  different
    result, and therefore the error cannot be a material one.

22. As Mr Mills himself accepted, once it is established that the Appellant
    enjoys a parental relationship with a qualifying British citizen child,
    namely, Hamza, the Respondent would not require the Appellant to  leave
    the United Kingdom.

Notice of Decision

23. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

24. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th May 2017

