







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28822/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|on 11 February 2016               |on 29 March 2016                         |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between
                            Mr Syed Nabeel Athar
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr A Al Arayn, Farani-Javid-Taylor Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 5 January  1985.  His
      appeal against the decision of  the  respondent  dated  30  June  2014
      refusing his application for a residence card as a family member of an
      EEA national exercising Treaty  rights  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
      Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations"), was dismissed by First-tier
      Tribunal Judge James in a decision promulgated on 19 August 2015.


   2. The appeal was  determined  on  the  papers  at  the  request  of  the
      appellant.


   3. On 22 December 2015, First-tier Tribunal Judge  Frankish  granted  the
      appellant  permission  to  appeal  following  the  assertion  by   the
      appellant in his application for permission to appeal, that the First-
      tier Tribunal had directed him to file his evidence in his appeal by 8
      September 2015.  However, his appeal was determined on 19 August 2015.
      He found that the grounds were arguable.


   4. Mr Al Arayn had not prepared the grounds  of  appeal,  but  relied  on
      them. He accordingly submitted that the documents before the  Tribunal
      showed that the appellant had indicated on 9 March 2015 that he wished
      the appeal to be decided on the papers. The prior appeal  hearing  was
      adjourned.  The Judge had directed  the  appellant  to  re-affirm  the
      decision that he wanted a paper case, which he did on 10 August 2015.


   5. On 11 August 2015 the Tribunal accordingly issued directions that  the
      appellant was to submit all the evidence that he wished to rely on  by
      12 August 2015. This was  complied  with  and  paper  representations,
      including further evidence, was submitted on 12 August 2015.


   6. The Tribunal also directed the respondent to  submit  her  submissions
      and evidence by 8 September 2015.


   7. Notwithstanding such direction, however,  the  Judge  promulgated  her
      decision  on  19  August  2015  without  giving  the  respondent   the
      opportunity to respond within  the  time  limits  directed.   That  he
      submitted constituted a procedural error as the Judge  had  failed  to
      note the Tribunal's own directions. The respondent could possibly have
      conceded a point.


   8. He referred to paragraph 5 of the grounds where it  is  asserted  that
      "... The determination therefore is strongly indicative  that  it  was
      produced with the Judge stepping into the feet of the Respondent. That
      is so asserted because the respondent themselves had made no  response
      (sic)".


   9. Moreover, he submitted  that  the  respondent  had  not  provided  the
      interviewer's comments, Form ICV.4605, which following the decision in
      Miah (interviewer's comments: disclosure: fairness) [2014]  UKUT  515,
      amounts to an error of law. The respondent may well have provided  the
      evidence or conceded this point. The respondent was required to engage
      with this ground (Ground 1(b)) and the grounds  raised  in  the  paper
      appeal, which the Judge "... denied due to her prematurely promulgated
      determination."


  10. By way of background, Mr Al Arayn  referred  to  paragraph  8  of  the
      grounds, where the history is set out in some detail.  He  noted  that
      the appellant's earlier hearing on 10  March  2015  was  adjourned  by
      another Judge as the respondent had failed to  provide  the  interview
      records. The appellant had asked for the appeal to be allowed  at  the
      hearing as the respondent was not able  to  discharge  the  burden  of
      proof on her, but the previous Judge  instead  adjourned  the  matter,
      giving the respondent "another bite of the cherry."


  11. Mr Al Arayn adopted Ground 2, contending that the Judge stated in  her
      determination that the burden of proof is on the  appellant  who  must
      show on the balance of probabilities that  all  relevant  requirements
      are met. The Judge stated at [46] that the general burden of proof  is
      on  the  appellant  and  the  civil  standard  of   the   balance   of
      probabilities applies.


  12.  Mr  Al  Arayn  referred  to  Papajorgi  (EEA  Spouse  -  Marriage  of
      Convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 38 which held that the burden of proof
      is on the respondent in cases in which there is  an  allegation  of  a
      marriage of convenience. The Judge disregarded the representations and
      did not engage with the current law.


  13. He submitted in accordance with ground 3 that  the  Judge  "based  her
      decision on her factual assumptions which were manifestly  incorrect."
      The Judge questioned the finances of the appellant.   Her  finding  at
      [19] that "even though he has no permission  from  the  respondent  to
      work,"  is  incorrect.  In  a  letter  dated  17  February  2014,  the
      respondent in fact stated that the appellant has  permission  to  work
      pending his application and its outcome.


  14. She further found at [8] that the appellant's Tier 4 student leave was
      refused and he then made his application under the  2006  Regulations.
      The impression given was that he made his EEA application when he  did
      not have leave to remain. That impression is incorrect. The respondent
      had withdrawn the earlier refusal.


  15. During the course of his submissions it was drawn  to  Mr  Al  Arayn's
      attention that the respondent's bundle was  contained  in  the  bundle
      before the First-tier Tribunal. That  included  the  interview  record
      sheet. In addition there was an interview summary sheet containing the
      box: "interviewer recommendation - genuine/marriage  of  convenience?"
      The recommendation was that this was a marriage  of  convenience.  The
      evidence to support the recommendation is set out at page 1, which was
      a summary of the interview, which contained 233 questions  in  all  to
      the appellant and his sponsor. The marriage interview  transcript  was
      enclosed in the Tribunal's bundle as per a letter from the Home Office
      dated 24 March 2015.


  16. Mr Al Arayn very properly informed me that the appellant's  solicitors
      had also had pages 1 and page 3 of the "interview summary sheet" prior
      to the hearing. However, they did not have page 2. He accepted that in
      the light of the recommendation, namely that this was  a  marriage  of
      convenience, that the assertion that  the  respondent  could  possibly
      have conceded a point was no longer arguable.


  17. Moreover, he accepted that although the full interview  summary  sheet
      had not been provided, the interviewer recommendation as  referred  to
      on Form ICV/4605 had been given to the appellant, albeit that  page  2
      was missing.


  18. Mr Bramble relied on the respondent's Rule 24 response.  Even  if  the
      respondent had responded to the directions it was  unlikely  that  she
      would have conceded the matter given the particular facts of the case.




  19. The Judge properly took into account the documentary evidence and made
      adequate findings of fact. The Judge found that the marriage  was  not
      genuine, or that there  was  there  a  genuine  relationship.  Crucial
      findings were made irrespective and apart from the interview  records.
      These are set out at [10-37]. The Judge  was  accordingly  correct  in
      finding that the appellant had not discharged the burden of proof.


  20. He also relied on the reasons for refusal letter in which there was  a
      summary of the inconsistencies and discrepancies that were highlighted
      to  the  interviewing  officer  during  the  course  of  the  marriage
      interview. It cannot be said that the appellant was not in a  position
      to know what topics were dealt with. The Judge  moreover  had  a  full
      copy of the interview.


  21. In the circumstances, he submitted that Grounds 1 and 2 fall away. The
      Judge had taken into account the interview records before  and  during
      the hearing as well as the evidence on appeal from the  appellant  and
      his sponsor [6].


  22. With regard to count 3,  even  if  there  was  a  factual  error,  its
      materiality must be assessed in the context of all the findings.  That
      includes the findings at [8]. Those findings were stated from [10] and
      continue beyond [37] where the Judge noted that the witness statements
      produced by the appellant confirm that they  do  not  cohabit  at  the
      Shakespeare Road, Brixton address. This undermined the  weight  to  be
      accorded to the bank statements and  gas/electric  bills  in  the  EEA
      National's name at this address. They confirmed that as the  sponsor's
      son is at school in Tunbridge, they would not  cohabit  until  he  has
      completed his schooling. As he is about five years  of  age  now,  and
      compulsory school leaving age is 16, it  is  their  intention  not  to
      reside together for another decade.


  23. He submitted that the claim that they meet  up  on  weekends  was  not
      supported by the production of train tickets or other forms of  travel
      to confirm this. Nor were there any invoices or receipts for  services
      in the names of the respective couple for these areas. From that,  she
      thus did not accept that they routinely visit each other  as  claimed.
      The "mistakes" at [19] and [8] are accordingly not material.


  24. In his reply, Mr Al Arayn submitted that the factual errors do  amount
      to an error of law.


     Assessment


  25. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has given a  detailed  decision  setting
      out the detailed reasons for her findings.


  26. In the light of the fact that the  relevant  pages  of  the  interview
      summary sheet were in the possession of the appellant's solicitors, it
      is evident that the fact that  the  respondent  was  incorrectly  only
      given a short  time  period  to  respond,  was,  as  asserted  by  the
      appellant,  without  significance.  The  interviewer   recommendation,
      including the evidence supporting such a recommendation, was contained
      at paragraph 1 which had at all relevant times been in the  possession
      of  the  appellant.  It  was  noted  that  there  was  a  marriage  of
      convenience. The evidence in support is set out in full, beginning  at
      page 1 and continuing at page 2 and 3.


  27. The evidence to support the recommendation that this is a marriage  of
      convenience contains a summary of the very detailed interview of  both
      the appellant and the sponsor that took place the same day. It is  not
      contended that the evidence in support of the  recommendation  was  in
      any way inaccurate.


  28. Accordingly, the fact  that  page  2  of  the  interviewer's  evidence
      supporting the recommendation had not been available did not result in
      any unfairness to the appellant. The full interview was available. The
      appellant had elected to have a determination on the papers without an
      oral hearing. The Judge had regard to the  interview  records,  before
      and during the hearing, as well as  the  evidence  on  appeal  of  the
      appellant and his sponsor [6].


  29. She also took into account the documentary  evidence  and  submissions
      made in the appeal [7].


  30. The Judge stated at [8], that in 2012 the appellant's  application  to
      extend his visa  was  refused  and  that  he  then  made  his  current
      application under the 2006 Regulations. The submission in the  grounds
      is that this gives the impression that  the  appellant  did  not  have
      leave  to  remain  when  he  submitted  the  application,  which   was
      incorrect. The respondent had  withdrawn  the  refusal.  However,  the
      Judge considered the contention that his marriage was  a  marriage  of
      convenience on its merits. The possible "impression" did  not  feature
      at all in that assessment and analysis.


  31. In addition, the reference to the appellant's  not  having  permission
      from the respondent to work, whilst incorrect, was referred to in  the
      context that they claimed not  to  have  sufficient  funds  to  reside
      together. At [20] the Judge stated that she  was  not  persuaded  that
      this is the case. The sponsor had claimed welfare benefits at her Kent
      address where she actually lives, and also at the  London  address  of
      the appellant where she does not live. She was also receiving payments
      from the appellant and his brother.  It  is  not  claimed  that  their
      finances are intertwined or that there is any payment received or made
      by the appellant or his brother, supporting the possibility that these
      are payments "for her services" for this marriage of convenience.


  32. The Judge has set  out  the  evidence  relating  to  the  respondent's
      conclusion that this marriage was a matter  of  convenience  from  [9]
      onwards. She took into account in some detail the  explanations  given
      by the appellant and  his  sponsor  for  the  discrepancies  in  their
      interviews, which are set out from [40-44].


  33. The Judge took into account the totality of the evidence  before  her.
      She found that this is a marriage of convenience between the appellant
      and the EEA national.


  34. At [46] she concluded that the "general burden of  proof"  is  on  the
      appellant to the civil standard.  On  the  totality  of  the  evidence
      before her, she found that the appellant had not discharged the burden
      of proof upon him and the reasons given by  the  respondent  justified
      the refusal of the residence permit. The decision was  accordingly  in
      accordance with the law and the 2006 Regulations.


  35. The Judge had been referred to the decisions of  Papajorgi  and  Miah,
      supra, in the paper representations setting out the burden of proof in
      such cases.


  36. At [44] she found on balance that the appellant had failed to "counter
      the objections of the respondent set  down  in  her  refusal  decision
      regarding her concerns." The appellant's documentation and submissions
      made  in  support  of  his  appeal  failed  to  properly  address  the
      respondent's objections.


  37. I have had regard to the decision of the Tribunal in Papajorgi.  There
      is no burden on the claimant in an application for a family permit  to
      establish that she was not party to a marriage of  convenience  unless
      the circumstances known to the decision maker give  reasonable  ground
      for suspecting that this  was  the  case.  Absent  such  a  basis  for
      suspicion,  the  application  should  be  granted  without   more   on
      production of the documents set out in Article 10  of  the  Directive.
      Where  there  is  such  suspicion,   the   matter   requires   further
      investigation and the claimant should be invited  to  respond  to  the
      basis of suspicion by producing evidential material to dispel it.


  38. A marriage of convenience in this context is a marriage contracted for
      the sole or decisive purpose of gaining admission to the host state. A
      durable marriage with children and cohabitation is quite  inconsistent
      with such a definition.


  39. Accordingly there is an evidential burden on the respondent to produce
      evidence of matters supporting a suspicion that the marriage is one of
      convenience.


  40. As is clear from Papajorgji, the question for the Judge will therefore
      be "in the light  of  the  totality  of  the  information  before  me,
      including the assessment of the claimant's answers and any information
      provided, am I satisfied that it is more probable than not  that  this
      is a marriage of convenience"?


  41. The First-tier Judge stated that, taking the totality of the  evidence
      before her into account, she did not find that this is  a  genuine  or
      subsisting  marriage.  The   evidence   before   her   confirmed   the
      respondent's concerns and supported the  respondent's  objections.  In
      summary, the appellant's documentation and submissions failed properly
      to address the respondent's objections.


  42. In those circumstances, she found on the balance of probabilities that
      the appellant failed to counter the objections of the  respondent  and
      did not show on the balance of probabilities that theirs is a  genuine
      relationship.


  43. Although it would have been more helpful for the Judge to have set out
      clearly the approach to be adopted as set out  in  Papajorgi,  I  find
      that she has nevertheless properly approached the evidence as a  whole
      including  the  documentary  evidence  produced  in  support  of   the
      contention that theirs is a genuine marriage. Having  regard  to  that
      evidence she found  that  theirs  was  not  a  genuine  or  subsisting
      relationship or marriage.


  44. The findings of the Judge were supported by the  evidence  apart  from
      the interview  records.  In  the  circumstances,  notwithstanding  the
      factual  errors  referred  to,  which  were  not   material   in   the
      circumstances, the decision reached was sustainable.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  did  not  involve  the
      making of any material errors on a point of law.  The  decision  shall
      accordingly stand.


      No anonymity direction is made.


      Signed                             Date  4 March 2016


      Judge C R Mailer


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

