
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28644/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|Decision given immediately following hearing  |                              |
|On 10 June 2016                               |On 12 July 2016               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Mr SARFAZ ABDUL UGHTRATDAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant (Secretary of State): Mr T Wilding, Home Office
Presenting Officer
  For the Respondent (Mr Ughratdar):  Mr A Miah, Counsel, instructed by M A
              Consultants                          (Blackburn)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Dickinson whereby he allowed  Mr  Ughratdar's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision made on 23  June  2014
    refusing him leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  a  spouse.   For
    ease of convenience, I shall throughout this determination refer to  Mr
    Ughratdar who was the original appellant as "the claimant" and  to  the
    Secretary of State, who was the original respondent, as "the  Secretary
    of State".

 2. The background can be summarised briefly.  The  Claimant  has  been  in
    this country unlawfully but on 11 January 2014  he  was  married  to  a
    British citizen who is of Indian origin.  Although as at  the  date  of
    the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  being  appealed  against  the
    couple had no children subsequently a child, a girl,  was  born  on  15
    September 2014.  Because the child was born to a British citizen mother
    the child is herself a British citizen.

 3. The grounds of refusal were made on two bases (as I have indicated at a
    time when there was no child).  The first was that under the Rules  the
    claimant (who I note in passing speaks excellent English) had exercised
    deception in obtaining his English language certificate  and  therefore
    failed under suitability requirements. The second was that it would not
    be unreasonable to require the child to go to India with his father who
    is an Indian citizen and mother who is of  Indian origin.

 4. As already noted, the appellant's appeal was allowed by Judge Dickinson
    outside the Rules on Article 8 grounds.  It should be noted that in the
    course of her decision she indicated that the Secretary  of  State  had
    failed to demonstrate that the original decision was justified  on  the
    basis that the appellant had been guilty of deception in respect of his
    English language test certificate because there was no evidence to this
    effect before him as at the date of hearing.   It  is  accepted  by  Mr
    Wilding that the Secretary of State had failed to demonstrate that  the
    original decision was justified on the basis  that  the  appellant  had
    been guilty of deception  in  respect  of  his  English  language  test
    certificate because there had been no evidence to  this  effect  before
    the judge.  As at today's date it is accepted by Mr  Wilding  that  the
    Secretary of State would still be unable to establish  this  aspect  of
    the refusal and so this appeal must be considered on the basis that the
    Secretary of State no longer maintains this ground.

 5. This appeal came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Baird  sitting  at
    Manchester on 21 April 2016 and in a Decision and Reasons dated  2  May
    2016 and probably promulgated on 9 May 2016 (although on  the  decision
    itself it is said to have been  promulgated  on  9  April  29016  which
    obviously cannot be correct) she found that there was a material  error
    of law in Judge Dickinson's decision which she accordingly  set  aside.
    In the course of this decision she stated that none of the findings  of
    fact would be retained and so the decision has to be made afresh.

 6. In the ordinary course of events Judge Baird  would  have  gone  on  to
    reconsider the matter herself but for logistical reasons this  has  not
    been possible and a transfer order has  been  made  in  consequence  of
    which the appeal is now before me for reconsideration, an error of  law
    having been  found.

 7. The circumstances have changed as I have indicated above  in  that  the
    appellant and his British citizen wife now have a daughter who is  also
    a British citizen.  As it is accepted that the respondent is not  in  a
    position to maintain any suitability objections I have to consider  the
    appeal first of all on the basis that  the  appellant  is  entitled  to
    remain under the Rules having regard to what is  set  out  in  EX.1  of
    Appendix FM.  It is accepted on behalf of the Secretary of  State  that
    in order to succeed in the circumstances of this case  under  EX.1  the
    appellant would have to establish one of two sets of circumstances.

 8. The first is that he has a qualifying  relationship  with  a  qualified
    partner, which he does, but in order to succeed on this ground he would
    have also have to establish that there were insurmountable obstacles to
    his family life continuing outside the UK.

 9. The second basis upon which he can succeed under EX.1 is if  he  has  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  a  qualifying  child
    which it is accepted this child is (because she is a  British  citizen)
    and it would not be reasonable for that child to leave the UK.

10. Having considered the Home Office Guidance  set  out  in  the  IDIs  Mr
    Wilding concedes that he  cannot  advance  a  case  that  it  would  be
    reasonable for a British citizen child to leave the UK.   The  position
    might  have  been  different  had  he  been   able  to  argue   because
    suitability requirements were not  met  that  the  appellant  could  be
    required to leave the country without his child, but that  is  not  the
    case here and the IDIs make it clear  that  an  advocate  appearing  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State should not argue  that   it  would  be
    reasonable for a British citizen, in this case the child, to leave  the
    UK.

11. In these circumstances and Mr Wilding accepts this must be correct,  it
    is apparent that this claimant meets the requirements  of  Appendix  FM
    with regard to EX.1 and accordingly I have  no alternative but to allow
    the appeal on this basis, which I now do.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal having been set aside as  containing
a material error of law I now remake the decision as follows:

The claimant's appeal is allowed, under the Immigration Rules.



Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 29 June 2016



Fee Award

This appeal has been allowed because the appellant had  a  child  who  is  a
British citizen after the date of the decision which was  appealed  against.
In these circumstances it cannot be said that there was  any  error  in  the
Secretary of State's decision at the date it was  made  or   indeed  at  the
time in which this appeal was launched. In  these  circumstances  I  do  not
consider it appropriate to  make a fee award.





Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 29 June 2016

