
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28816/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8 December 2016                       |On 05 January 2017                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              nana kofi tandoh
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. P. Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. A. Bajwa, A. Bajwa & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Blake, promulgated  on  22  August  2016,  in
    which he allowed the appeal of Mr.  Tandoh  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to refuse leave to remain on the basis of  his  family
    and private life.


 2. For the purposes of this appeal I refer to the Secretary  of  State  as
    the Respondent, and to Mr. Tandoh as the  Appellant,  reflecting  their
    positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


         "However it is arguable that the Judge has misdirected  himself  in
         law by (a) failing to  consider  and  apply  section  117B  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002;  (b)  failing  to
         consider  what  insurmountable  obstacles   there   are   for   the
         Appellant's wife not returning to Ghana to live with the  Appellant
         there, and (c) failing to apply the case of Chen v SSHD [2015] UKUT
         00189 (IAC) where there is arguably a sensible reason for requiring
         removal  when  the  relationship  has   developed   in   precarious
         circumstances which is distinguishable from the facts and ratio  of
         Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40."


 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I announced that I found  the  decision
    involved the making of a material  error  of  law,  and  that  my  full
    reasons would follow.


Submissions


 5. Mr. Armstrong submitted that there were inadequate reasons given as  to
    why the Appellant could not make an entry  clearance  application  from
    Ghana.  The judge had not engaged with  the  public  interest  argument
    under section 117B.  The relationship had begun when the Appellant  was
    an overstayer and his partner would  have  been  aware  of  that.   His
    children were all adults.


 6. I was referred to paragraphs (i) and (iii) of the head  note  to  Chen.
    The judge had misunderstood Chen and had made a  material  misdirection
    of law.  The Appellant still had contact with  relatives  in  Ghana  as
    shown by paragraph 39 of the decision.  The judge had  failed  to  give
    reasons in paragraph 80 as to  why  a  temporary  separation  would  be
    disproportionate.  I  was  referred  to  paragraphs  31  and  33of  the
    decision referring to contact with Ghana.


 7. In response Mr. Bajwa accepted that the failure to deal with the public
    interest was an omission on the part of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.
    He referred to paragraph 64 and submitted that, although insurmountable
    obstacles  had  not  been  explored  in  much  detail,  they  had  been
    considered.  He accepted that the judge had not gone into  much  detail
    regarding the case of Chen.  With reference to paragraph 69, whether it
    had been properly applied was a matter for the Tribunal.  He  submitted
    that all of the Appellant's family had precarious  status  until  2011,
    and it was not clear whether the relationship was formed  at  the  time
    when the Appellant's wife knew that his status was precarious.


 8. In response Mr. Armstrong referred to paragraph 60, where it  had  been
    accepted that the Appellant could not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules.


Error of Law Decision


 9. As I stated at the hearing, and as accepted by Mr. Bajwa, I  find  that
    it is difficult to establish the facts of the Appellant's case from the
    decision.  In particular, it is not clear from the decision whether the
    Appellant's wife had known that his  status  was  precarious  when  the
    relationship was formed.


10. The decision and reasons are set  out  in  paragraph  59  onwards.   In
    paragraph 60 the judge states:


         "I noted that the Appellant had conceded he could not qualify under
         the Immigration Rules.  I therefore considered whether  there  were
         any exceptional circumstances to warrant the consideration  of  the
         application outside of the Immigration Rules."


11. I find that the Appellant conceded that he could not qualify under  the
    immigration rules, but there is no reference to this concession in  the
    judge's consideration of Article 8.  This is particularly  relevant  in
    relation to the  issue  of  insurmountable  obstacles  given  that,  by
    accepting that he could not meet the requirements  of  the  immigration
    rules, the Appellant has accepted  that  there  are  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing with his wife in  Ghana.   This  is
    the wording as set out in paragraph EX.1(b), and as further defined  in
    paragraph EX.2, of Appendix FM.  By conceding that he does not  satisfy
    the requirements of  this  paragraph,  the  Appellant  has  effectively
    conceded that family life  could  continue  with  his  wife  in  Ghana.
    However, there is no reference to this concession in the  consideration
    of Article 8 outside the immigration rules.


12. Paragraph 64 states:


         "In this respect I fully understood the evidence of the Appellant's
         wife, Mrs Nana Yaa Tama when she stated that she would not be  able
         to go to Ghana if the Appellant were removed  because  all  of  her
         children and grandchildren were in the UK lawfully."


13. This arguably runs counter to the concession that paragraph EX.1(b)  is
    not satisfied.    However the judge has failed to  link  this  evidence
    with the concession that the immigration rules are not met.


14. Further it is not clear from the decision whether the judge  has  found
    that the Appellant has family life with his sons, given that  they  are
    all adults.  It is clear from paragraph  75  that  he  knows  that  the
    Appellant's sons are all adults as he lists their ages.   In  order  to
    find that there was family life between the Appellant and his sons,  he
    would have had to have found that the ties between them went beyond the
    normal emotional ties to be  found  between  a  father  and  his  adult
    children following the case of Kugathas [2003] ERCA Civ  31.   However,
    there are no such findings.


15. In the consideration of Article 8, it is clear that where an  Appellant
    has waited for fourteen years before seeking to regularise his  status,
    the fact of  him  being  an  overstayer  for  so  long  is  a  relevant
    consideration in relation to public interest  considerations.   In  the
    consideration of Article 8 outside the immigration rules  there  is  no
    reference to section 117B of the 2002 Act,  or  any  reference  to  the
    factors set out in that section.  The factors set out in  section  117B
    must be considered  by  Tribunals  when  considering  an  appeal  under
    Article 8 outside of the immigration rules.


16. In relation to the case of Chen, and whether  temporary  separation  of
    the Appellant and his wife would be disproportionate, the judge  states
    in paragraph 80:


         "I   considered   that   even   temporary   separation   would   be
         disproportionate on the particular circumstances of the appeal."


17. I find that the judge has failed to give any reasons for this, and this
    is especially difficult to understand given  the  concession  that  the
    immigration rules were not met.  Paragraph (i) of the headnote to  Chen
    states:


         "Appendix FM does not include consideration of the question whether
         it would be disproportionate to expect an individual to  return  to
         his home country to make an entry clearance application to  re-join
         family members in the U.K. There may be cases in which there are no
         insurmountable obstacles to family life being enjoyed  outside  the
         U.K. but where temporary separation to enable an individual to make
         an application for entry clearance may be disproportionate. In  all
         cases, it will be for the individual to place before the  Secretary
         of State evidence that such  temporary  separation  will  interfere
         disproportionately with protected rights. It will not be enough  to
         rely solely upon the case-law concerning Chikwamba  v  SSHD  [2008]
         UKHL 40."


18. There is no reference to any evidence that the Appellant put forward to
    show that temporary separation would be an interference, and there  are
    no reasons given by the judge for so finding.  Chen refers specifically
    to circumstances where there are no insurmountable obstacles to  family
    life being enjoyed outside the United Kingdom, a concession  which  the
    Appellant made.  I find that the failure to  give  reasons  for  why  a
    temporary separation would be disproportionate is an error of law.


19. Taking the decision as a  whole,  I  find  that  the  consideration  of
    Article 8 is inadequate. There is no consideration of the  factors  set
    out in section 117B.  In particular, there is no consideration  of  the
    relevance of the concession that he did not meet  the  requirements  of
    the immigration rules, and there is no consideration of the  fact  that
    he has been in the United Kingdom for fourteen years as an  overstayer.
    Further, it is not clear whether the judge has found that  family  life
    exists between the Appellant and his sons.


20. As stated above,  it  is  difficult  to  ascertain  the  facts  of  the
    Appellant's case  from  this  decision.   It  was  agreed  between  the
    representatives that it would be appropriate to remit the appeal to the
    First-tier Tribunal as further evidence would need to  be  adduced.   I
    have taken account of the Practice Statement dated  10  February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding
    necessary to enable this appeal to be remade, and having regard to  the
    overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision


21. The decision involves the making of a material error of law and  I  set
    the decision aside.


22. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.


23. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 4 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

