
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28736/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 July 2013                               |On 22 August 2013            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                            mr shahid iqbal kiani
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Mehta, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms H Horsley, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant, who was born on 15  September  1985,  is  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan.  On 9 April 2010, he  was  given  leave  to  remain  in  this
    country as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant, but on 8 December 2012,  he  was
    notified that his leave to remain was cancelled, because  he  had  made
    false representations for the purpose of obtaining his  Tier  1  (Post-
    Study Work) residence permit which had been issued on 2  October  2008.
    He had submitted a postgraduate diploma in business management from the
    Cambridge College of Learning, but the  respondent's  records  revealed
    that the qualification was not valid, because this  subject  had  never
    been taught by the Cambridge College of  Learning.   It  was  for  this
    reason that the appellant's continuing leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom was cancelled, and removal directions were issued.

 2. The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Snape on 29  April  2013,  at  Sheldon
    Court, Birmingham, on the papers (at the appellant's request).

 3. In a determination promulgated on 3 May 2013, Judge Snape dismissed the
    appellant's appeal, having been satisfied that the  appellant  had  not
    addressed the  issues  raised  in  the  refusal  letter.   The  removal
    directions were also upheld.

 4. The appellant appealed against this decision, and  although  permission
    to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Warren L  Grant,  it
    is quite clear from the reasons  given  by  Judge  Grant  that  he  had
    intended to refuse the application.  In setting  out  his  reasons  for
    "granting" the application, Judge Grant stated as follows:

         "...2.   The grounds of application disclose no arguable  error  of
              law  but  consist  instead  of  a   disagreement   with   the
              conclusions reached by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  which
              were based upon well-reasoned findings  which  in  turn  were
              based entirely upon the evidence placed before her  to  which
              the appellant had been given every opportunity to respond."

 5. In his grounds of appeal, which were settled without the assistance  of
    legal advice, the appellant had claimed that  he  had  been  a  genuine
    student who had attended his classes regularly, paid  his  tuition  and
    course fees and "had not committed any  deception".   He  continued  as
    follows:

         "Therefore, if any deception has been done by college for  which  I
         should not be penalised.  Therefore I humbly request the Honourable
         Tribunal that permission for appeal may kindly be granted."

 6. In a response submitted under Rule 24 on behalf of the  respondent,  it
    was submitted that "it is clear that the judge had  granted  permission
    in his case, intended to refuse permission" and that  accordingly  "the
    matter should be addressed administratively, without  the  need  for  a
    further hearing".

 7. Subsequent to this response, it appears that  the  appellant's  current
    solicitors, Malik & Malik were instructed, because  on  29  July  2013,
    which was the date of the hearing, this  firm  wrote  to  the  Tribunal
    stating that they had been instructed on 26 July 2013 and  they  wished
    to "submit additional grounds  in  support  of"  the  appeal.   In  the
    additional grounds, it is asserted that an Article 8 assessment was not
    carried out, even though  the  appellant  had  been  residing  in  this
    country  for  "nearly  eight  years"  and  that  such  assessment   was
    "fundamentally flawed".  It was also submitted that the  appellant  had
    now married a European national who was exercising her treaty rights in
    the  UK,  although  no  evidence  was  submitted  in  support  of  this
    assertion.

 8. Before me, on behalf of the respondent, Ms Horsley relied on the  reply
    given by the respondent under Rule 24.  It was submitted  that  it  was
    plain that the "grant" of permission to appeal had been a typographical
    error, and that Judge  Grant  had  intended  to  refuse  permission  to
    appeal.  So far as the substance of the appeal was concerned, while  it
    might not have been entirely clear that the cancellation of  leave  was
    made under paragraph 321A(2) of the Rules, and that the burden  was  on
    the respondent to establish that this was justified,  this  was  not  a
    material error of law.  The appellant had not submitted cogent evidence
    to show that he had obtained a postgraduate diploma from the  Cambridge
    College of Law.  There had been a number of  reported  cases  regarding
    this college, in particular NA & Others [2009] UKAIT 00031 and TR (CCOL
    cases) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 37, from which it  was  apparent  that  the
    Cambridge College of Law never  issued  postgraduate  diplomas  in  the
    subject which it was said this appellant had been  granted  a  diploma.
    Although the burden was on the respondent in this case,  the  Tribunal,
    on the basis of these decisions, could only have found one way.

 9. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Mehta submitted that the Tribunal in  NA
    did not say  that  the  Cambridge  College  of  Law  had  never  issued
    diplomas, they just said they did not teach the subject.  The appellant
    said that he was doing a Master's degree programme.

10. It is quite clear, in my judgment, that there is no proper  basis  upon
    which this appellant could properly argue  that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  had  contained  a  material  error  of  law.   The
    Cambridge College of Learning did not teach the course  in  respect  of
    which this appellant had claimed to have had a diploma,  and  therefore
    he could not properly have obtained a diploma as he claimed.  Following
    the Court of Appeal decision in AA (Nigeria) it is  irrelevant  whether
    or not the deception which was practised was with the knowledge of  the
    appellant or not; it is abundantly clear  that  whoever  completed  the
    appellant's application must have known that  this  appellant  did  not
    have a valid diploma and must have  exercised  deception.   It  follows
    that the First-tier Tribunal had no alternative other than to find that
    deception had been used in the submission of the application.

11. With regard to  the  assertion  that  the  appellant  has  subsequently
    married a European national who is exercising her treaty rights in  the
    UK, this is not relevant for the purpose of considering  whether  Judge
    Snape's determination had contained an error of law, which I have found
    it did not.

12. It follows that this appeal must be dismissed, and I shall so order.







Decision

There being no material error of law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal, the appellant's appeal is dismissed.



Signed:
                                          Date: 20 August 2013

Upper Tribunal Judge Craig
