

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: IA/28024/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 22 July 2014                        |On 25 July 2014           |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between


                             MR MARK OSEI MINTAH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Owusu, Solicitor
      (BWF Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1.    The Appellant appealed with permission granted on 6 May 2014  by
           First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen against the dismissal  of  his
           appeal seeking the issue of a residence card under regulation 7,
           alternatively  regulation  8,  of  the   Immigration   (European
           Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (as   amended)   ("the   EEA
           Regulations") by First-tier Tribunal Judge  NMK  Lawrence  in  a
           determination promulgated on 8 May 2014.   The  Appellant  is  a
           national of Ghana, born on 16 January 1975.  He claimed that  he
           was married by proxy to  an  EEA  national  with  the  right  of
           permanent residence in the United Kingdom.


      2.    Judge Lawrence found that the Appellant had not  shown  that  he
           had satisfied the EEA Regulations.  The Appellant had failed  to
           prove either a valid marriage (see Kareem (Proxy marriages -  EU
           law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC)) or a  durable  relationship.   The
           judge refused to consider the Article 8  ECHR  claim  which  the
           Appellant had raised in his Notice of Appeal, on the basis  that
           there were no Removal Directions.   Here it must  be  said  that
           the confusion was caused by the Secretary of State whose  Notice
           of Immigration decision dated 19 June 2013  (the  foundation  of
           the  appeal)  stated  that  the  application  "has   also   been
           considered under Article 8  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  (sic)",
           whereas the reasons for refusal letter took the stance  that  an
           application under Article 8 ECHR would have to  made  separately
           if the Appellant wished any such claim  to  be  considered.   As
           will be explained later  in  this  determination,  however,  the
           Article 8 ECHR element of the appeal is not material.


      3.    Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Brunnen because he considered it arguable  that  the  judge  had
           erred in his refusal to consider  Article  8  ECHR  and  in  his
           consideration of what constituted a durable relationship in law,
           even if the judge had found for good reasons that the  Appellant
           was not lawfully married nor in a durable relationship.


      4.    By notice under rule 24 of the Upper Tribunal  Procedure  Rules,
           in the form of a letter dated 16 June 2014, the Respondent  (the
           Secretary of State) indicated that she opposed  the  application
           for permission to appeal.


      5.    It was agreed by the parties at the start of the hearing at  the
           tribunal's request that there  were  two  obvious  typographical
           errors in the judge's determination, at [22] and [28], where the
           word "not" had been omitted  from  the  last  sentence  in  each
           paragraph.   No other reading made sense.


      6.    Mr Owusu for the Appellant  accepted  that  there  could  be  no
           challenge to  the  proxy  marriage  findings.   The  judge  had,
           however, misdirected himself as to  the  meaning  of  regulation
           8(5) in various ways, for example in stating that the  Appellant
           would have to have shown that a previous relationship had ended.
            Although the judge had  disbelieved  much  of  the  Appellant's
           evidence, there had been adequate independent  evidence  of  the
           durable relationship,  for  example  in  the  letters  from  the
           children's school and from the family's GP.  Mr Owusu identified
           each relevant item in the Appellant's appeal  bundle  which  had
           been before  the  judge.   The  judge  had  been  perverse  when
           refusing to accept them as cogent evidence.


      7.    The judge's approach to Article 8 ECHR was wrong.  Plainly there
           had been an Article 8 ECHR decision by the  Secretary  of  State
           and the judge had accepted that the Appellant had  two  children
           by his claimed EEA national partner. The determination should be
           set aside for perversity.


      8.    Mr Wilding for the Respondent (the Secretary of State) submitted
           that the determination although admittedly not  ideal  contained
           no material error of law.  The determination had  addressed  the
           durable relationship point and the judge had been unimpressed by
           the Appellant's evidence as he explained. But it  was  a  matter
           for the tribunal whether that was a sufficient  finding  in  the
           face of the independent evidence.


      9.    The tribunal indicated at this  point  that  it  was  unable  to
           uphold the judge's findings  on  whether  or  not  there  was  a
           durable relationship.   There was a material error of law in his
           approach to the evidence.  The durable relationship was  not  an
           issue which the Secretary of State had addressed at any stage of
           the decision-making process, but the tribunal had been  required
           to examine the point at the hearing, subject  to  the  need  for
           regulation 17(4) to be applied by the Secretary of State in  the
           light of the tribunal's findings.  The determination would  have
           to be remade to that extent.


      10.   The judge had been entitled to find against the Appellant on the
           proxy marriage issue, which was not in  dispute.   Unfortunately
           the judge failed to examine the durable relationship issue  with
           the necessary  degree  of  judicial  impartiality  and  balance.
           This was not simply a question of the weight to be given to  the
           evidence.  Although  the  judge  was  right  to  have  expressed
           reservations about the Appellant's honesty  and  character,  the
           judge had had to accept that the Appellant had two  children  by
           the EEA national whom he claimed was  his  partner.   There  was
           also recent independent evidence from the head  teacher  of  the
           children's school that the children's parents (identified in the
           letter as the Appellant and  his  partner)  lived  at  the  same
           address and were known to the school.  There was similar  recent
           evidence from the family's GP.


      11.   The judge was surely too hard [25] on the  nurse  who  had  used
           official  paper  to  write   in   support   of   the   Appellant
           relationship, as there was no evidence before him that  she  had
           not received consent to such modest private use.  To that extent
           she was offering some evidence of her standing.  The  children's
           birth certificates produced to the judge stated the addresses at
           which the Appellant and his partner had claimed to be living  at
           the material time.  There was no requirement to  show  that  the
           Appellant's relationship with  a  previous  partner  had  ended,
           given that the dates of birth of the two  children  by  his  EEA
           partner post dated the child by the earlier partner.  It was the
           reasonable and obvious inference  when  considered  against  the
           other evidence that the earlier relationship was long over.


      12.   All of these matters should have been evaluated by the judge  in
           an even handed way.   Unfortunately  the  very  poor  impression
           which the Appellant's oral evidence made on the judge, no  doubt
           exacerbated by the sham of the proxy marriage, caused the  judge
           to fail to recognise the independent evidence for what it was.


      13.   The tribunal accordingly sets aside the judge's  findings  about
           the durable relationship.  For the reasons  given  above,  which
           need not be repeated, the tribunal  remakes  that  part  of  the
           decision in the Appellant's favour and finds that he  has  shown
           by independent evidence deserving of weight  that  he  is  in  a
           durable relationship with his EEA national partner, and that the
           durable relationship is in his case akin to marriage.


      14.   The judge made no findings at all about whether the EEA national
           partner was a qualified person within  regulation  6.  That  had
           been disputed by the Secretary of State, but as the  Appellant's
           appeal had been dismissed  there  was  no  basis  on  which  the
           Respondent could draw attention to the  apparent  omission.   Mr
           Owusu for the Appellant  pointed  out,  however,  that  the  EEA
           national  partner  had  already  achieved  permanent   residence
           status, so regulation 6 was no longer  relevant.   Nevertheless,
           for the tribunal's information the EEA national partner  was  in
           fact working as a child minder: a certificate of her status as a
           registered child minder had been produced at the hearing and was
           in the Appellant's bundle.


      15.   Any residual issue about that can be considered by the Secretary
           of State when she decides how to exercise her  discretion  under
           Regulation 17(4)(a), where both qualification or  the  right  of
           permanent residence are preconditions.


      16.   In these circumstances the Article 8 ECHR element of this appeal
           is irrelevant and the tribunal need not examine it further.


      DECISION


      There was a material error of law in part of the First-tier Tribunal's
      determination, which is set aside to the extent that  the  Appellant's
      appeal under regulation 8(5) was dismissed.  The following decision is
      substituted:


      The Appellant's appeal under regulation 8(5) is allowed to the limited
      extent that  the  Secretary  of  State's  mandatory  discretion  under
      regulation 17(4) has not yet been exercised.  The original application
      is accordingly returned to the Secretary of State for regulation 17(4)
      to be applied in the light of the findings in this determination.


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




      TO THE RESPONDENT
      FEE AWARD


      Although the Appellant's appeal has succeeded in part,  the  Appellant
      was responsible for the  difficulties  with  his  application  to  the
      Respondent.  There is accordingly no fee award.


      Signed
                                        Dated


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell






















































































































































































































































































