
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/28908/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 August 2015                    |On 7 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                              AFFAN AHMED KHAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr Balroop (Counsel)
For the Respondent:     Mr Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, aged 25.  He  appeals  with
         permission against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss
         his appeal against a decision dated 15 July 2014 to refuse to  vary
         his leave to remain so as to extend his leave as a Tier 1 dependent
         over 18.

Background

      2. The appellant entered the UK as the child of  a  Tier  1  (General)
         Migrant on 16 June 2009.  He was then granted leave  to  remain  as
         Tier 1 dependent over 18 until 26 June 2014.   An  application  was
         made to extend this leave but as noted in the SSHD's  decision,  no
         evidence to show dependency and that the appellant was  not  living
         an independent life was provided.

      3. With the assistance of solicitors the  appellant  appealed  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal with submissions attached to a covering  letter
         dated 23 August 2014.  These submissions assert that the  appellant
         is living with his father.  Reference is made to a  bank  statement
         and NHS letter to show his  address.   It  is  then  asserted  that
         "these all facts clearly establish that the appellant is  dependent
         on his father and is not living an independent life".

      4. The appellant opted for his hearing to be considered on the  papers
         without an oral hearing.  Judge Pacey had very little evidence from
         the appellant and concluded that the appellant provided no evidence
         to establish key requirements of paragraph 319 of  the  Immigration
         Rules and there was insufficient evidence to  support  a  claim  to
         family life.

      5. The appellant  appealed  against  this  decision.   Permission  was
         refused by the First-tier but granted by the Upper  Tribunal  on  1
         June 2015.

      6. The matter now comes before me to  determine  whether  or  not  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
         law.

Hearing

      7. Mr Balroop asked me to note that the appellant believed that he had
         submitted the relevant evidence to the SSHD and does not understand
         why it was not available to the SSHD or the First-tier Tribunal.  I
         asked Mr Balroop to outline  with  greater  precision  the  alleged
         error of law committed on the part of the Judge when  deciding  the
         appeal on the information available.  Mr Balroop acknowledged  that
         the only material error is the Judge's failure to acknowledge  that
         family life could exist between  an  adult  child  and  his  father
         absent 'extra' ties.

      8. Mr Tarlow invited  me  to  uphold  the  decision.   I  reserved  my
         decision at the end  of  submissions,  which  I  now  provide  with
         reasons.

Error of law discussion

      9. There are numerous grounds of  appeal  set  out  in  the  documents
         prepared by the appellant's representatives.  I do not accept  that
         any identify a material error of law.  I  address  each  ground  in
         turn for completeness, although as  identified  above,  Mr  Balroop
         quite properly focussed on one ground of appeal.

     10. The submission that the appellant was not provided  with  a  bundle
         from the SSHD is difficult to follow.  As observed  by  the  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge who refused permission,  this  bundle  contains
         documents the appellant already had.  The second ground  of  appeal
         criticises the  Judge  for  finding  that  there  was  no  evidence
         available as to where the appellant's father  resides.   The  Judge
         could only decide the appeal on  the  information  provided.   That
         information did not  contain  any  cogent  evidence  regarding  the
         father's address.  The Judge was fully  entitled  to  observe  that
         there was simply no evidence  available  as  to  where  the  father
         resided.

     11. The grounds of appeal attach fresh evidence not  available  to  the
         Judge.  There is no good reason for admitting this evidence so late
         in the proceedings.  It  was  clearly  available  at  the  date  of
         hearing.  In any event this evidence does not go anywhere  near  to
         establishing that the appellant is not living an independent life.

     12. The grounds of appeal renewed to the Upper  Tribunal  point  out  a
         'typo' in the Judge's decision.  The  Judge  has  referred  to  the
         SSHD's letter sating that the appellant had  provided  no  evidence
         that "he was...still  living  an  independent  life".   The  letter
         actually states that the "SSHD is not satisfied that you are living
         a dependent life".  It is clear from  reading  the  decision  as  a
         whole that this is a typographical error and does  not  indicate  a
         misreading of the letter.  The issues before the  Judge  were  very
         straightforward - there was insufficient evidence  to  support  the
         appellant's assertion that (1) he was dependent on his  father  (2)
         he was not living an independent life (3) his relationship with his
         family constituted family life for the purposes of Art 8(1).

     13. Upper Tribunal Judge Saini identified two arguable  errors  of  law
         not identified by the representatives to which I now turn.   First,
         the fact that the appellant  had  been  successful  in  a  previous
         application and the SSHD accepted that he met the  requirements  of
         the Rules is clearly apparent from the decision  letter.   Whatever
         the status quo in the past the onus was still on the  appellant  to
         establish that he continued to meet the rules and he could only  do
         so by providing updated evidence, which he failed to do.

     14. I now turn finally to the ground of appeal that was the focus of Mr
         Balroop's submissions.  I accept that it is not necessary for there
         to be ties "beyond the normal  ties  of  affection  between  family
         members" or "extra ties" in order  for  there  to  be  family  life
         between an adult child and his parent.  The relevant  framework  is
         comprehensively set out in Ghising (family life - adults  -  Gurkha
         policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC) at [51] to [62].  I accept that the
         Judge has erred in law in requiring extra ties to be present.

     15. I do not consider this to be a material error of law.   As  Ghising
         states, Art 8(1) is highly fact-sensitive and each case needs to be
         analysed on its own facts to decide  whether  or  not  family  life
         exists [62].  Sir Stanley Burnton stated in  Singh  v  SSHD  [2015]
         EWCA Civ 630 at [24] that "it all depends on the  facts".  Even  if
         the evidence before the Judge is  taken  at  its  highest,  it  was
         woefully inadequate to enable the Judge to conduct a fact-sensitive
         analysis to support a conclusion that the  appellant  continued  to
         enjoy family life with  his  parents.   The  submission  that  such
         evidence could have been available does not assist  the  appellant.
         It was not available and the Judge cannot be said to  have  made  a
         material error of law if, as I find, on the material  available  no
         reasonable Tribunal could have come to a different conclusion.

     16. The decision is a succinct one that reflects the lack  of  evidence
         available to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

     17. I do not find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains
         a material error of law.

     18. I do not set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 24 August 2015

