
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28224/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |            Decision & Reasons      |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 18th June 2015                        |            On 3rd July 2015        |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON



                                   Between

                              vaishaliben patel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Wainwright
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clark, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of India born on 4th July 1986.   The
    Appellant first arrived in the UK on 19th October  2010  when  she  was
    given leave to enter until 27th  August  2012  as  a  Tier  4  (General
    Student) Migrant and on 7th July 2012 she applied for leave  to  remain
    as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant.  That application was  refused  on  31st
    October 2012 for the reasons given in the Respondent's letter  of  that
    date.  The Appellant appealed, and her appeal was heard by Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Butler (the Judge) sitting at  Birmingham  on  14th
    January 2015.  He decided to dismiss the appeal for the  reasons  given
    in his Decision dated the 22nd  January  2015.   The  Appellant  sought
    leave to appeal that decision, and on 30th March 2015  such  permission
    was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The application for leave to remain was refused by the Respondent inter
    alia under  the  provisions  of  paragraph  322(1A)  of  HC  395.   The
    allegation was  that  with  her  application  the  Appellant  submitted
    various documents which were subsequently declared to be false  by  the
    University of Bath, Santander Bank, and Teleca Limited, a company which
    the Appellant had claimed had made an offer of employment to her.

 4. The Judge dismissed the appeal because he did not find to  be  credible
    the Appellant's evidence by way of explanation.  However, he  wrote  at
    paragraph 10 of the Decision:

         "10. The standard of proof is the civil standard on the balance  of
             probability and rests with the Appellant".

    It was argued by Mr Wainwright at the hearing, relying upon his grounds
    of application, that the Judge had erred in law by applying  the  wrong
    burden of proof according to the decision in JC (Part 9 HC 395 - burden
    of proof) China [2007] UKAIT 00027, and  also  the  wrong  standard  of
    proof as given in R (AN and another)  v  SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  1605.
    These errors were material because the Judge had decided the appeal  on
    the papers without a hearing and had not had the opportunity  therefore
    of considering the explanation of the Appellant in the context  of  the
    correct burden and standard of proof.

 5. Finally, Mr Wainwright invited me to remit the case to  the  First-tier
    for rehearing if an error of law was found because the Appellant had  a
    child of 3 years of age born in the UK  and  a  British  citizen  whose
    Article 8 ECHR rights had not been considered.

 6. In response, Mr Clark did not dispute that there was such an  error  of
    law, but argued that it  was  not  material  as  there  was  compelling
    evidence of the  deception  perpetrated  by  the  Appellant.   Whatever
    burden or standard of proof the Judge had applied, he would  have  come
    to the same decision.

 7. I find that there was an error of law in the decision of the  Judge  as
    argued by Mr Wainwright.  It is evident from what he wrote at paragraph
    10 of the Decision that he did not understand that where  deception  is
    alleged, the initial burden of proof to establish the  precedent  facts
    lies upon the Respondent.  Likewise, by using a standard  of  proof  of
    the simple balance of probabilities, the  Judge  failed  to  apply  the
    higher standard of proof set at the end of the spectrum of the  balance
    of probabilities required to prove allegations of deception

 8. I find these errors to be material because the appeal was determined by
    the Judge on the papers without a hearing and  as  there  has  been  an
    error of law, the Appellant  should  be  afforded  the  opportunity  to
    explain what happened in person.  It may  be  the  case  that  in  such
    circumstances applying the correct burden  and  standard  of  proof,  a
    Judge would come to a different decision.

 9. For these reasons I set aside the decision of the judge.  I  remit  the
    case to the First-tier Tribunal for  that  decision  to  be  remade  in
    accordance  with  paragraph  7.2(b)   of   the   Practice   Statements,
    particularly as now the Appellant has raised an Article 8 ECHR issue.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.  I remit the appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
for the decision to be remade.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity and  I  find  no
reason to do so.



Signed                              Date




Upper Tribunal Judge Renton


