
IAC-PE-AW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/28884/2014
                                                               IA/28889/2014
                                                               IA/28887/2014
                                                               IA/28892/2014
                                                               IA/28896/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th February 2015                        |On 22nd April 2015            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                 mr pranavan balachandran (first appellant)
                 mrs shanthy balachandran (Second appellant)
               Mr sagarapillai balachandran (third appellant)
                miss karthika balachandran (fourth appellant)
                miss sinthuja balachandran (fifth appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Jegarajan - Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell - Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by  the  above  named  Appellants,  all  citizens  of
    Australia.  Pranavan Balachandran and Mrs Shanthy Balachandran are  the
    parents of the other three Appellants.  They were born on 16th  October
    1957, 31st December 1964, 16th September 1987, 30th March 1990 and 30th
    July 1995 respectively.  They appeal against the determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge D Ross issued on 13th November 2014  dismissing  on
    human  rights  grounds  their  appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent made on 24th June 2013 to refuse  leave  to  remain  and  to
    remove them by way of directions under Section 47 of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The first Appellant had entered the UK on 17th September  2007  with  a
    work permit visa  valid  until  21st  November  2012  and  subsequently
    obtained a Tier 1 (Highly Skilled) Migrant visa valid until 18th  March
    2013.  The other Appellants entered as his dependants.

 3. Permission to appeal  against  the  determination  of  Judge  Ross  was
    granted on 15th January 2015  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Osborne.
    Since this deals with the grounds seeking permission I shall set it out
    verbatim:

         "1.  The grounds seek permission to appeal a decision of First-tier
             Tribunal  Judge  D  Ross  who  in  a  decision   and   reasons
             promulgated on 13th November 2014  dismissed  the  Appellants'
             appeals under Appendix FM (family life) and  paragraph  276ADE
             (private life) of the Immigration Rules.

         2.   The grounds assert that the Judge fundamentally erred in fact.
              The Grounds of Appeal clearly identify the relevant Rules and
             evidence on the respective cases of each  of  the  Appellants.
             Each of the Appellants claims to satisfy paragraph  276ADE  of
             the Immigration Rules.  Nonetheless the Judge at  [21]  states
             that it has not been argued that the circumstances of  any  of
             the Appellants comes within  these  provisions.   The  grounds
             assert  that  that  was  precisely  what  was  argued  by  the
             Appellants.  The Judge erred in failing to make  any  findings
             in respect of the applications made under  the  Rules  despite
             the  fact  that  the  decision  related  to  the  Rules.   The
             Appellants have not had a fair hearing.  In any event the test
             to be applied is not whether the Appellants have 'no links  to
             Australia' as the Judge put it; the test is far  more  nuanced
             and includes,

                  '... the length of time a person has spent in the  country
                  to which he would have to go if he were required to  leave
                  the United Kingdom;

                  the age the person left that country;

                  the exposure that person has had to the cultural norms  of
                  that country;

                  whether that person speaks the language of the country;

                  the extent of the family and friends that  person  has  in
                  the country to which he is being deported or removed; and

                  the quality of the  relationships  that  person  has  with
                  those friends and families.'  (See  Ogundimu  [2013]  UKUT
                  00060 (IAC).

             Additionally the Judge gave no consideration  as  to  how  the
             cases  of   the   Appellants   engage   with   the   statutory
             considerations in Sections 117A-D Immigration Act  2014.   The
             Judge was taken through all the previous findings of the first
             Judge (FT T J Widdup) and asked to adopt these findings on the
             basis that the respective cases of each of the Appellants  had
             become only stronger.  The Judge  made  no  reference  to  the
             decision and findings of the first Immigration Judge.

         3.   In finding at [21] that  it  has  not  been  argued  that  the
             circumstances  of  any  of  the  Appellants  come  within  the
             provisions of the Immigration Rules it is  arguable  that  the
             Judge had fundamentally misunderstood the basis upon which the
             Appellants' appeals had been put in.  It is an essential  part
             of the appeals that the Appellants fall within the Rules.   It
             is further arguable that such a  fundamental  misunderstanding
             infected the Judge's reasoning throughout the determination of
             the appeals.  It is further arguable that in  so  finding  the
             Judge erred in law.

         4.   As this arguable error of law  has  been  identified  all  the
             issues raised in the grounds are arguable."

 4. In a response to the grant of permission the Secretary of State submits
    that it was open to the Judge to conclude that since the Appellants had
    spent ten years in Australia and having become Australian citizens they
    had not lost all ties to their country of nationality.  The  Appellants
    when asked if there was any particular reason why they could not return
    to Australia simply said that they would prefer to stay in the UK.

 5. The Respondent does however concede that there may be an error  of  law
    in the determination in respect of the version of 276ADE(vi) which  was
    applied because it was changed in July 2014 from:

         "has no ties (including  social,  cultural  or  family)  with  (the
         country to which he would be returned)"

         to:

         "there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellants'
         integration into"

 6. This change applies to all applications decided on or after that  date.
    Reliance is then placed on the decision of YM Uganda  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    1292 as authority for the fact that the version of the Rules which came
    into force in July 2014 should be applied to this case.

 7. At the hearing before me Ms Jegarajan submitted  that  the  appeal  was
    presented before Mr Ross treating each family member as an  individual.
    One of the Appellants had not attended court because she had been given
    leave to remain on  the  basis  of  psychiatric  evidence.   The  third
    Appellant has a place at university  here  which  is  evidence  of  his
    integration and community ties to the UK.  He feels British  and  would
    have to start again in Australia.  Sending  him  back  there  would  be
    devastating.

 8. Judge Ross did hear evidence from  all  of  the  family.   One  of  the
    submissions that was made to me, and  indeed  it  was  conceded  by  Mr
    Whitwell, was that the family are all well-educated and high achievers.
     Sinthuja has some physical difficulties including deafness but despite
    that had take up  a  place  at  Queen  Mary  University  to  study  BSc
    Economics and obtained a First class degree.  She had been given an MSc
    place at the London School of Economics but could not accept it because
    of her immigration status.  She then passed the recruitment process for
    the Civil Service as a fast stream economist and  is  waiting  for  her
    immigration status to be resolved.

 9. Judge Ross took all the evidence relative to the family  into  account.
    He correctly took into  account  paragraph  276ADE  as  it  relates  to
    private life.  He did  say  that  it  had  not  been  argued  that  the
    circumstances of any of the Appellants came within paragraph 276ADE and
    it is clear that only paragraph 276ADE(vi) would apply given the length
    of time the Appellants have been in the UK. He did deal with 276ADE and
    although he  may  not  actually  have  gone  through  all  the  factors
    mentioned in Ogundimu as they  related  to  each  individual  Appellant
    Judge Ross was in my view justified in  finding    that  it  could  not
    sensibly be argued that they have no links to Australia.

10. He then went on to consider Article 8 outside the Rules.  He  concluded
    that since the family could all return to Australia together there  was
    no interference with family life caused by the decision.  He went on to
    say that Article 8 has never protected the right of a person to  choose
    where they want to live.  He considered that the application was  based
    on a preference expressed by the family because of family links to  the
    UK and because of the considerable progress made  by  the  children  in
    their education whilst living in the UK.  He said  that  there  was  no
    evidence that any of the children would be disadvantaged  by  going  to
    Australia.  He took into account that Sinthuja could apply from  abroad
    for the same course at Queen Mary though he did accept that that  would
    be much more expensive for her.

11. Judge Ross did question the submission that the first  Appellant  would
    be able to get a job very easily in the UK once his immigration  status
    was resolved, noting that  there is no offer  of  employment  and  that
    the first Appellant is now 57 years old.  (This was criticised  in  the
    grounds seeking permission.)  He did take into account  the  provisions
    of Sections 117A-D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
    noting that it had been argued by the Appellant that there is no public
    interest in removing a family which is doing so well in the UK and  are
    potentially able to support themselves and can speak English.

12. He concluded that this is not  one  of  those  "rare  cases  where  the
    decision is so harsh as to be disproportionate".  He said that each  of
    the Appellants was asked whether there was any  particular  reason  why
    they would not return to Australia and each  of  them  said  that  they
    would prefer to remain in the UK.  None had a compelling reason  as  to
    why they should remain outside the Rules.  He  took  into  account  the
    desires and ambitions of the children and their potential future in the
    UK but said that he had no doubt that the children  would  be  able  to
    thrive in Australia.  He concluded:

         "The family came to the UK because the first Appellant  had  a  job
         here but he has not been employed  for  a  number  of  years.   The
         children are now adults and doing well.  There is now no reason why
         they should not go back to Australia."

13. I cannot criticise the decision of Judge Ross at all.  He clearly  took
    everything into account.  I appreciate that one of the family  has  now
    been granted leave to remain but this does not in my  view  affect  the
    decisions made relative to the  other  family  members.  They  are  all
    adults. It seems to me that the correct version of 276ADE  was  applied
    but even if it were not the requirements of the amended version are not
    in my view met in this case.

14. There is no error of law material or otherwise in the determination  of
    Judge Ross.

Notice of Decision

I find that there is no material error in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal and that decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date: 20th April 2015

N A Baird
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Baird

