
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28025/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 November 2016                           |On 13 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                            ayaba muibat adeyemi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tampuri, Tamsons Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Ayaba Muibat Adeyemi, was born on 22 October 1975 and is
    a female citizen of Nigeria.  She appealed against a decision dated  24
    January 2015 refusing her leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  under
    Article 8 ECHR.  The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Miller) in  a  decision
    promulgated on 6 July 2016 dismissed the  appeal.   The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The  appellant  had  been  encountered  in  September  2014  during  an
    enforcement visit and had been served with IS151A notices.  Some months
    later, she had made her  application  which  is  the  subject  of  this
    appeal.  The appellant has three children B (born 2008) E  (born  2009)
    and H (born 2014).  The  two  elder  children  B  and  E  are  Nigerian
    citizens.  The appellant claims that the child H is a  British  citizen
    whose father is one John Smith.  The Secretary of State did not  accept
    that H is a  British  citizen;  the  appellant  had  produced  a  birth
    certificate  on  which  no  father  had  been  named.   The  respondent
    considered that the appellant could not  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE of HC 395 or that there were exceptional circumstances
    justifying a grant of leave to remain outside the Rules under Article 8
    ECHR.

 3. The judge in the First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from the appellant.
     No oral evidence was given by Mr John Smith.  The judge found at  [32]
    that there was "no credible evidence that H is likely to be  a  British
    citizen".

 4. The grounds of appeal challenge the judge's  findings  as  regards  the
    nationality of H.  It was not legitimate for the judge to criticise the
    appellant for failing to provide DNA evidence as that matter had  never
    been raised by the respondent [5].  The judge should  have  found  that
    there were exceptional circumstances in this instance.

 5. In granting permission, Judge Saffer found that it  was  arguable  that
    the judge had erred in law by requiring the appellant to produce a  DNA
    certificate in circumstances where she had  already  produced  a  birth
    certificate identifying the child's father and what appeared to be  the
    British passport of that father.

 6. I find that the judge did not err in law for the  reasons  asserted  in
    the grounds of appeal or at all.  I have reached  that  conclusion  for
    the following reasons.  The judge has given detailed  reasons  at  [31]
    for finding that the child H is not a British citizen.   He  refers  to
    the fact that in January 2015 the appellant's solicitors had written to
    the respondent indicating that all three of  the  appellant's  children
    were "not British citizens".  That letter had been written only a month
    after H's birth.  Birth certificates submitted to the  Home  Office  in
    2015 did not name the father but a second certificate, naming Mr Smith,
    had been obtained a year after H's birth.  The statement from Mr  Smith
    was short and provided few details.  There was nothing to show that  Mr
    Smith had applied for a British passport for  H.   The  judge  drew  an
    adverse inference from the fact  that  Mr  Smith  did  not  attend  the
    hearing to give oral evidence.  It was against this background that the
    judge found that DNA evidence would have put the parentage of H  beyond
    reasonable doubt.  He does not state that providing DNA evidence was in
    any way a requirement for proving paternity; only that, set against the
    background of the concerns which he had expressed in the  decision  and
    for which he had given cogent and clear reasons, it was surprising that
     DNA evidence had not been adduced.  It was also significant  that  the
    judge did not find the appellant to be  a  credible  witness.   It  was
    legitimate for the judge  to  find  that  the  appellant's  immigration
    history cast doubt upon her credibility as a witness  generally.   That
    credibility was further undermined by  the  inconsistent  evidence  the
    appellant had given either directly or through her solicitors as to her
    relationships with other men.

 7. I find, therefore, that there was  no  obligation  on  the  judge,  who
    carried out a holistic examination of all the evidence, to be bound  to
    accept that H was a British citizen because  a  birth  certificate  had
    been adduced in evidence showing Henry Smith  as  the  child's  father.
    The judge did not err by referring to DNA testing.  Contrary to what is
    said in the grounds of appeal, the reasons for refusal letter dated  21
    July 2015 did indeed challenge the nationality of H at  [15].   It  was
    open to the judge to draw an adverse inference from the failure of  the
    appellant to obtain DNA testing in circumstances where the parentage of
    the child H had been challenged.  Ultimately, the findings of the judge
    drew it to his conclusion that the appellant had  failed  to  discharge
    the burden of proof upon her by failing to prove that H  is  a  British
    citizen.

 8. Given that the judge's finding that H has  not  been  proved  to  be  a
    British  citizen,  the  remainder  of  his  findings  as  regards   the
    application of HC 395 and Article 8 ECHR remain sound.  The family, all
    Nigerian citizens, will be removed to Nigeria together and there was no
    evidence to suggest that the private lives of  the  appellant  and  the
    children would be so affected as to render their  removal  unreasonable
    or disproportionate.  As far as the grounds  of  appeal  challenge  the
    judge's  analysis,  those  grounds  amount  to  nothing  more  than   a
    disagreement with findings available to the judge on the evidence as he
    found it.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 11 December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 11 December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

