
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/28126/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |Decision Promulgated               |
|On 27 April 2017                   |On 11 May 2017                     |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                           CAROLINE AKOMU ABRAHAM
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Jagadesham counsel instructed by GMIAU
For the Respondent: Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. The Appellant was born on 9 May 1973 and is a national of Nigeria.  There
   are 4 dependants in this appeal: the  Appellants  husband  Collins  Chidi
   Abraham; their three children who were all born  in  the  UK:  [DA]  born
   2006, [DCA] born 2009 and [DChA] born 2012.

3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.

4. This was an appeal by the Appellant against the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Gladsone promulgated on 31 August 2016 which  allowed  the
   Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent dated  22  July
   2015  to refuse her human rights application to remain in the UK  on  the
   basis of her family and private life.

5. In a decision dated 6 February 2017 Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lever
   found at paragraph 25:

      "... the judge while conducting an exemplary and detailed analysis  of
      this case made an error of law by failing to take account  of  section
      117B(4) and (5) and potentially placing too much reliance on the  Home
      Office IDI and potentially misdirecting herself in terms of  what  was
      finally concluded in MA . A failure to fully consider or  at  all  the
      public interest inherent in Section 117B(4) and (5) may have led to  a
      material error of law in that if the judge had considered  the  public
      interest and adopted the approach taken by the  court  in  MA  and  MM
      (Uganda) she may well have come to a different conclusion particularly
      bearing in mind her earlier analysis regarding relocation."

6. The decision was set aside in so far as it related to the  reasonableness
   of return to Nigeria under section 117B6.

7. The following findings were preserved:

   a)  The Appellant does not succeed under the Immigration Rules.

   b)  There is a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a  qualifying
      child.

The Law

8. The burden of proof in this case is upon the Appellant and  the  standard
   of proof is upon the balance of probability.

9.  The  Appellant's  appeal  is  pursuant  to  Section  82(1)  (b)  of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ('the  2002  Act')  which
   provides that a person may appeal to the Tribunal where the Secretary  of
   State has decided to refuse a human rights claim. S84 of the Act provides
   that an appeal under s82(1)(b) must be  brought  on  the  ground  that  a
   decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

10. Section 117A (2) of the 2002 Act  provides  that  where  a  Tribunal  is
   required to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration  Acts
   would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998  it  must,
   in considering 'the public interest question', have regard in  all  cases
   to  the  considerations  listed  in  section117B  of   the   Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended by the Immigration Act 2014).
   Section 117 (3) provides that the 'public interest  question'  means  the
   question of whether an interference with a person's right to respect  for
   private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).

11. The S117B considerations are as follows:

      "(1) The maintenance of  effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
        public interest.

      (2)   It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
        of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who
        seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
        English, because persons who can speak English-

        (a)      are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

        (b)      are better able to integrate into society.

      (3)   It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
        of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who
        seek to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
        independent, because such persons-

        (a)      are not a burden on taxpayers, and

        (b)      are better able to integrate into society.

      (4)   Little weight should be given to-

        (a)      a private life, or

        (b)      a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

        that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
        United Kingdom unlawfully.

      (5)   Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
        person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration   status   is
        precarious.

      (6)   In the case of a person who is not liable  to  deportation,  the
        public interest does not require the person's removal where-

        (a)       the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
           relationship with a qualifying child, and

        (b)      it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
           the United Kingdom."

Section 117B6


12. The definition of "qualifying child" is found in section 117D:

      "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and who-

        (a)      is a British citizen, or

        (b)      has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
        seven years or more;"

13. Reference is made to the guidance given in R (on the application  of  MA
   (Pakistan) and Others) v UT (IAC) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705 in  relation
   to the issue of reasonableness in section 117B  6  of  the  2002  Act  at
   paragraph 45 it states:

      "In my judgment, if the court should have regard to the conduct of the
      applicant and any other matters relevant to the public  interest  when
      applying the "unduly harsh" concept under section 117C(5),  so  should
      it when considering  the  question  of  reasonableness  under  section
      117B(6)...

      But the critical point is that section 117C(5) is in substance a free-
      standing provision in the same way as section 117B(6), and even so the
      court in MM (Uganda) held that wider  public  interest  considerations
      must be taken into account when applying the "unduly harsh" criterion.
      It seems to me that  it  must  be  equally  so  with  respect  to  the
      reasonableness  criterion  in  section  117B(6).   It  would  not   be
      appropriate  to  distinguish  that  decision  simply  because  I  have
      reservations whether it is correct.  Accordingly,  in  line  with  the
      approach in that case, I will analyse the appeals on  the  basis  that
      the Secretary of State's submission on this point is correct and  that
      the only significance of section 117B(6) is that where the seven  year
      rule is satisfied, it is a factor of some weight leaning in favour  of
      leave to remain being granted."

14. In addressing the relevance of the Respondents  policy  in  relation  to
   Appendix FM and children MA at paragraph 46-49 states:

      "46.  Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the fact that  a
      child has been here for seven years must be given  significant  weight
      when carrying out the proportionality exercise. Indeed, the  Secretary
      of State published guidance in August 2015 in the form of  Immigration
      Directorate Instructions  entitled  "Family  Life  (as  a  partner  or
      parent) and Private Life: 10  Year Routes"  in which it  is  expressly
      stated that once the seven years' residence requirement is  satisfied,
      there need to be "strong reasons" for refusing leave  (para.  11.2.4).
      These instructions were not in force when the  cases  now  subject  to
      appeal were determined, but in my view, they merely  confirm  what  is
      implicit in adopting a policy of this nature. After such a  period  of
      time the child will have put down roots and developed social, cultural
      and educational links in the UK such that it is likely  to  be  highly
      disruptive if the child is required to leave the UK. That may be  less
      so when the children are very young because the focus of  their  lives
      will be on their families, but the disruption becomes more serious  as
      they get older.  Moreover, in these cases there must be a very  strong
      expectation that the child's best interests will be to remain  in  the
      UK with his parents as part of a family unit, and that must rank as  a
      primary consideration in the proportionality assessment.

      47.   Even if we were applying the narrow  reasonableness  test  where
      the focus is on the child alone, it would not in my view  follow  that
      leave must be granted whenever  the  child's  best  interests  are  in
      favour of remaining. I reject  Mr  Gill's  submission  that  the  best
      interest's  assessment  automatically  resolves   the   reasonableness
      question. If Parliament had  wanted  the  child's  best  interests  to
      dictate the outcome of the leave application, it would have said so.

      ...

      49.   Although this was not in fact a seven year case,  on  the  wider
      construction of section 117B(6), the same principles  would  apply  in
      such a case. However, the fact that the child has been in the  UK  for
      seven  years  would  need  to  be  given  significant  weight  in  the
      proportionality exercise for two related reasons:  first,  because  of
      its relevance to determining the nature and strength  of  the  child's
      best interests; and second, because it establishes as a starting point
      that leave should be granted unless there are powerful reasons to  the
      contrary."

Submissions

15. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  Mr  Bates  on  behalf  of  the
   Respondent that :

     a) He relied on the reasons for refusal letter.

     b) The Appellant did not meet the requirements of the Rules  and  this
        informs the public interest.

     c) He conceded that  the  two  eldest  children  were  now  qualifying
        children but there was, for example no suggestion that in  speaking
        English they did not speak the primary language of Nigeria.

     d)  In  relation  to  their  financial  circumstances  they  were  not
        financially independent in that their 3 children were  not  British
        citizens but had utilized public funds in accessing  education  and
        had all been born courtesy of the NHS.

     e) Both their family life and private life were precarious.

     f) MA made clear that all of these factors while not  relevant  to  an
        assessment of the best interests of the children were  relevant  to
        the assessment of the reasonableness of return.

     g) In relation to the reasonableness  of  the  children  returning  to
        Nigeria the fact that they had lived in the  UK  for  more  than  7
        years was capable of adding weight to their  claim.  However  their
        private life could be reformed in Nigeria. Their parents  would  be
        returning with them to a country they were familiar with and  could
        assist the children in adapting. While they might prefer to  remain
        this  was  not  determinative  and  their  best  interests  can  be
        outweighed by the adverse immigration history and the  reliance  on
        public funds.

     h) Even allowing for the 7 years they had been in the UK they had  not
        had 7 years in education because of their ages.

     i) The Appellant and her  husband  could  work  in  Nigeria  and  were
        therefore capable of supporting themselves in addition to  anything
        they were entitled to with an assisted voluntary return.

     j) He asked what was unreasonable about requiring them  to  return  to
        the country of their nationality: language was  not  an  issue  and
        while they may have Manchester accents Nigeria  was  a  country  of
        many accents and those amongst the ex-pat community in the  UK  who
        returned were likely  to  return  with  an  accent;  education  was
        available.

     k) There has to be more than a mere difficulty or  dissatisfaction  at
        returning.

16. On behalf of the Appellant Mr Jagadesham submitted that :

     a) The starting point must  be  that  the  two  eldest  children  were
        qualifying children.

     b) He relied in paragraph 10 of his skeleton argument on paragraph  49
        of MA that powerful reasons were required for refusing leave  where
        there was a qualifying child.

     c) He suggested that in relation to the best interests of the children
        [DA] had now been in the UK 10 years and 6 months and [DCA] had now
        been here for 7 years and 4 months. They have social  and  cultural
        roots and it would be highly  disruptive  for  them  if  they  were
        required to leave.

     d) Paragraph 117B6 lays  out  the  relevant  factors  as  required  by
        parliament, there was no requirement of compelling reasons.

     e) If the answer in relation to the  child's  best  interests  was  an
        emphatic yes that this answered the test of reasonableness.

     f) In addition to the  ties  already  referred  to  there  was  direct
        evidence of the children's own views  having  spoken  to  a  social
        worker. They had never been to Nigeria  or  had  any  contact  with
        family there. They would not be returning to the extended bosom  of
        a welcoming family. [DA] was old enough to express  concerns  about
        Boco Haran and the kidnapping of children. It was  overstating  the
        matter to suggest that because the parents were Nigerian they  were
        familiar with Nigerian culture.

     g) In relation to [DA] the Appellant had also submitted an application
        for citizenship on 26 January 2017.  His  application  reflected  a
        recognition by parliament  that  10  years  residence  since  birth
        entitles an applicant to British Citizenship.

     h) It was emphatically in their best interests to remain  in  the  UK.
        Their best interests outweighed the public interest factors arising
        out of the adverse immigration history of the parents.

Findings

17. I am required to look at all the evidence in the round  before  reaching
   any findings.  I  have  done  so.   Although,  for  convenience,  I  have
   compartmentalised my findings in some respects below,  I  must  emphasise
   the findings have only been made having taken account of the evidence  as
   a whole.

18. The Appellant is now a 44 year old citizen of Nigeria  who  was  refused
   leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the  basis  of  her  family  and
   private life. She  is  the  Appellant  in  this  case  but  there  are  4
   dependants named whose circumstances are relevant to the issues  which  I
   must resolve. There is reference to a younger child,  [D],  who  was  not
   born at the time of the application.

19. The Appellant appeals the decision of the Respondent on the  basis  that
   the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

20. I have determined the issue on the basis of the questions posed by  Lord
   Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27

Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority with  the
exercise of the applicant's right to respect for  his  private  (or  as  the
case may be) family life?

21. I am satisfied that the Appellant  has  a  family  life  in  the  United
   Kingdom with her husband and 3 children but  given  that  they  would  be
   removed as a family I do not accept that there would be any  interference
   with their exercise of the right to family life. I am satisfied that  the
   Appellant has a private life in the UK given the period that  the  family
   has lived in the UK.

If  so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

22. I am satisfied that removal would have consequences of such  gravity  as
   potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.

If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

23. I am satisfied that there is in place the legislative framework for  the
   decision giving rise to the interference with Article 8 rights  which  is
   precise and accessible enough for the Appellant to regulate  her  conduct
   by reference to it.

If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being  of
the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection  of
health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the  rights  and  freedom  of
others?

24. The interference does have legitimate aims since it  is  in  pursuit  of
   one of the legitimate aims set out in Article 8 (2) necessary in  pursuit
   of the economic well being of the country through the maintenance of  the
   requirements of a policy of immigration control. The state has the  right
   to control the entry of non nationals into its territory  and  Article  8
   does not mean that an individual can choose where she wishes to enjoy her
   private and family life.

If so, is such interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  public  end
sought to be achieved?

25. I am satisfied that in assessing  the  proportionality  of  the  removal
   decision I am obliged to consider  firstly  the  best  interests  of  the
   children who are affected  by  and  those  best  interests  are  assessed
   without reference to the parents circumstances. In making the  assessment
   of the best interests of the children I have also taken into  account  ZH
   (Tanzania) (FC) (Appellant) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
   (Respondent) [2011] UKSC 4 where Lady Hale  noted  Article  3(1)  of  the
   UNCRC which states that "in  all  actions  concerning  children,  whether
   undertaken  by  ...  courts  of  law,   administrative   authorities   or
   legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall  be  a  primary
   consideration."

26. Article 3 is now reflected in section 55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship
   and Immigration Act 2009 which provides that, in  relation,  among  other
   things, to immigration, asylum or nationality,  the  Secretary  of  State
   must make arrangements for ensuring that those functions "are  discharged
   having regard to the  need  to  safeguard  and  promote  the  welfare  of
   children who are in the United Kingdom".   Lady  Hale  stated  that  "any
   decision which is taken without having regard to the  need  to  safeguard
   and promote the  welfare  of  any  children  involved  will  not  be  "in
   accordance with the law" for the purpose of article 8(2)".  Although  she
   noted that national authorities were expected to treat the best interests
   of a child as "a primary consideration", she added  "Of  course,  despite
   the looseness with which these  terms  are  sometimes  used,  "a  primary
   consideration" is not the same as "the primary consideration", still less
   as "the paramount consideration".

27. The starting point is that children should be  brought  up  by  both  of
   their parents whether that be in the UK or Nigeria.

28. They are all healthy children and have no apparent  physical  or  mental
   issues that would render a return  to  Nigeria  contrary  to  their  best
   interests and there is,  of  course,  a  functioning  health  service  in
   Nigeria.

29. It is generally in the interests of children to have both stability  and
   continuity of social and educational provision and the benefit of growing
   up in the cultural norms of the society to  which  they  belong.  I  note
   therefore that in this case that all of the children were born in the  UK
   and have lived here since birth and have never been to Nigeria: [DA]  has
   lived in the UK for 10 years and 6 months ,  [DCA]  for  7  years  and  4
   months and [DChA] for 4 years 8 months. I  also  note  as  an  additional
   factor than in respect of the older boy the family  made  an  application
   for British citizenship for him but at the time of the hearing before  me
   that application had not been  considered  and  had  certainly  not  been
   granted.  The two older boys have however lived in the UK in excess of  7
   years and past and present policies have  identified  seven  years  as  a
   relevant period. Their length  of  residence  is  perhaps  the  strongest
   argument that they have in relation to their best interests as  I  remind
   myself that in Azimi-Moayed and  others  (decisions  affecting  children;
   onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197(IAC) (Blake J) it was said  that  lengthy
   residence in a country other  than  the  state  of  origin  can  lead  to
   development of social cultural and educational  ties  that  it  would  be
   inappropriate to disrupt, in the absence of  compelling  reasons  to  the
   contrary. Again I note that in Azimi-Moayed it was also said  that  seven
   years from age four is likely to be more significant to a child than  the
   first seven years of life. Very young  children  are  focussed  on  their
   parents rather than their peers and are adaptable: given  the  respective
   ages of the boys in this case therefore the strength of  this  factor  is
   somewhat less than it might have been had they been older when they  came
   to the UK.

30. The boys have both attended school in the UK and there are a  number  of
   positive school reports in  the  bundle  reflecting  the  fact  they  are
   socially and educationally well settled in the community. They engage  in
   out of school activities organised by both the school, the Church and the
   local community but there is of course a functioning education system  in
   Nigeria, Churches that they could attend  and  nothing  to  suggest  that
   activities are not organised for children as they are  here  albeit  they
   would be different in nature and the parents were both educated to degree
   level there and would be  best  placed  to  ensure  that  their  children
   engaged with and benefited from the system available: while the system is
   not free if the parents were both working, something they assert they are
   eager to do in the UK so should be equally be prepared to do in  Nigeria.
   There is therefore nothing to suggest it could not be  accessed  by  them
   and that return would therefore be contrary to their best interests.  The
   disruption caused by moving school and its impact on the children  should
   not be exaggerated as I note that that [DA] appears to have  started  his
   education in a school in Southend in Sea and then moved to the Manchester
   area in the middle of a school year without any  apparent  difficulty  as
   none is noted in any of the school reports provided.

31.  The boys speak English which is clearly spoken in Nigeria and  while  I
   accept that they do not speak Edo which is the dialect of  the  area  the
   Appellant is from, I do  not  accept  that  this  is  of  any  particular
   significance as it is a 'dialect', English is the  official  language  of
   Nigeria and the family would not apparently wish to return to their  home
   area. I do not accept that there is  evidence  that  having  a  Mancunian
   accent would adversely affect them.

32. I have taken into account the report at pages 16-19  of  the  Appellants
   bundle from a student social worker Grace Osuokota. I accept  that  given
   the length of time they have lived in the UK they identify as British  as
   much as a 10 year old and 7 year old have unprompted thoughts about  such
   matters  as  this  is  confirmed  in  the  report  of  Ms  Osuokota.  Not
   surprisingly the children expressed their desire to remain in the UK. The
   report suggests that it is in their best interests to remain in the UK. I
   give some weight to this although the weight I attach must be  inevitably
   limited by the lack of information about her qualifications,  experience,
   confirmation of her expertise in  relation  to  children/social  care  or
   indication of the social educational and other  provisions  available  in
   Nigeria when suggesting that return would have a  detrimental  impact  on
   them.

33. Nevertheless ,taking all of those factors into  account  ,  particularly
   the length of residence of the two older boys and their integration  into
   UK society I accept that it is in the best interests of the  children  to
   remain in the UK but  not  overwhelmingly  so  because  while  they  were
   settled in their schools, had developed  sporting  and  other  interests,
   were benefiting  from  an  English  education  and  had  developed  close
   friendships which they did not want to lose and whose  loss  would  cause
   them some emotional distress there is nothing to suggest  that  education
   and friendships would be unattainable in Nigeria.  I  am  satisfied  that
   they could with the help of parents who have lived the majority of  their
   life in Nigeria be able to settle there and would be able to pursue their
   sporting interests and further education there, where  English  continues
   to be the official language. I do not think that the distress from losing
   friends would be long-lasting or irreversible. Returning to Nigeria would
   not adversely affect their health or frustrate their long-term ambitions.

34. I now turn to section 117B 6.

35. The assessment of the reasonableness of return must  not  however  focus
   entirely on the position of the children and this has been made clear  in
   MA referred to above and more recently in AM (Pakistan) [2017]  EWCA  Civ
   180 unless it is overwhelmingly  in  the  children's  best  interests  to
   remain in the UK which I have not found to be the case here.

36. When considering where the balance lies between the  best  interests  of
   the  children  on  the  one  hand  and  the  importance  of   maintaining
   immigration control on the other I am entitled to take into account  that
   the Appellant did not meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules  either  in
   relation to  family  or  private  life  which  are  intended  to  promote
   consistency, predictability and  transparency  in  decision-making  where
   issues under article 8 arise, and to clarify the  policy  framework.  The
   Rules are also intended to reflect where the  balance  should  be  struck
   between the right to respect for private and family life.

37.  I am entitled to take into account and give significant weight  to  the
   fact that the parents have breached UK immigration law whose  maintenance
   is in the public interest. The Appellant and her husband have remained in
   the UK unlawfully for periods in 2009 when  the  Appellant  overstayed  a
   visit visa between November 2012 - December 2013. They have never had any
   legitimate expectation that they could live permanently in the UK as they
   came as students .At all times that the  Appellant  was  in  the  UK  her
   status was therefore either unlawful or precarious and therefore must  be
   accorded little weight. I remind myself that at paragraph  88  of  MA  it
   states 'the conduct of the parents is relevant  to  their  own  situation
   which bears upon the wider public interest and does not amount to blaming
   the children even if they may be prejudiced as a result.' The family have
   indirectly benefited from public funds in that four children were born in
   NHS hospitals and are those of  school  age  are  being  educated  in  UK
   schools at public expense.

38. Having considered all of the evidence  carefully  and  factoring  in  my
   conclusion that on balance it is in the best interests of the children to
   remain in the UK I have come to the conclusion that it is reasonable  for
   the purposes of section 117B6 to require the children to leave the United
   Kingdom. Whilst it will inevitably cause them some distress and hardship,
   I am not persuaded that this will be sufficiently grave to  outweigh  the
   wider  interests  of  maintaining  immigration  control.  They  will   be
   returning as a family unit  to  a  place  where  the  parents  lived  the
   majority of their life. They suggest there  is  estrangement  from  other
   family members but I am satisfied that  they  are  independent  and  well
   educated enough to live as a  nuclear  family  apart  from  those  family
   members they are estranged from. The Appellant and her husband  are  both
   educated up to degree level and the Appellant with the  Appellant  having
   qualifications in Catering and Hotel Management. Her husband  obtained  a
   Diploma in Law in Nigeria and further legal qualifications in the UK. The
   Appellant undertook employed  work  in  Nigeria  before  coming  to  this
   country in a hotel in Port Harcourt working as a Marketing Executive  and
   in other departments. There is no reason before me why  they  should  not
   obtain suitable employment on their return so as to be able  to  continue
   to support their family

39. In determining  whether  the  removal  would  be  proportionate  to  the
   legitimate aim of immigration control I  find  that  none  of  the  facts
   underpinning the Appellants  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  taking  into
   account the best interests of the children  taken  either  singularly  or
   cumulatively outweigh the legitimate purpose of the Appellants removal.

Conclusion

40. On the facts as established in this appeal,  there  are  no  substantial
   grounds for believing  that  the  Appellant's  removal  would  result  in
   treatment in breach of ECHR.

Decision

41. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                                              Date
10.5.2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
