
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28177/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd October 2018                           |On 26th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                           mr bakir raauf mohammed
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bedford (of Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge N M K Lawrence,  promulgated  on  20th  July  2017,  following  a
    hearing at Stoke-on-Trent (Bennett House) on 6th  July  2017.   In  the
    determination,  the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,
    whereupon the Appellant subsequently  applied  for,  and  was  granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iraq, and was born on 1st January
    1980.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent Secretary  of
    State dated 25th July 2015, rejecting his claim for  further  leave  to
    remain in the UK.

The Hearing

 3. At the hearing before me on  2nd  October  2018,  there  was  consensus
    between Mr Mills (on behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State)  and
    Mr Bedford (acting for the Appellant) that the judge had  indeed  erred
    as a matter of law, such that this matter should now be  remitted  back
    to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Lawrence.  The judge had assessed  the  claim  for  protection  by  the
    Appellant on a balance of probabilities, when  there  was  a  "Robinson
    obvious"  point  that  there  was  a  claim  for  protection  as  well.
    Moreover, the judge had erroneously set out the immigration history  of
    the Appellant but most important, given that the return  was  to  Iraq,
    the judge failed to deal with the country guidance case of AA  (Article
    15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544, and the other country guidance  cases
    since then in relation to Iraq, concentrating exclusively on the  issue
    of help on the part of the Appellant and his re-integration into  Iraqi
    society.  It was significant that the Appellant was  unrepresented  and
    the judge had failed to have any regard to the guidelines  on  managing
    an appeal where the Appellant was not represented.  There  was  also  a
    failure to have regard to an Appellant's true position in  relation  to
    the Appellant's bundle that had been submitted.

Error of Law

 4. I am satisfied, having considered  the  determination,  and  given  the
    consensus between the parties appearing before me, that the decision of
    the judge involved an error on a point of law  (see  Section  12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is  remitted
back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be determined  by  a  judge  other  than
Judge Lawrence under practice statement 7.2(b) because the nature or  extent
of any judicial fact-finding which is necessary in order  for  the  decision
of the appeal to be remade is such that, having  regard  to  the  overriding
objective and Rule 2, it is proper to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 22nd October 2018
