
 [pic]
IAC-FH-AR

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28141/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 June 2015                      |On 10 August 2015                    |
|Prepared 26 June 2015                |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                XIAOHUI CHEN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A White, Counsel, instructed by Ian Henery
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Presenting Officer
Interpreter:   Y P Nan, language Mandarin


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant. The  Claimant,
    a national of the People's Republic of China, date of  birth  28  March
    1993, had appealed against the Secretary of State's decision, dated  20
    June 2014, to refuse a derivative residence card with reference to  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (the   2006
    Regulations), which appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Broe
    ("the judge") who, on 18 December 2014, dismissed the appeal  on  human
    rights grounds and under the Immigration Rules.

2.    It  was  conceded  that  the  basis  of  application  under  the  2006
    Regulations seeking a permanent residence  card  was  certain  to  fail
    because  the  Claimant  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of   those
    Regulations. Accordingly the Original Tribunal's decision  on  the  EEA
    application stands.

3.   The challenge on Article 8 ECHR grounds to the  judge's  decision  came
    before me and on 27 March 2015  I  found  that  the  Original  Tribunal
    decision could not stand for reasons set out in my  determination.   At
    that stage,  having  heard  argument  I  concluded  that  although  the
    relevant decision of the Secretary of State  to refuse  the  derivative
    residence card as a confirmation of a right of residence as the primary
    carer of an EEA national minor  who  was  a  qualified  self-sufficient
    person, was correct, it remained open for an Article 8 claim to also be
    considered.

4.   Thus, at the further hearing to remake the decision  I  heard  evidence
    and submissions relating to Article 8 ECHR issues and directed  at  the
    proportionality of the Secretary  of  State's  decision.  I  have  only
    remade the decision in respect of the Article 8 ECHR claim.

5.   In the alternative if I was wrong in doing  so,  I  am  satisfied  that
    there was no other right of appeal, there being no Section 120  notice,
    to pursue Article 8 ECHR grounds.  I reach  that  latter  view  on  the
    basis that:- first an application for a derivative residence card is  a
    completely different application to that under Article 8 of  the  ECHR.
    Secondly, there are no removal directions contemplated by the Secretary
    of State's decision and thus the Claimant's  position  in  terms  of  a
    claim under Article 8 ECHR is protected for hearing at a later date  if
    a decision to remove is made, when there will, in any event, be further
    appeal rights available.

6.   Turning therefore to the Article 8 claim, the position is somewhat  the
    more difficult because of the conduct of the Claimant's  parents.   The
    Claimant's parents are from Fujian  Province  in  eastern  China.   The
    Claimant's father entered the United Kingdom in 1994 and ultimately was
    granted indefinite leave to remain on  the  basis  of  fourteen  years'
    residence.  His residence in the United Kingdom was not lawful.

7.   The Claimant's mother entered the United Kingdom in  1999  and  made  a
    claim for asylum which had no substance and was essentially a device to
    remain here, as she now accepts.

8.   She then made arrangements when pregnant to go,  via  Northern  Ireland
    with limited border controls, to the Republic of Ireland to give  birth
    to her children, Jenny, date of birth 25 June 2004, and  Jessica,  date
    of birth 8 September 2001. It appeared that with the  help  of  another
    she was able to misrepresent her status to obtain Irish Nationality for
    her children.  The Claimant's mother resided in the Republic for  about
    three months, on each occasion staying with an Irish national. She  now
    acknowledged these arrangements were entirely carried out in  order  to
    enable her to remain in the UK reliant upon her daughters' nationality,
    and thus rendered the parents effectively irremovable from  the  United
    Kingdom.

9.   These children have thus been brought  up  in  the  United  Kingdom  at
    public expense and all this achieved wholly and deliberately to  defeat
    immigration controls in the United Kingdom.

10.  In respect of the Claimant the position was more complicated.   He  was
    born on 28 March 1993 before his father left the  PRC  for  the  United
    Kingdom, he was left to be brought up by his grandparents.  His mother,
    until she came to the United Kingdom appeared to have been living  with
    other family members in China.  The Claimant was brought to the  United
    Kingdom having entry clearance as a dependant of an EEA national child,
    his sister Jessica, a child, and entry clearance was valid until 12 May
    2014.  The Claimant is over the age  of  18,  is  not  eligible  for  a
    derivative residence card as he is no longer a dependant.   He  is  not
    and never was the primary carer of an EEA national child.  So far as  I
    am aware he lives an  independent  life  but  for  convenience  remains
    living at home.

11.  It was again apparent that the device behind the  derivative  residence
    card application was intended to  defeat  immigration  control  and  to
    enable the Claimant to remain in the UK. It seemed to me that both  the
    Claimant and his parents were responsible for that application.

12.  In the meantime in the United Kingdom the Claimant has been  undergoing
    education. Whilst it was said he  was  fully  fluent  in  English,  his
    nerves were such that he preferred to  give  evidence  at  the  hearing
    through a Mandarin interpreter.  Again it may be that  the  payment  of
    property rentals in China to the Claimant was simply to enable  an  EEA
    basis of claim to be made that the Claimant had a  rental  income  from
    the PRC which rendered him self-sufficient.

13.  It may be that  the  rental  income  was  his  parents  but  they  have
    diverted it to him.  Whether or not it was truly his to spend as a fact
    was quite another matter to which the evidence  does  not  specifically
    address (see paragraph 15 and 17 of this decision post).   Essentially,
    although it is a somewhat unattractive argument, it  was  being  argued
    that because the two Irish national children cannot be removed from the
    United Kingdom outside the EEA area and  because  the  parents  of  the
    children are in  the  United  Kingdom  as  their  primary  carers,  the
    Claimant should  be  entitled  to  remain.  His  removal  would  be  an
    interference with private/family life rights being exercised  and  that
    his removal would not be in the best interests of his two  sisters  who
    would be upset by his absence.

14.  The part the Claimant truly  played  in  the  sisters'  lives  was  not
    explained in the evidence and apart from the commonsense likelihood  of
    his having some contact with his younger siblings and  they  with  him.
    The fact was the evidence did not show that the  interference  in  that
    relationship would  not  be  in  their  best  interests  nor  have  any
    significant adverse effects upon them or him.

15.  The Claimant's evidence was contained within a  short  statement  which
    speaks of  his  parents'  immigration  history  and  confirmed  he  was
    financially  self-sufficient.  Separately,  his   parents   are   self-
    sufficient, having money from their business and personal bank accounts
    and employment.  The Claimant simply says  at  the  conclusion  of  his
    statement he hoped his indefinite leave to remain application  will  be
    successful

         "So I can continue to live with all my family members in the United
         Kingdom.   I do  not  engage  myself  in  any  criminal  behaviour,
         neither do I smoke, drink or take  drugs.   I  see  myself  as  law
         abiding, honest and respectable."

16.  Thus his statement gave no insight into the following matters.   First,
    the nature of any private life with any friends or links or  ties  with
    people outside of the family; Second,  he did not  indicate  where  his
    studies have got to and what if any expectations he had for any further
    study; Third there was nothing by way of information from or references
    from people who know  him  in  the  community;  Fourth,  there  was  no
    evidence of  any  dependency,  financial,  practical  or  in  terms  of
    emotional support from his family as part of his private  life;  Fifth,
    there was no evidence from him of any part he has ever  played  in  the
    upbringing of his siblings  nor any  future  plans  to  do  so  or  any
    responsibility for them; Sixth, there was  no  evidence,  not  only  of
    friends but also  any social network or life he has  been  enjoying  in
    the United Kingdom; Seventh, the Claimant gave no indication as to  why
    he could not maintain a private life for himself in the PRC and it  was
    not suggested that  he  would  be  unable  to  communicate  in  Chinese
    (Mandarin) or otherwise with persons in the PRC.

17.  As to the Claimant's family life, he provided no  evidence  other  than
    to say they live in the same  home  and  he  gave  no  picture  of  any
    practical reliance upon  his  parents  or  indeed  they  on  him.   The
    Claimant's father made a short statement,  also  signed  by  his  wife,
    which gave something of their immigration history and  identified  that
    the Claimant's mother was the primary carer of the two children  (Jenny
    and Jessica) but gave no information to suggest  the  Claimant  has  in
    fact ever been dependent upon his siblings. The Claimant's father  said
    in his statement [9] "I am the person who is responsible financially to
    maintain the whole family in the UK.   My  wife,  my  son  and  me  are
    sharing responsibility to look after  our  two  daughters  on  a  daily
    task."  The Claimant's  father  claimed,  contrary  to  the  Claimant's
    claim, to receive the rental income from properties in China  which  it
    was said by the  Claimant  rendered  him  self-sufficient.  Rather  the
    Appellant claimed the rental was transferred to his bank account and he
    was self-sufficient in the UK. Yet the Claimant's  father  claimed  the
    moneys were sent to him and the transfer was to "our bank" in the UK.

18.  The Claimant's mother's part  of  the  joint  statement  added  nothing
    specifically as to anything  of  the  family  life  she  has  with  the
    Claimant and nor indeed did in any substance the Claimant's  father.  I
    did not find the parents evidence reliable or credible of any part  the
    Claimant played  in  the  care  of  his  siblings   because   of  their
    willingness to use deception in the past  and  their  present  wish  to
    secure the Claimant's presence in the UK by any means.

19.  It seemed to me that the extent to which family and  private  life  was
    enjoyed in the United Kingdom was  a  fact  specific  issue  and  quite
    simply there was no useful  or  reliable  evidence  of  the  Claimant's
    private life and nothing to indicate whether, if he had to be  removed,
    the interference would be significant.

20.  Accordingly,  I  find  that  there  was  nothing  in  relation  to  the
    Claimant's private life to  suggest  removal  would  be  a  significant
    interference to engage Article 8(1) ECHR.

21.  If I was wrong  in  that  conclusion  then  plainly  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision was lawful and in accordance with  the  objectives  of
    Article 8(2) of the ECHR.

22.  There was no  evidence  relating  to  the  impact  of  removal  of  the
    Claimant upon either of his siblings nor on their best  interests,  nor
    of any part he plays in their family and private lives or upbringing.

23.  So far as any part the Claimant played in  the  family  life  generally
    with his parents I  have,  in  the  light  of  their  poor  immigration
    history, very considerable reluctance in accepting anything they say as
    being the truth about it, but instead  of  providing  information  they
    provided nothing more than bare assertion. I find that the Claimant and
    his parents' oral evidence added nothing to  the  statements  they  had
    made.

24.  The Claimant was just over the age of  18.  I  accept  simply  an  18th
    birthday does not make a material difference as a fact  in  most  cases
    between  the  family  life  before   and   after   such   a   birthday.
    Unfortunately, the evidence before me does not show  what  that  family
    life was nor if it truly existed  now.  It  may  be  the  Claimant  was
    essentially independent, self-sufficient and made his own life choices.
    The fact of still living in his parents' home  may  be  his  choice  or
    convenience  and  their   preference   There   was   no   compassionate
    circumstances argued against the Claimant's return to the PRC.  It  was
    clear, assuming that the Claimant  does  speak  English,  that  he  can
    probably find some form of employment in the United Kingdom, but whilst
    he may have had various lawful reasons to be in the United  Kingdom,  I
    have in the light of the immigration history the gravest  doubts  about
    his ever  being  a  genuine  dependent  upon  his  siblings,  who  were
    significantly younger, or them on him.

25.  In the circumstances, therefore,  I  am  particularly  mindful  of  the
    position of the Claimant being removed from ready access to his  family
    in the United Kingdom but in the light of the evidence I do not find on
    a fact  specific  basis  that  there  are  any  personal  circumstances
    evidenced in relation to the Claimant's parents or indeed his  siblings
    that militated in favour of him remaining.  There  is  nothing  suggest
    that the Claimant's mother cannot continue, as she was claimed  to  be,
    the primary carer of his two siblings or at all. The Claimant can  keep
    in contact with  his  family  by  e-mail,  Skype,  telephone  or  other
    electronic means/Apps if he does not wish to correspond  by  letter  or
    card.

26.  Unsurprisingly, the evidence presented by the parents of  the  Claimant
    was largely to the effect that there would  not  be  much  for  him  to
    return to in the PRC.  I find their evidence was not reliable on  those
    matters because of their self evident interest in keeping him in the UK
    and willingness to use deception to achieve their immigration goals.

27.  In considering the Article 8  claim,  I  apply  the  cases  of   Razgar
    [2004], Huang [2007] and ZH (Tanzania) [2013],  I have  considered  the
    evidence in the context of SS  (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387,  Gurung
    [2012] EWCA Civ 3 and insofar as it is applicable to the context of the
    claim Ghising [2012] UKUT 160.

28.  I fully  take  into  account  the  ages  of  his  siblings  and  as  ZH
    indicates, I put  to  one  side  the  Claimant's  parents'  conduct  in
    establishing themselves and the Claimant in the  United  Kingdom  in  a
    wholly unmeritorious fashion.  It  does  not  seem  to  me  that  their
    conduct should be held against the Claimant.  Similarly I do not accept
    the Claimant's parents' evidence that the Claimant  has  no  family  to
    make contact with in the PRC. It seemed to me that their  evidence  was
    completely driven by their  desire  to  keep  Claimant  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

29.  Although it was said the Claimant sometimes helped with  his  sibling's
    care I  am  left  with  no  picture  of  any  significant  or  material
    contribution he made.  I have no evidence of any  significant  harm  or
    material harm to his siblings from his absence, nor evidence  of  their
    best interests.  In terms of the public interest,  I  find  that  is  a
    matter which must be significant in  terms  of  weight.   I  take  into
    account, although it was less than clear how far the Claimant's A level
    studies, by distance learning, have actually got.  I have no  idea  how
    the Claimant actually supported himself from what  was  said  to  be  a
    rental income of �4,982 every three months or whether he was paying for
    his education.  I find the likelihood was that the Claimant at the  age
    he is, was effectively independent of his  parents  albeit  within  the
    usual constraints of living  in   his  parents'  home.   I  accept  the
    Claimant has the normal emotional ties with his parents which cannot be
    regarded as insignificant, but only to be expected between parents  and
    their eldest child and none which indicated any emotional reliance  one
    upon another.

30.  However, it is fair to say that the Claimant's  entry  to  the  UK  was
    obtained by the devices of his parents and in my opinion his status was
    precarious if their deception became known.  I  find  that  the  public
    interest in the maintenance of immigration controls and Article 8(2) of
    the ECHR was such that those  matters  relied  upon  by  the  Claimant,
    applying the approach of Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 [25] as it is said
    modified by Ghising,  nevertheless  indicated  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision was lawful and proportionate in relation to his family
    life.

31.  The Claimant must have a private life, it  would  seem  in  the  United
    Kingdom, but I have no evidence of it. Whilst it is said in the context
    for example of EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 that the Claimant's
    parents have been frank today and therefore should be given some credit
    for it, I found that was not an attractive  argument  bearing  in  mind
    they really had no alternative than to admit their past conduct;  given
    the surrounding facts  so  obviously  disclosed  their  willingness  to
    deceive or evade UK immigration  controls.   I  have  fully  considered
    Ss.117A-C of the Immigration Act 2014.  I do not  find  the  Claimant's
    English language  skills,  capacity  for  employment,  some  education,
    talent and experiences  militated in favour of his  remaining,  nor  do
    his personal interests outweigh  the public interest  in  his  removal.
    It does not seem to me the parents' frankness  today  about  their  own
    immigration history, but not the Claimant's EEA  application,  rendered
    their evidence reliable or credible on Article 8 issues or the issue of
    proportionality.

32.  The fact that the parents own their own home, they work and are  firmly
    established in the United Kingdom was a material consideration but I do
    not find they outweigh other pertinent considerations to the  claim  by
    the Claimant as a whole or the public interest. On the minimal evidence
    provided I do not find that removal would be disproportionate

33.  The Claimant's appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds is dismissed.



Signed   Date 17 July 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

