
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/28345/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2 December 2016                   |On 5 December 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                IBRAHIM NAYAN
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr A Agbim, Solicitor
For the Respondent:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This  appeal  is  brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  however  for
      convenience I shall refer to the parties as they were before the First-
      tier Tribunal.


   2. The appellant is a national of Ghana. He entered the UK in 2003  as  a
      visitor and overstayed. In March 2012, March 2014 and November 2014 he
      made applications for a residence card as the unmarried partner of  an
      EEA national. All have been refused and the most recent  refusal  gave
      rise to these proceedings.


   3. The appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge S Taylor by way of
      a determination promulgated on 5 July 2016. There was no appearance on
      behalf of the respondent at the hearing.


   4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Chohan
      on 7 November 2016. Whilst he considered that the judge arguably erred
      in allowing the  appeal  outright  instead  of  remitting  it  to  the
      respondent to consider her discretion, he observed that the issue  was
      academic following the case of Sala (EFMs:  right  of  appeal)  [2016]
      UKUT 00411 (IAC) where it had held by the Tribunal that there  was  no
      statutory right of appeal against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of
      State to refuse to issue a residence card to an extended family member
      of an EEA national.


   5. At the hearing before me Mr Melvin sought permission to  rely  on  the
      judgment  in  Sala.  Mr  Agbim  did  not  object  and  I  granted  the
      application.


   6. Mr Melvin submitted that following the decision in Sala, there was  no
      right of appeal against a decision taken  under  reg.  8(5)  and  that
      there had therefore been nothing before the  Tribunal  to  decide.  It
      followed that the determination was void.


   7. Mr Agbim submitted that Sala had been promulgated after Judge Taylor's
      determination  and  did  not  address  the  issue  of  discretion.  He
      disagreed with the proposition that there was no right of appeal.


   8. Mr Melvin briefly responded. He submitted that it was clear  that  the
      judgment impacted on  all  decided  cases  involving  extended  family
      members. There had been no appeal before the Tribunal  to  decide  and
      the determination was void.


   9. At the conclusion of the hearing I indicated that I concurred with the
      respondent's submissions and that my determination would follow.


  10. As the unmarried partner of the sponsor, the appellant is an  extended
      family member. He therefore falls within the category of persons  that
      the Tribunal dealt with in Sala.  On the reasoning of that appeal, the
      First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal against the
      refusal to document him as the EFM of the sponsor. It does not  matter
      that Sala was promulgated after the appellant's determination  as  the
      judgment sets out the law as it should have been applied regardless of
      when the appeal was  heard.  It  follows  that  the  determination  is
      rendered void.








  11. Decision


  12. There was no appeal before the First-tier Tribunal to  determine.  The
      determination is set aside and the appellant's appeal is dismissed for
      want of jurisdiction.



    Signed





       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 2 December 2016



