
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28373/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th February 2015                |On 16th March 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                             Miss Simranjit Kaur
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr V Makol (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against decisions to refuse to  vary  her  leave
    and to remove her from the United Kingdom, made on 24th June 2013,  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  O'Garro  ("the  judge")  in  a
    determination promulgated on 19th February 2014.  The judge found  that
    the ground of refusal under paragraph 322(1A) was made out and that the
    appellant could not show that the requirements of the rules  were  met,
    in relation to her application for further leave.  She  also  concluded
    that the requirements of the rules were not met in relation to  Article
    8 of the Human Rights Convention and that the  adverse  decisions  were
    proportionate and lawful.

2.   An application was made for permission  to  appeal,  in  which  it  was
    contended that the Tier 1 application made by the appellant was  varied
    by her, to a Tier 4 (Student) application and  that  as  there  was  no
    conclusive evidence (paragraph 7  of  the  grounds)  showing  that  the
    appellant herself committed deception or intentionally  provided  false
    information "in her current or previous  application,  which  had  been
    varied", the ground of refusal under paragraph  322(1A)  was  not  made
    out.  Similarly, the discretionary ground under  paragraph  322(2)  was
    also not made out.  It was also contended  that  the  judge  failed  to
    indicate  that  a  substantive  decision  would  be  made  and  instead
    suggested at the hearing that the  matter  would  be  remitted  to  the
    Secretary of State.  A "full-scale determination" (paragraph 9  of  the
    grounds) was not expected.

3.   Whereas the judge  treated  the  application  for  leave  made  by  the
    appellant as a varied one, from Tier 1 to Tier 4, the  proper  approach
    was to treat any deception as limited to the  "first  application"  and
    not the varied one.  It was also contended, in a short paragraph,  that
    the judge failed to carry out a proper  proportionality  assessment  in
    relation to Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted on 18th July 2014, on the  basis  that
    it was arguable that the  judge  ought  to  have  heard  more  detailed
    evidence on the issue of dishonesty.

5.   The matter came before me on  5th  September  2014.   The  hearing  was
    adjourned, so that a typed copy of the Record of Proceedings  could  be
    obtained.  The judge helpfully produced a typed copy of her handwritten
    note and this was made  available  to  the  representatives,  when  the
    hearing resumed on 17th February 2015.

Background

6.   The appellant was given leave to remain as a student, between  November
    2008 and February 2010.  In October the previous year,  she  was  given
    leave in the Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) category.   On  1st  April  2011,
    before expiry of that leave, she made a further application  for  leave
    as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant which, on 26th September 2012, she varied
    so as to seek leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Migrant instead.

7.    In  refusing  the  application  and  making  the  adverse  immigration
    decisions, the Secretary of State noted that  the  appellant  submitted
    invoices addressed to Power Stream Employment  Limited,  bearing  dates
    between 3rd May 2010 and 7th March 2011.  These documents  were  false,
    as shown in the conviction of two men following a  trial  at  Isleworth
    Crown Court, where both admitted charges of conspiracy to  defraud  the
    Secretary of State.  It emerged in those proceedings that Power  Stream
    Employment Limited had never participated in any  legitimate  trade  or
    business in the United Kingdom.   As  the  appellant  relied  on  false
    documents in support of her application, the Secretary of State refused
    it under paragraph 322(1A) of the rules.  Refusal was  the  appropriate
    course in the varied application, in which the appellant  sought  leave
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant, under  paragraph  245ZX(a),  (c)
    and (d).

8.   As noted above, the appellant's response, in her grounds of  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal, was that she herself had not been involved  in
    any deception.  In varying her application in September 2012, she  made
    it clear to the Secretary of State that she had no intention of relying
    upon the documents forming part of the Tier 1 application  as  she  had
    simply trusted an agent to make it for her and was horrified  when  she
    discovered the Power Stream invoices and other documents.

9.   At the Upper Tribunal hearing on 5th September 2014, it  was  contended
    that the judge had acted unfairly.  In the  course  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  hearing, she indicated that she was minded to remit the  case
    to the Secretary of State, as the two representatives present  on  that
    occasion confirmed. The Presenting Officer representing  the  Secretary
    of State prepared a typed note, which recorded the  judge's  indication
    to "remit this case back to SoS as this decision is not  in  accordance
    with the law".  In the same note, the Presenting Officer recorded  that
    the judge "reserved her determination".  The appellant's case that  the
    appropriate  candidate  ground  of  refusal  was  paragraph  322(2),  a
    discretionary ground, and not paragraph 322(1A) is also noted, "because
    the alleged documents were supplied in the previous application not  in
    the current application under T4".

10.  In response to case management directions made in September  2014,  the
    solicitor appearing on behalf of the appellant  made  a  short  witness
    statement, exhibiting his note of the proceedings on 24th January 2014.
     This  records  the  representative  raising  a  preliminary  point  in
    relation to the appropriate ground of  refusal.   The  representative's
    note shows that the argument was indeed that the  discretionary  ground
    should have been used as the false documents were "supplied in previous
    application and not in current Tier 4 application".  The representative
    "argued this point" before the judge.  There is then the following:

         "IJ indicated that she cannot consider the Home  Office  discretion
         and was minded to send the matter back to Home  Office.   HOPO  did
         not object to this and was not sure  why  para  322(1A)  was  used.
         Hearing continued.  Miss Kaur gave live evidence and simply adopted
         her  witness  statement.   HOPO  asked  question  in  relation   to
         declaration signed on Tier 1 form.  Few questions asked  by  IJ  in
         relation to the previous Tier 1 application.  Short submission made
         by me that no false documents in current  Tier  4  application  and
         therefore application does not fall for refusal under para 322(1A).
          Also relied on skeleton argument.  Determination reserved."

11.  The judge's typed Record of Proceedings is short.  It consists  of  the
    following:

         "Appellant  attended.   Appellant  adopted  her  statement  as  her
         evidence.

         Cross

         You explained you signed Tier 1 application when  ready.   Did  you
         see section 5?

         I completely trusted the representative.  I didn't see  whether  it
         was Tier 1 or Tier 4.

         Did you read the document?

         No that is my mistake

         Submissions-Respond

         Rely on refusal and requirements of paragraph 322(2)

         Submissions-App

         Rely on skeleton argument."

12.  The skeleton argument referred to in the  representative's  record  and
    by the judge in her Record of Proceedings shows that the case  advanced
    on behalf of the appellant before the judge was essentially this.   The
    appellant  did  not  employ  deception  as  explained  in  her  witness
    statement.  Her application did not fall for  refusal  under  paragraph
    322(1A) as there was nothing  conclusive  showing  that  she  had  used
    deception or provided false information.   Reliance  was  placed  on  a
    number of well-known authorities, including JC [2007] UKAIT  00027,  RP
    [2006] UKAIT 00086, AA (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA  Civ  773  and  Kulasekara
    [2011] EWCA Civ 134.

13.  The skeleton  argument  also  contained  a  case  in  response  to  the
    Secretary of State's finding that no valid  CAS  was  produced  by  the
    appellant.  In this context, it was contended that the appellant  ought
    to have the benefit  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy  following
    revocation of a sponsor's licence and an opportunity  to  switch  to  a
    different sponsor.  So far as Article 8 of the Human Rights  Convention
    was  concerned,  the  skeleton  argument  briefly  asserted  that   the
    appellant had established a private life in the United Kingdom,  having
    lived here "for a considerable length of time".  She  wished  to  study
    with a Tier 4 sponsor.

Submissions on Error of Law

14.  Mr Makol said that the judge's Record of Proceedings  made  no  mention
    of her indication that she was minded to remit the  case  back  to  the
    Secretary  of  State.   The  Presenting  Officer  and  the  appellant's
    representative had mentioned this in their  notes.   The  determination
    was unexpected, in the light of the indication earlier in  the  hearing
    that the judge would remit the case.  The additional witness  statement
    made following variation of the  application  for  leave,  so  that  it
    became a Tier 4 application, was  not  put  to  the  appellant  at  the
    hearing.  She took steps to expedite her application, including seeking
    judicial review, and this led in due course to the Secretary of State's
    adverse decision.  The appellant made clear in her  varied  application
    and subsequently that she did not  wish  to  rely  on  documents  which
    accompanied the Tier 1 application.

15.  Mr  Makol  submitted  that  in  the  light  of  the  appellant's  clear
    indication, the Secretary of State could not  properly  rely  on  those
    documents, concerning Power Stream Employment  Limited.   Instead,  the
    varied application fell to be considered  only  on  the  basis  of  the
    documents the appellant submitted at the time  of  variation.   In  the
    determination, the judge found that the appellant  deliberately  closed
    her eyes to deception but this was not put to her in the course of  the
    hearing, in evidence.  The Record of Proceedings  did  not  show  which
    evidence was considered by the judge or what  emerged  in  evidence-in-
    chief.  The judge's record made no mention of  the  witness  statements
    made by the appellant or the covering letter and other documents  which
    accompanied the variation of the leave application, in September 2012.

16.  Ms Isherwood  said  that  false  documents  were  clearly  supplied  in
    support of the application for leave.  The judge made a  clear  finding
    to this effect at paragraph 30 of the determination.   The  application
    for leave was not the first one made by the  appellant  and  the  judge
    dealt with the matter appropriately.  The background was that  criminal
    proceedings were brought  in  relation  to  a  bogus  company  and  the
    sponsorship licence was withdrawn from the  appellant's  college.   The
    judge was entitled to find that she put in an application  on  a  false
    basis, albeit that she relied upon  an  agent.   She  then  varied  her
    application but it was not  open  to  her  to  ask  for  the  documents
    originally submitted to be ignored.  The  appellant  appeared  to  have
    been one of about 250 people who relied on false  documents  apparently
    emanating from Power Stream Employment Limited.  Again, the judge  made
    clear findings on these matters.

17.  The Record of Proceedings shows that the appellant  accepted  that  she
    made a mistake in not reading the application made on her  behalf.   In
    the light of that evidence, the judge was clearly entitled to reach the
    conclusions she did.

18.  In a response, Mr Makol said that the appellant had not been  asked  at
    the hearing which documents she gave to  the  agent.   In  her  witness
    statement, she drew attention to Lloyds  Bank  statements  accompanying
    the Tier 1  application,  whereas  her  own  accounts  were  held  with
    Barclays  and  HSBC.   The  appellant's  case  was  that   the   varied
    application was the one that fell to be considered by the Secretary  of
    State.  AA (Nigeria) could be distinguished because  the  appellant  in
    the present case expressly did not rely on the documents submitted with
    the Tier 1 application.   Instead,  she  relied  only  on  those  which
    supported her Tier 4 application.

19.  Mr Makol said that if procedural unfairness were  found  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal, taking into account the lack  of  detail  in  the  Record  of
    Proceedings, the appeal should be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and decided afresh.  The case could then  be  argued  properly  and  in
    full.  This would be the proper course.

Conclusion on Error of Law

20.  The critical questions are  these:  was  there  procedural  unfairness,
    taking into account the judge's Record of Proceedings, the  notes  made
    by the two representatives present at the hearing in January  2014  and
    the  Decision  promulgated  subsequently?   Secondly,  was  the   judge
    entitled to find that the ground of refusal under paragraph 322(1A) was
    made out, on the evidence before her?  Finally, is there anything  else
    in the grounds in support of the application for permission  to  appeal
    or in the Decision itself that shows any material error?

21.  I deal first  with  the  contention  that  there  has  been  procedural
    unfairness.  The notes made by the two representatives do show that the
    judge, at least early in the hearing, was minded to remit the case back
    to the Secretary of State, apparently  on  the  basis  that  the  wrong
    candidate ground of refusal had been chosen by the Secretary of  State.
    It is clear from the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  that
    the appellant's case was that she herself  had  not  been  involved  in
    submitting false documents, that she had relied entirely on an agent to
    make her application and that  the  proper  ground  of  refusal  to  be
    considered was the discretionary ground under paragraph 322(2)  of  the
    rules, rather than paragraph 322(1A).

22.  The judge's Record of Proceedings is brief and makes  no  mention  that
    she was minded to take any particular course.  I do not accept that the
    parties were in some way taken by surprise at the  substantive  outcome
    or that the Decision promulgated by  the  judge  shows  any  procedural
    unfairness.  After all, each of the notes made by  the  representatives
    concludes with the judge reserving the decision.  Each note refers to a
    "preliminary  point"  that  the  proper  candidate  ground  was   under
    paragraph 322(2).  It is clear, particularly from the note made by  the
    appellant's  representative,  that  the  hearing  continued,  with  the
    appellant giving evidence and adopting her  witness  statement.   There
    was brief cross-examination.  All of this is fully consistent with  the
    Record of Proceedings, where the judge noted that the appellant adopted
    her witness statement.  This appeared in the bundle of documents  filed
    and served shortly before the hearing (and it is  referred  to  in  the
    Presenting Officer's note).  She briefly recorded cross-examination  in
    which the appellant said that she trusted her representative,  did  not
    "see whether it was Tier 1 or Tier 4" and  accepted  that  she  made  a
    mistake in not asking to read the document, meaning  here  the  Tier  1
    form of application.

23.  It is also clear  from  the  judge's  Record  of  Proceedings  and  the
    appellant's representative's note that submissions were made on  behalf
    of the parties.  The Presenting Officer expressly relied on the  letter
    giving reasons for the adverse decisions and also on paragraph  322(2),
    adding there an alternative case.  As noted  earlier,  the  appellant's
    representative relied on his skeleton argument.

24.  Even supposing that the representatives were surprised to  receive  the
    Decision, a case was put by each side and supporting  evidence  adduced
    by the appellant.  The skeleton argument prepared on her behalf  builds
    on  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   If   the
    representatives thought that the judge  had  decided  on  a  particular
    course, in the light of the "preliminary point", they might  reasonably
    have been expected to raise it with her and as it  is  clear  from  the
    Record of Proceedings and the two notes that the hearing proceeded,  in
    the usual way, beyond a preliminary discussion, with evidence-in-chief,
    cross-examination  and  submissions,  with  the  judge  then  expressly
    reserving  her  decision,  there  really  was  no  sensible  scope  for
    professional  representatives  to  conclude  that   the   outcome   was
    predetermined in some way, with remittal  of  the  application  to  the
    Secretary of State the inevitable next step.  I conclude that there has
    been no procedural unfairness.

25.  Was the judge entitled  to  find  that  the  ground  of  refusal  under
    paragraph 322(1A) was made out?  Did she err in this context?

26.  It is clear from guidance given by the Court of Appeal in AA  (Nigeria)
    that what is required here is  dishonesty  or  deception,  rather  than
    inaccuracy or an innocent mistake, "albeit not necessarily that of  the
    applicant himself", to render a "false  representation"  a  ground  for
    mandatory refusal (paragraph 76 of the  judgment).   The  Secretary  of
    State drew attention to invoices addressed to Power  Stream  Employment
    Limited, made available on the appellant's behalf  in  support  of  the
    Tier 1 application.  The judge  took  into  account  the  Secretary  of
    State's clear finding that Power Stream Employment  Limited  had  never
    engaged in any legitimate  business  and  a  summary  of  the  criminal
    investigation which appeared in the  respondent's  bundle.   She  noted
    that this evidence was not challenged by or on behalf of the appellant.
     She was entitled to accept the respondent's  case  that  the  invoices
    submitted with the appellant's Tier  1  application  were  false.   She
    directed herself correctly in the light of AA (Nigeria) and found  that
    there was dishonesty present in the application, the  origin  of  which
    lay in the actions of the agent the appellant relied upon.   In  making
    this finding, the judge noted the evidence before her, contained in the
    witness statement (at paragraph 8 in  particular)  that  the  appellant
    signed the Tier 1 application form while it was not completed  and  had
    no  idea  which  documents  were  sent  to  the  respondent.   In  this
    particular context, the judge did not accept that the appellant had  no
    knowledge of the documents  to  be  submitted  and  it  is  clear  from
    paragraphs 30 and 31 of her Decision that she  took  into  account  the
    appellant's claim that she did not see whether the application was  for
    Tier 1 or Tier 4 leave and made a mistake in not reading the form.  The
    judge's adverse findings were open to her in the light of the evidence.
     She had the appellant's case clearly in mind, I find, in the light  of
    the adoption of the witness statement and the brief  cross-examination.
    The fact that dishonesty was present in the actions of her agent,  with
    the appellant having "deliberately  closed  her  eyes",  as  the  judge
    found, was no impediment at all to the conclusion that  the  ground  of
    refusal under paragraph 322(1A) was made out.

27.   The  variation  of  the  application,  in  September  2012,  with  the
    appellant seeking to show that the requirements of the  Tier  4  scheme
    were met, did not have the effect of giving rise to a separate,  second
    application and the Secretary of State was perfectly entitled  to  take
    into account documents submitted in support of the application  in  its
    unvaried, Tier 1 form.   The judge did not err in  the  assessment  she
    made in this context.  She took into  account  guidance  given  by  the
    Court of Appeal in JH [2009] EWCA Civ 78.  It  is  clear  from  section
    3C(5) of the Immigration Act 1971 that an application to vary leave may
    itself be varied.  The important phrase in the section is "variation of
    the application", which puts beyond any doubt that the application made
    to the Secretary of State remains intact.  Variation does not bring  it
    to  an  end  or  give  rise  to  a  separate  application.   In   these
    circumstances, the appellant was  of  course  entitled  to  invite  the
    Secretary of State not to take into account documents which accompanied
    the application when it was first made and before she varied it but the
    Secretary of State was perfectly entitled to take them into account, as
    showing dishonesty, deception or falsity in the application,  including
    in its varied form.  The judge's conclusion that paragraph 322(1A)  was
    made out was open to  her  and  is  fatal  to  any  argument  that  the
    substantive requirements of the Tier 4 rules  were  met  (at  the  very
    least, the requirement of paragraph 245ZX(a) was not met).

28.  As noted by the grantor of permission to appeal, and as accepted by  Mr
    Makol, the grounds in support of  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal are lengthy.  The  contention  that  paragraph  322(2)  was  the
    proper ground of refusal  is  simply  not  made  out.   The  judge  was
    entitled to find  that  paragraph  322(1A)  fell  to  be  applied.   At
    paragraph 15 of the grounds, it is suggested that the  judge  erred  in
    failing "to consider the mens rea aspect", as shown at paragraph 32  of
    the Decision, where she found that  "some  dishonesty  was  likely  ...
    albeit ... by (the) agent".   This  is  disingenuous.   The  judge  was
    considering here the appellant's state of mind and  she  made  a  clear
    finding that reliance upon the Power Stream Employment Limited invoices
    showed  that  dishonesty  and  false  documents  were  present  in  the
    application, albeit as a result of the agent's actions.  It is  briefly
    contended that the judge  failed  to  carry  out  a  proper  Article  8
    assessment.  This is simply not  so.   At  paragraphs  34  to  36,  she
    properly found that the requirements of  the  rules  were  not  met  in
    relation to the appellant's claim to  have  established  a  substantial
    private life.  There was nothing to show any family life.  The skeleton
    argument relied upon at the First-tier Tribunal hearing and the witness
    statement made by  the  appellant  on  21st  January  2014  assert  the
    thinnest of Article 8 cases and there  is  nothing  to  show  that  any
    particular ties and associations made here cannot  be  maintained  from
    abroad.  The judge did not err in concluding that the  appellant  could
    not succeed under Article 8.  In summary, no material error of law  has
    been shown and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Anonymity

There  has  been  no  application  for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
proceedings and I make no order on this occasion.



Signed        Dated 16th March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
