

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/28526/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On: 28 September 2017                  |On: 29 September 2017               |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     SA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     None
For the respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellant.

 1. I have made an anonymity order because  this  decision  refers  to  the
    circumstances of the appellant's young child.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He entered the United  Kingdom
    ('UK') as the spouse of his British citizen wife in 2011.  They have  a
    British citizen child (born in 2016) together.


 3. On 17 July 2015 the SSHD refused the appellant further leave to  remain
    as a spouse and found  that  he  submitted  a  false  English  language
    certificate with his application for further leave  dated  14  February
    2014.


 4. In a decision dated 8 December 2016, the First-tier Tribunal  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal against the SSHD's decision, and found  that  he
    fraudulently attempted to deceive the SSHD  by  relying  upon  a  false
    English language certificate and that it would be reasonable to  expect
    the appellant's British citizen child and wife to live in Pakistan with
    the appellant.

 5. In a decision dated 18 July 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor did  not
    find the grounds addressing  the  deception  finding  to  be  arguable.
    Judge O'Connor however considered it arguable that there was  an  error
    of law  in  failing  to  apply  section  117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and in failing  to  attach  significant
    weight to the child's British citizenship.


 6. In a rule 24 response dated 3 August 2017 the SSHD submitted  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal  was  well-aware  of  the  child  and  applied  the
    appropriate reasonableness test.


Hearing

 7. There was no appearance from the appellant or  his  solicitors.   In  a
    letter dated 29 August 2017  the  appellant's  solicitors  invited  the
    Tribunal to determine the appeal on the papers.


 8. I indicated a provisional view to Mr McVeety,  with  which  he  agreed.
    First, the First-tier Tribunal committed a material  error  of  law  in
    failing to attach  weight  to  the  child's  British  citizenship.   As
    observed in MA Pakistan v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705, where the child  is
    a qualifying child either by reason of seven years residence or British
    citizenship, significant weight must be given to  this  when  assessing
    reasonableness and conducting the proportionality exercise - see [45-6]
    and [102].  Second, I can remake the  decision  myself:  when  all  the
    relevant considerations are  taken  into  account  including  the  best
    interests of the appellant's British citizen child and the  finding  of
    fraud / deception, the Article 8 appeal should be dismissed.


Error of law

 9. Mr McVeety conceded that the First-tier Tribunal  decision  contains  a
    material error of law and I so find for the reasons outlined above.


Re-making the decision under Article 8

Best interests

10.  I  begin  the  Article  8  assessment  by   evaluating   the   primary
    consideration of the  interests  of  the  appellant's  British  citizen
    child.  He was born in May 2016  and  is  therefore  very  young.   The
    evidence relating to  the  child  is  very  limited.   The  appellant's
    solicitors have merely re-served the evidence available to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  I accept that citizenship is a weighty factor and  that
    the child and his British citizen mother  are  likely  to  have  strong
    links to the UK.  The mother came to the UK as a young  child  and  her
    parents reside in the UK.  She  has  regular  employment  and  accesses
    medical treatment for pain in the UK.


11. On the other hand, the appellant's parents reside in Pakistan  and  are
    likely to be able to support their  son  and  his  family,  whilst  the
    family settle into Pakistan.  The mother has a Pakistani background and
    has visited Pakistan.


12. On balance, I conclude that the best interests of the  child  would  be
    best served by remaining in the UK, but only by a narrow  margin.   The
    child is very young and would be able to adapt  to  life  in  Pakistan,
    with the  support  of  his  parents,  both  of  whom  have  substantial
    knowledge of and links to Pakistan.


Section 117B(6)

13. Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    states as follows:


           "In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
           public interest does not require the person's removal where -


                 (a) the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                 relationship with a qualifying child; and
                 (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
                 the United Kingdom."

14.  I  accept  that  (a)  is  met.   The  real  question  for  me  is  the
    reasonableness of expecting the child to leave  the  UK  in  accordance
    with (b).  I must take all the relevant factors into account, including
    the child's best interests, when  assessing  reasonableness  -  see  MA
    Pakistan (supra).  The relevant countervailing factor in this  case  is
    the appellant's use of deception.


15. When considering reasonableness, it  is  also  relevant  to  take  into
    account the SSHD's policy.  Paragraph 11.2.3.  of  the  IDI  on  Family
    Migration provides the SSHD's decision makers with  guidance  on  cases
    involving British children. The August 2015 version states  that,  save
    in cases involving criminality, the decision  maker  must  not  take  a
    decision in relation to the  parent  or  primary  carer  of  a  British
    Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to force  that
    British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age of that child. The
    decision would not force the child to  leave  the  EU  because  he  can
    remain in the UK with his British citizen mother, for the  reasons  set
    out in detail in VM Jamaica v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 255.


16. However, the policy also states that:


           "where a decision to refuse  the  application  would  require  a
           parent or primary carer to return to a country outside  the  EU,
           the case must always be assessed on the basis that it  would  be
           unreasonable to expect a British Citizen child to leave  the  EU
           with that parent or primary carer".


17. The SSHD's  decision  to  refuse  the  application  would  require  the
    appellant ('a parent') to return  to  a  country  outside  of  the  EU,
    Pakistan.  As such, the SSHD's own policy states that the case must  be
    assessed on the basis that it  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    British citizen child to leave the EU with that parent.  In such cases,
    the policy states it  will  usually  be  appropriate  to  grant  leave,
    provided that there is evidence of a genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship.  The policy then states:


          "It may be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where the conduct
          of the parent or primary carer gives rise  to  considerations  of
          such  weight  as  to  justify  separation,  if  the  child  could
          otherwise stay with another parent or alternative carer in the UK
          or in the EU.  The circumstances envisaged  could  cover  amongst
          others:
          Criminality...
          A very poor immigration history, such as  where  the  person  has
          repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules"


18. The policy clearly envisages that countervailing circumstances may mean
    that it is appropriate to refuse leave.  The list provided  is  not  an
    exhaustive one.  The appellant has been found to have  used  deception.
    He did not admit to this when it was first alleged and took part  in  a
    Tribunal  hearing  maintaining  an  innocent  explanation   which   was
    ultimately  rejected.   In  my  judgment,   this   is   a   significant
    countervailing circumstance.


19. When the appellant's use  of  deception  is  considered  in  the  round
    together  with  all  the  relevant  circumstances  including  the  best
    interests of the child and his British citizenship, together  with  the
    circumstances and citizenship of the mother  which  I  have  summarised
    above, I am satisfied that it would be reasonable to expect  the  child
    and his mother to leave the UK to be with his father in Pakistan.   The
    mother will have the support of the appellant's family in Pakistan  and
    this  family  will  be  able  to  establish  themselves  adequately  in
    Pakistan.


20. In all the circumstances, it would be reasonable to expect the child to
    leave the UK and section 117B(6)(b) is not met.

Private life

21. The appellant and his family members undoubtedly have private lives  in
    the UK.  However, there is a dearth of any meaningful evidence relevant
    to the appellant.

Balancing exercise

22. Proportionality is the "public interest question" within the meaning of
    Part 5A of the 2002 Act. By section 117A(2) thereof  I  am  obliged  to
    have regard to the considerations listed in section 117B.   I  consider
    that section 117B applies to this appeal in the following way:


          (a)  The  public  interest  in  the   maintenance   of   effective
          immigration controls is clearly engaged given the appellant's  use
          of deception.


          (b)  The  evidence  on  the   appellant's   English   ability   is
          contradictory but I am prepared to accept he can  speak  in  basic
          English and as such I do not find an infringement of the  "English
          speaking" public interest.


          (c) The  appellant's  wife  has  employment  in  the  UK  and  the
          economic interest does not appear to be engaged.


          (d) The private life  established  by  the  appellant  during  the
          entirety of his time in the UK qualifies for  the  attribution  of
          little weight only.


23. In my judgment, when all of the above matters  are  considered  in  the
    round, together with the child's best interests and  the  circumstances
    of his mother, and balanced against  the  public  interest  in  removal
    (particularly in  light  of  the  appellant's  use  of  deception)  the
    appellant's removal does not constitute a  disproportionate  breach  of
    Article 8.  Although the appellant's wife does not wish  to  reside  in
    Pakistan, I have found that it will be reasonable to expect her  to  do
    so.  This is not a case in which the appellant's wife and child will be
    required to leave the UK.  She can choose to remain in the UK with  her
    child or return to Pakistan with her husband and child.  The choice  is
    hers.  In all the circumstances, it would be reasonable to  expect  the
    child to live in Pakistan with both his parents.


24. Having applied the facts to section 117B of the 2002 Act and considered
    the general principles applicable in a case raising family and  private
    life under Article 8 of the ECHR, I find that the  appellant's  removal
    from the UK would not constitute a disproportionate breach  of  Article
    8.


Decision

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.


26. I remake the decision by dismissing the appellant's appeal pursuant  to
    Article 8 of the ECHR.






Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 28 September
2017
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
