
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28974/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 26th March 2014                              |On 23rd April 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON



                                   Between

                            SHAFQAT HUSSAIN SYED
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan born on 9th  January  1987.
    The Appellant first arrived in the UK on 23rd November 2011 when he was
    given leave to enter as a Tier 4 (Student) Migrant eventually until 3rd
    July 2013.  On 18th March 2013 the Appellant applied for further  leave
    to remain citing his human rights.  On 18th April 2013 his leave  as  a
    student was curtailed to cease on 17th June 2013, and on 25th June 2013
    the Respondent refused the Appellant's application for leave to  remain
    for the reasons given in a Refusal Letter of that date.  The  Appellant
    appealed, and his appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Youngerwood (the Judge) sitting at Taylor House on 5th  February  2014.
    He decided  to  dismiss  the  appeal  for  the  reasons  given  in  his
    Determination dated 10th February 2014.  The Appellant sought leave  to
    appeal that decision, and on 28th February  2014  such  permission  was
    granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision  of the Judge contained an error on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.  At the  hearing,  there
    was no appearance by or on behalf of the Appellant.  I decided to  hear
    the appeal in the absence of  the  Appellant  in  accordance  with  the
    provisions of Rule 38 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  I was satisfied that the Appellant  had  been  notified  of  the
    hearing as required by those Rules, and there was  no  explanation  for
    his absence.

 3. The Judge decided to dismiss the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules.
    That decision has not been impugned in this appeal.  The Judge went  on
    to dismiss the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  The Judge found  that
    there was very limited evidence of the Appellant's private life in  the
    UK, and that any interference with that private life as  a  consequence
    of the Respondent's decision would not  be  of  sufficient  gravity  to
    engage the Appellant's Article  8  rights.   Alternatively,  the  Judge
    found such interference to be proportionate.

 4. Having heard a submission from Ms Everett  which  is  recorded  in  the
    Record of Proceedings, I find no error of law in respect of  this  part
    of the Judge's decision.  As the Judge commented, there was no evidence
    before him specifically relating to the Appellant's private life in the
    UK, and the Appellant failed to satisfy the requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE of HC 395.  In that event, it was open to the judge to find that
    the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights were not engaged as a consequence
    of the Respondent's decision.

 5. However, I do find an error of law in this respect.  It was part of the
    Appellant's case that he would be at risk on  return  to  Pakistan  and
    therefore that the Respondent's decision amounted to a  breach  of  the
    Appellant's Article 3 ECHR rights.  The Judge failed to deal with  this
    issue at all and in my judgment that amounts to an error  of  law.   Ms
    Everett did not argue to the contrary.

Re-made Decision

 6. As a consequence of my finding of an error of law as described above, I
    set aside any decision of the Judge relating to the Appellant's Article
    3 ECHR rights.  I will re-make that decision.

 7. The  Appellant  did  not  attend  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and has not attended this hearing.   There  is  therefore  no
    oral evidence from him, tested by cross-examination, as to his claim to
    be at risk on return.  The only evidence in support of the  Appellant's
    claim amounts to a letter from  the  Appellant's  representatives  sent
    along with the application for leave to remain.   It  states  that  the
    Appellant came to the UK in order to escape numerous death threats made
    by the family of a former girlfriend.   Apparently  the  Appellant  had
    formed a relationship with a local girl in September 2009.  She  was  a
    Shia Muslim whereas the Appellant was a Sunni Muslim, and she was  from
    a different caste.  There had been a sexual relationship  between  them
    for about twelve months before they had been discovered.  The Appellant
    had  been  attacked  by  the  girl's  family  and  shot  whereupon  the
    relationship had come to an end.  The girl's family had sworn  to  kill
    the Appellant and had beaten him by smashing bottles over his head when
    the Appellant had suffered serious injuries which had required hospital
    treatment.  The Appellant had also been disinherited by his family.

 8. There was also medical evidence that in January 2010 the Appellant  had
    been hospitalised for a period  of  five  days  as  a  result  of  head
    injuries, although that medical evidence  did  not  give  any  sort  of
    opinion as to how those injuries had been sustained.  There was also  a
    "deed of disinheritance" from the Appellant's father  relating  to  the
    Appellant.

 9. The burden of proof is upon the  Appellant.   I  am  not  satisfied  by
    evidence of this nature even to the lower standard of proof that  there
    is any truth in the Appellant's claim and therefore I find  that  I  am
    not satisfied that  the  Appellant  has  shown  that  the  Respondent's
    decision will result in any breach of the Appellant's  Article  3  ECHR
    rights.

10. To summarise, I find no error of law in the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal to dismiss the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  I do find an
    error of law in respect of the Appellant's Article 3  ECHR  rights.   I
    remake that decision by dismissing the appeal.

Anonymity

11. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005  and  I
    find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
