
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/28414/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 22 November 2016                   |On 13 December 2016             |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                           ABDULYEKEEN OLA ADEKOYA
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: not represented
For the Respondent: Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Agnew promulgated on 17 December 2015 which dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent to  refuse  his
   application dated 17 October 2014 for leave to remain on the basis of his
   family and private life.
4. The Appellant appeared before me unrepresented. I explained  to  him  the
   procedure and that I was required to look at the Judge's decision on  the
   basis of the evidence before him and whether based on that  evidence  the
   Judge had made an error of law and whether that error was material to the
   outcome of the decision.
Background
5. The Appellant was born on 27 August 1971 and is a national of Nigeria.
6.  On  8  July  2013  the  Appellant  completed   an   immigration   status
   questionnaire in which he claimed that entered the  UK  illegally  on  16
   February 2001.
7. On 26 January 2009 he submitted an application for an EEA Residence  Card
   in which he claimed he entered the UK on 16 February 2004.
8. On 15 February 2009  the  application  for  an  EEA  Residence  Card  was
   refused.
9. On 19 June 2013 he was served with  a  notice  of  his  liability  to  be
   removed as an illegal overstayer.
10. On 14 October 2014 the Appellant made  the  application  which  was  the
   subject of the appeal before Judge Agnew.
11. On  30  July  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
   application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:
   a) The Appellant did not have a partner in the UK.
   b) The Appellant did not meet the eligibility requirements of the  parent
      route as there was no evidence that he had sole responsibility for the
      4 named children or that they lived with him rather than their mother.
      The Appellant had also failed to  establish  that  he  was  taking  or
      intended to take an active role in the children's upbringing.
   c) The private life requirements of the Rules were considered but  as  he
      had not lived in the UK for 20 and had failed to show that there  were
      very significant obstacles to his reintegration in Nigeria.
   d) There was no basis for a grant of leave outside the Rules
The Judge's Decision
12. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Agnew ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against  the  Respondent's
   decision after the Appellant had requested a paper hearing. The Judge:
   a) Stated at paragraph 6 that he had the refusal letter and a  bundle  of
      documents from the Appellants then representatives Leslie Charles.
   b) He noted that the Appellant was the father of 4  children  by  his  ex
      partner who had won her appeal to remain  in  the  UK  in  April  2014
      although the Respondent was appealing that decision.
   c) The Appellant asserted that he played a role in  the  children's  life
      and saw them weekly and sometimes took them out  at  weekends  and  to
      Mosque and sometimes bought them gifts. The Judge found there  was  no
      independent evidence that the  Appellant  had  any  contact  with  the
      children.
   d) He found that the children's best interest was to  remain  with  their
      mother which was unaffected by the presence of their father.
   e) He did not accept that the Appellant had no ties with Nigeria.
   f) He found that the Appellant did not  meet  Appendix  FM  or  paragraph
      276ADE.
   g) He found that the decision was proportionate.
13. Grounds of appeal were lodged by the Appellant in  person  arguing  that
   the Judge focused too heavily on the Appellants immigration history;  the
   Judge did not appear to have before him the Respondents bundle  and  take
   into account he evidence he submitted  to  the  Home  Office;  the  Judge
   failed to give adequate reasons why Article 8 was not engaged.
14. On 14 July 2016 First -tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth gave  permission
   to appeal.

15. At the hearing I heard submissions from the Appellant that:

   a) He was unable to identify any document that would  have  been  in  the
      Respondents bundle that was not in the bundle of  documents  submitted
      by Leslie Charles for the paper hearing.

   b) The Appellant then thought he remembered making a document with  Binas
      Solicitors to show that he was in fact living back  with  his  partner
      that was submitted to the Home Office before the hearing date and  the
      decision of Judge Agnew. He was unable to remember when  he  made  the
      document, not even what year it was made.

   c) He accepted that  he  had  not  been  truthful  at  the  time  of  the
      application about where he lived at the time  of  his  application  or
      about the status of his relationship with his partner:  they  were  in
      fact living at the same address and were reconciled.

16. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Harrison submitted that:

   a) He accepted that the Judge did not have a  Respondents  bundle  before
      him.

   b) He accepts that the Appellant is now back living with his partner  and
      has been for at least 7 months.

The Law

17.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

18. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
   proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no  error
   of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  not  to  have
   regard to evidence of events arising after his decision  or  for  him  to
   have taken no account of evidence that was not before him.
19. In relation to  adequacy  of  reasons  in  MK  (duty  to  give  reasons)
   Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), it was held that (i) It  was  axiomatic
   that a determination disclosed  clearly  the  reasons  for  a  tribunal's
   decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence  to  be  implausible,
   incredible or unreliable or a document to be worth no weight  whatsoever,
   it was necessary to say so in the determination and for such findings  to
   be supported by reasons. A bare statement that a witness was not believed
   or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to  satisfy  the
   requirement to give reasons.
Finding on Material Error

20. Having heard those  submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

21. I am satisfied that the Judge did not  have  before  him  a  Respondents
   bundle that should have  contained  the  material  that  was  before  the
   decision maker when considering this application. This  would  have  been
   potentially material to the outcome of the  appeal  had  there  been  any
   evidence in that bundle that was not before the Judge at the time of  his
   decision.

22. I note that a bundle was prepared for  the  hearing  of  the  appeal  by
   Lesley Charles Solicitors. While  I  note  that  the  Appellant  has  now
   produced various undated photographs  together  with  witness  statements
   from his partner and himself that post date the  appeal  hearing  he  was
   unable to identify for me anything that he submitted  to  the  Respondent
   prior to the date of the appeal that was not replicated in Lesley Charles
   bundle.

23. I reject the Appellants assertion that the Respondent was in  possession
   of a 'document that showed that he and his wife were  reconciled  at  the
   time of the appeal hearing and that was therefore not before the Judge on
   9 December 2015. I note of course that the bundle from Lesley Charles was
   submitted under  cover  of  a  letter  dated  1  December  2015  and  the
   Appellants statement in that bundle which clearly stated that he was  not
   living with his partner was signed by him and dated 1  December  2015.  I
   note that the Appellant before me was extremely vague as to the nature of
   this document and when it was created and initially gave a date  for  its
   creation prior to the date of  the  application  under  appeal  but  then
   changed his mind and suggested that it was made for the appeal in  issue.
   I also find it undermines the Appellants claim that at the  time  of  the
   appeal he was represented by Leslie Charles Solicitors he stated that  he
   went to another firm of solicitors to create this document.

24. I am satisfied that the bundle produced  by  Leslie  Charles  Solicitors
   contained all of the documentary evidence that would  have  been  in  the
   Respondents bundle because the Appellant was unable to identify  anything
   additional. I am satisfied that the Appellant is unable to be  vague  and
   hesitant about the basis on which he pursued this appeal because even  on
   his account he had lied in his dealings with the  Respondent.  The  Judge
   cannot be faulted that he dealt with the evidence  that  was  before  him
   which did, as he found, show no evidence of contact with his children.

25. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

26. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

27. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
10.12.2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

