
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28654/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Oral Determination         |
|On 1 November 2013                              |Promulgated                |
|                                                |On 14 November 2013        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                   miss priyadarshini pradipkumar kawaiya
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance or representation
For the Respondent:    Ms E Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of India and provides her date of  birth  as
    14 April 1984.  She appeals against  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Prickett  promulgated  on  4  March  2013  following  a
    determination decided upon the papers in which the judge dismissed  the
    appeal of the appellant against the decision of the Secretary of  State
    to refuse her application made on 17 April 2012 for leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom as a Tier 4  (General)  Student  Migrant  under  the
    points-based  system  and  for  a  biometric  residence  permit.    The
    application was refused by the respondent in  a  decision  made  on  19
    October 2012.

 2. At the hearing before me neither the  appellant  nor  a  representative
    attended.  Accordingly I have decided the appeal without the assistance
    of either.  The situation arises in this way.

 3. The decision made by the  Secretary  of  State  was  a  decision  which
    included making a decision to issue a Section 47 decision.  It  is  now
    accepted by the Secretary of State that the making of a decision  under
    Section 47 was unlawful when made at the same time as the  decision  to
    vary the appellant's  leave.   Accordingly,  and  quite  properly,  the
    Secretary of State wrote a letter dated 28 August 2013  in  which  this
    point was conceded:

         "Given that the appellant accepts  that  she  could  not  meet  the
         requirements of the Immigration Rules an application will  be  made
         at the error in law hearing for permission to withdraw as per  Home
         Office policy the Section 47 decision so  that  there  will  be  no
         appeal before the Tribunal.  A removal decision  will  subsequently
         be made granting a right, potentially  limited,  to  the  appellant
         which she will be able to exercise if she chooses."

    Accordingly, there is no issue that the Secretary of State had properly
    responded to the combined effect of the cases of Ahmadi [2013] EWCA Civ
    512 and Adamally & Jaferi [2012] UK 244 to the effect that a Section 47
    decision cannot arise until the applicant has already received a notice
    of variation decision.  Accordingly, that element of the appeal  is  no
    longer in issue.

 4. The second issue related to Article 8 and it is said that the appellant
    should be allowed to make Article 8  representations.   The  difficulty
    that is faced with this application is that there is no  material  upon
    which either I or the Immigration Judge could make a decision that  the
    appellant's removal would  violate  her  Article  8  rights.   She  was
    granted leave to enter the United Kingdom on 4 September 2009 as a Tier
    4 (General) Student until 17 April 2012.  During the period  of  extant
    leave she made a combined application for leave to remain.   The  basis
    upon which she had originally been granted leave was as a student.   It
    follows from this that there was implied within the grant of leave that
    she would meet the requirements of her student status and  if,  at  the
    expiration  of  her  student  status,  she  had   not   satisfied   the
    requirements for further leave to remain, she would  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  There could therefore have been no expectation, legitimate or
    otherwise, that she would be entitled to remain beyond  the  period  of
    her student leave.   Such  private  life  as  she  may  have  developed
    (doubtless she would have done so during the relatively short period of
    her student leave between 4 September  2009  and  17  April  2012)  was
    predicated upon the fact that she would be leaving the country  at  the
    conclusion of her studies  unless  she  met  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules for further leave to remain.  She has not  met  those
    requirements and accordingly there could be no basis upon which she had
    any expectation for further leave or that her private life so developed
    would be violated were she to be required to leave.   No  material  has
    been placed before me to indicate that in this period she has developed
    a private life which should be protected  from  removal  and  in  those
    circumstances there is nothing in the Article 8 claim.

 5. The appeal also fails because it is not challenged that  the  appellant
    did not meet the requirements of leave to remain under the Rules.

DECISION

                 1. The s47 removal decision is unlawful.

                 2. Save as to paragraph 1 of the decision, the  Judge  made
                    no error on a point of law and the determination of  the
                    appeal by the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall stand.


                            [pic]
                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
