
[pic]

Upper Tribunal         Appeal Number
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        IA/28279/2013
            IA/28289/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 11 June 2014             On 4 August 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                      1) Muhammad Delwar Hossain Manzur
                             2) Farzana Mustaeid
                          (Anonymity directions not made)
                                                              Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms. J. Norman of Counsel  instructed  by  Sterling  &
                       Law Associates LLP.
For the Respondent:            Mr.  J.  Parkinson,  Home  Office  Presenting
                            Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. These are linked appeals against the decisions of First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Paul promulgated on 18 February 2014, dismissing the Appellants'
      appeals against  decisions  of  the  Respondent'  refusing  the  First
      Appellant leave to remain in the UK as a  Tier  4  (General)  Migrant,
      refusing the Second Appellant  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  as  the
      dependant of a Tier 4 Migrant, and to remove the  Appellants  pursuant
      to section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


   2. At all material times the Second Appellant has  been  treated  as  the
      dependant of the First Appellant and her immigration position has been
      contingent on that of her husband. Accordingly, the substantive issues
      - as opposed  to  procedural  issues  (see  further  below)  -  relate
      primarily to the First Appellant - and indeed in the determination  of
      the First-tier Tribunal the First Appellant is generally  referred  to
      as "the appellant".


Background

   3. The Appellants are nationals of Bangladesh born on  25  December  1981
      and 17 April 1982 respectively. I set out in  more  detail  below  the
      First Appellant's immigration history.


   4. The proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal arose in the context of
      an application by the First Appellant for leave to remain as a Tier  4
      (General) Student Migrant recorded as having been made  on  22  August
      2012. In a refusal letter dated  20  June  2013  the  application  was
      refused with reference to paragraphs 322(1A), 245ZX(a), 245ZX(c),  and
      245ZX(d).


   5. The Respondent determined that the First Appellant  had  submitted  in
      support of his application a certificate for  a  Level  7  Diploma  in
      Management from  the  Accrediting  and  Assessment  Bureau  for  Post-
      Secondary Schools dated 22 August 2011 that was a forgery. It was also
      noted that the provider  of  the  First  Appellant's  Confirmation  of
      Acceptance for Studies (CAS), Seven Oaks College, was at the  date  of
      decision not on the list of Tier 4 sponsors. The  Respondent  was  not
      prepared to grant the Appellant the usual 60 days grace  in  order  to
      arrange a new sponsor in circumstances where a false document had been
      supplied with his application. The decision letter also contained  the
      section 47 removal decision. (The decisions in respect of  the  Second
      Appellant were made 'in- line' with the decisions in  respect  of  the
      First Appellant.)


   6. The Appellants appealed to the IAC.


   7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the  Appellants'  appeals  for
      reasons set out in his determination.


   8. The Appellants sought permission to appeal which was granted by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Page on 8 April 2014.


   9. The Respondent has filed a Rule 24 response dated 17 April 2014 -  but
      that merely indicates that the Respondent did not have access at  that
      time to the determination or the application for permission to appeal.


Consideration

  10. It was common ground before the First-tier Tribunal that  the  Diploma
      in Management certificate was indeed a  forgery.  However,  the  First
      Appellant claimed that he himself had been duped in this  regard,  and
      it was advanced on the Appellants' behalf that the issue in the appeal
      was whether or not the First Appellant had acted dishonestly, that  is
      whether the First Appellant knew that the document was false (e.g. see
      paragraph  3).  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  concluded  that  the
      Appellant had "not acted honestly" (paragraph 13).


  11. The Appellants challenge the conclusion  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge. As  before  the  First-tier,  before  me  the  premise  of  the
      Appellants' case was focused on the supposed innocence  of  the  First
      Appellant's state of mind in submitting a false document in support of
      his application: e.g see Grounds in support  of  the  application  for
      permission to appeal - "However, if he was, as he says, the victim  of
      a fraud, then he has not been dishonest and should succeed".


  12. In my judgement this focus is  misconceived,  and  is  based  upon  an
      incomplete understanding of AA (Nigeria) 2010  EWCA  Civ  773  -  upon
      which reliance has been placed on behalf of the Appellants.


  13. Paragraph 322(1A) of the Rules refers both to 'false  representations'
      and 'false documents'. Consideration of the dishonest state of mind of
      an applicant in AA (Nigeria) is in the context  of  a  representation.
      This is particularly manifest at  paragraph  67  where  the  adjective
      'false' in the phrase' false  document'  is  utilised  in  reaching  a
      conclusion as to the meaning of the adjective 'false' when attached to
      'representation':

"First,  "false  representation"  is  aligned  in  the  rule   with   "false
      document". It is plain that a false document is one that tells  a  lie
      about itself."


  14. Indeed that a counterfeit document is a 'false  document'  within  the
      meaning of paragraph 322(1A), irrespective of  the  innocence  of  the
      person who makes use of it in an immigration application, is  manifest
      in the rest of paragraph 67:

"Of course it is possible for a person to make use of a false document  (for
      instance a counterfeit currency note, but that example, used  for  its
      clarity, is rather distant from the context  of  this  discussion)  in
      total ignorance of  its  falsity  and  in  perfect  honesty.  But  the
      document itself is dishonest. It is highly likely therefore that where
      an applicant uses in all innocence a false document for the purpose of
      obtaining entry clearance, or leave to  enter  or  to  remain,  it  is
      because some other party, it might be a parent, or sponsor, or  agent,
      has dishonestly promoted the use of that document. The response  of  a
      requirement of mandatory refusal is entirely understandable in such  a
      situation. The mere fact that a dishonest document has been  used  for
      such an important application is understandably  a  sufficient  reason
      for a mandatory refusal. That is why  the  rule  expressly  emphasises
      that it applies "whether or not to the applicant's knowledge"."


  15. See similarly in this context, the quotation from Lord Bassam when the
      rule was before Parliament, reproduced at paragraph  71:  "We  mean  a
      document that is forged or has been altered to give false information.
      If people submit such documents, our belief is  that  they  should  be
      refused...".


  16. It follows that in circumstances where the Appellants do  not  dispute
      the falsity of the level 7 Diploma in Management document,  the  First
      Appellant's  application  fell  for  mandatory  refusal  pursuant   to
      paragraph 322(1A). It was  therefore  unnecessary  for  the  Judge  to
      embark upon a  consideration  of  the  state  of  mind  of  the  First
      Appellant in respect of the document. Necessarily it follows that  any
      error that the Judge may have made in this regard would be immaterial.
      In such circumstances the challenge brought by the  Appellants  cannot
      have the  effect  of  overturning  the  substance  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal's determination to uphold the Respondent's decision under the
      Rules.


  17. As regards the substance of the Judge's determination on the state  of
      mind of the Appellant, whilst I accept that there is a lack of flow in
      the reasoning at paragraphs 12 and 13, the finding that the  Appellant
      had not acted honestly is clear. It is to be noted that there  was  no
      supporting evidence produced by the Appellant that he had ever studied
      at  Princeton  College  (such  as  course  work  and  materials),  and
      seemingly no attempt to obtain such evidence (and in this context,  no
      supporting evidence of the claimed fact of the  closure  of  Princeton
      College). In all such circumstances the inference drawn by  the  Judge
      was, in my judgement both open to him and  sustainable  -  though,  as
      identified above, ultimately immaterial.


  18. However, notwithstanding the analysis above, during the course of  the
      submissions Mr Parkinson drew to my attention the  particular  history
      of the Appellants' applications, and indicated that  it  was  now  the
      Respondent's position that there was no right of appeal and  therefore
      the Tribunal had no jurisdiction.


  19. The First Appellant entered the UK on 18  September  2009  with  entry
      clearance as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  until  7  April  2012.  (The
      Second Appellant entered on 20 June 2011 as a dependent  partner  with
      leave in  line  with  her  husband;  as  noted  above  her  subsequent
      applications were as a dependant.) On 4 April 2012 the First Appellant
      made an application as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant. Upon the expiry  of
      the pre-existing leave, on 7 April 2012,  the  Appellants  would  have
      enjoyed statutorily extended leave  pursuant  to  section  3C  of  the
      Immigration Act 1971. The Tier 2 application was refused  on  13  June
      2012 and removal decisions also made pursuant to  section  47  of  the
      Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


  20.  The  Appellants  appealed  to  the  IAC  (refs.   IA/14922/2012   and
      IA/14924/2012) - and their section 3C leave continued. A hearing  took
      place on 22 August 2012 at which the Appellants  did  not  attend.  In
      their absence. In a determination promulgated on 13 September 2012 the
      Judge dismissed their appeals under the Immigration Rules and on human
      rights  grounds.  Strangely,  and  notwithstanding  that   the   Judge
      acknowledged that the Respondent had no power to  make  a  section  47
      removal decision at the time, the Judge concluded that the removal was
      unlawful because "the appeal appears to be doomed to  failure  in  any
      event, and it would be unfair to the appellants to remain  [sic.]  the
      matter in such circumstances".


  21. Be that as it may,  Ms  Norman  on  taking  instructions  and  seeking
      clarification from  her  instructing  solicitors  indicated  that  the
      Appellants did not attend the appeal hearing on 22 August 2012 because
      they had wished to withdraw their appeals, and a letter had been  sent
      to the Tribunal accordingly. The Appellants had not wanted  to  pursue
      their  appeals  because  they  had  decided  to  make   the   Tier   4
      applications, which indeed are recorded by the  Respondent  as  having
      been made on 22 August 2012.


  22. It was common ground before me that pursuant to section 3C(4)  of  the
      Immigration Act 1971 it was not possible to make  an  application  for
      variation of leave to enter or remain during the pendency  of  section
      3C leave. It follows that the only way the Appellants could have  made
      valid applications to the Respondent would have been subsequent to the
      withdrawal of their appeals, and subsequent to the  lapsing  of  their
      section  3C  leaves.  Necessarily,  it  also  followed  that  if   the
      Respondent had accepted the applications as  valid  -  as  indeed  the
      Respondent had - the applications must be treated as having been  made
      at a time when the Appellants did not have leave. It was common ground
      that the refusal of an application for variation of leave  made  at  a
      time when there was no extant leave did not attract a right of appeal.


  23. So far as the section 47 removal decisions dated  20  June  2013  were
      concerned, it was also common ground that there was no power  to  make
      such decisions - notwithstanding that they post-dated the amendment of
      section 51(3) of the Crime and Courts Act 2013 - because  pursuant  to
      section 47(1) it is  a  pre-requisite  that  the  subject  of  such  a
      decision be a person with  statutorily  extended  leave.  Accordingly,
      although there was a right of appeal pursuant to section 82(2)(ha)  of
      the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  the  only  possible
      outcome of such an appeal would be to find that the decision  was  not
      in accordance with the law.


  24. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not address the section  47  removal
      decisions.


  25. In conclusion I find as follows:

(i) Whilst the Respondent's decision in respect of the First  Appellant  was
      entirely in accordance  with  paragraph  322(1A)  of  the  Immigration
      Rules, and whilst the First-tier Tribunal Judge unnecessarily embarked
      upon a consideration of the state of mind of the  First  Appellant  in
      respect of his fake Diploma document,  there  was  in  fact  no  valid
      appeal for either Appellant  against  the  refusals  of  variation  of
      leave. Accordingly, in this context, the decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal was in error of law and is set aside. The Tribunal shall take
      no further action in this regard.

(ii) There was a right of appeal  in  respect  of  the  section  47  removal
      decisions. However, as acknowledged by the Respondent today, there was
      in law no power to make such decisions. The  Appellants'  appeals  are
      allowed to this limited extent as the decisions were not in accordance
      with the law - and any issue of removal remains outstanding  with  the
      Respondent.


Decisions

  26. The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal Judge are set aside.


  27. There is no right of appeal in respect of the refusal to vary leave of
      each of the Appellants.


  28. The appeals against the decisions to remove the Appellants pursuant to
      section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act  2006  are
      allowed as being not in accordance with the law. The issue of  removal
      remains outstanding before the Respondent.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     30 July 2014
