
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/28590/2015
     IA/28593/2015
     IA/28597/2015
     IA/28601/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 25th October 2017                       |On 07th November 2017            |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                  Mr b.k.p.

                            and three dependents
                                 Mrs a.g.p.
                                 miss m.n.c.
                                 miss d.b.p.

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Khalid, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer




Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
I make an anonymity direction in this appeal, given that reference is made
throughout this decision to the Appellant's two minor children.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid
    promulgated on 22nd September 2016, following a hearing at Taylor House
    on 14th September 2016.  In his decision,  Judge  Majid  dismissed  the
    appeal of Mr B.K.P. (dob 10/01/1977) against the Respondent's  decision
    dated 31st July 2015 refusing him leave to remain in the United Kingdom
    on account of his Article 8 ECHR private/family life rights.

 2. The other named parties are his  dependents,  namely  his  partner  Mrs
    A.G.P. (dob 01/04/1987) and their two minor children, Miss  M.N.C  (dob
    22/04/2008) and Miss D.B.P (dob 21/07/2013).

Background

 3. The Appellant B.K.P. arrived in the UK in 2003 in possession  of  entry
    clearance as a visitor.  He is a  national  of  India.   Following  the
    expiry of his visit visa, B.K.P. remained in the UK unlawfully.

 4. In 2007 A.G.P., who is also a national of India, entered the  UK.   She
    and the Appellant started a relationship and entered  into  a  cultural
    marriage ceremony in August 2007. Two children have been  born  to  the
    couple.  Both children were born in the United  Kingdom  although  both
    are citizens of India.

 5. The Appellant made application for leave to remain in  the  UK  on  the
    basis of his family/private  life  with  his  wife  and  children.   In
    support of the application it was said that the children had been  born
    in the UK and that the eldest child had lived here for over seven years
    and was currently in education.

 6. The application was refused by the Respondent.  It is of note that  the
    Appellant's partner had also remained without valid leave,  and  indeed
    the Respondent claimed that she had  employed  deception  in  order  to
    remain.  The Respondent considered the application taking into  account
    the family  unit  as  a  whole  including  consideration  of  the  best
    interests of the children.

 7. When the Appellant's appeal came before Judge Majid he  heard  evidence
    from the Appellant and A.G.P. After setting out the oral  evidence  the
    judge said the following at [14]:

         "The evidence at my disposal cogently persuades me to be  aware  of
         the fact that this Appellant was not  telling  the  truth  in  many
         places and was keen to remain in this country.  Therefore I  cannot
         give him the discretionary relief even though the  "best  interest"
         of Appellants number 3 and 4 is involved." (sic)

    He followed this in [18]:

         "According to a statutory provision (Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002) a child who has spent seven years in the UK should
         not  be  uprooted  unless  the  Home  Office  proves   it   to   be
         "unreasonable".  The  Appellants'  Barrister  Mr  Solomon  drew  my
         attention to parts  of  his  thirteen-page  skeleton  argument  and
         indicated that it was "unreasonable" to send [M.N.C.] who was  born
         in this country on 22 April 2008 and  has  spent  more  than  seven
         years in this country - in this context he drew my attention to the
         two letters sent by the head teacher and the teacher of [M.N.C.] to
         show that she was a gifted student. ........ I admire the Barrister
         Mr Solomon's valiant effort to inspire me to give these  Appellants
         protection of the Human Rights Convention but as it is  clear  from
         paragraphs 11, 12 and 13 of the Appellant's  statement  of  8  June
         2016 these Appellants have been "unreasonable" and cannot be  given
         the protection of the Human Rights Act." (sic)

 8. He then set out in a paragraph at [19]  an  obscure  reference  to  the
    Prime Minister of India in relation to asylum. (This is not  an  asylum
    claim).  Finally after two more paragraphs of comment he dismissed  the
    appeal.

 9. The Appellant sought permission to appeal the decision.  Permission was
    granted on the grounds that it was arguable that the judge  had  failed
    to consider the best interests of the children in assessing whether  it
    was reasonable to expect them to leave the UK. In summary the following
    was claimed:

       . The judge in assessing  the  Article  8  claim  took  into  account
         irrelevant matters; and

       . The judge failed to give reasons for finding  that  the  Appellants
         cannot come within the Immigration Rules.

    Thus the matter comes before me to decide whether the decision  of  FtT
    Judge Majid contains such error that it requires to be  set  aside  and
    the decision remade.

Error of Law Hearing

10. Mr Khalid appeared on behalf of the Appellant and Mr Nath on behalf  of
    the Respondent.  At the outset of the hearing Mr  Nath  referred  to  a
    Rule 24 response which had been served by the Respondent  in  which  it
    was accepted  that  the  Respondent  did  not  oppose  the  Appellant's
    application to have the decision of Judge Majid  set  aside  for  legal
    error.  In view of that concession, I did not  need  to  hear  from  Mr
    Khalid.

Consideration

11. I am satisfied that the decision of Judge  Majid  contains  such  error
    that it must be set aside and remade.  I find as  the  grounds  clearly
    set out, the judge has failed to  give  any  proper  consideration  and
    analysis of the evidence concerning the best interests  of  Appellant's
    two children.  That should have been the starting point of the  judge's
    consideration and nowhere do I see that any findings of fact have  been
    made which shows that the judge turned his mind to Section  117B(6)  of
    the 2002 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act.  It is  correct  that
    the judge refers to it in [18], but that is simply in  the  context  of
    reciting  the  submissions  made  by  the  Appellant's  representative.
    Nowhere do I see that the judge has undertaken a  thorough  examination
    of the circumstances of the Appellant's minor children. Equally nowhere
    do I see any findings of fact such as to  show  that  he  has  properly
    assessed the Article 8 claim by looking at matters in the round.   This
    is especially pertinent in that the Appellant and his partner have both
    remained in the United Kingdom for several years without lawful  leave.
    In addition it is part of the Respondent's case  that  the  Appellant's
    partner employed deception during the course of her time in the UK  and
    that is something which would factor into an Article  8  assessment.  I
    find therefore the decision is unsustainable and must be set aside  for
    error.

12. Both representatives were of the view that the proper  course  in  this
    appeal would be to remit this matter to the First-tier  Tribunal.  This
    is on the basis that the errors contained in Judge Majid's decision are
    so fundamental that nothing can be saved from the  decision.   I  agree
    with that course.

Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Majid promulgated on 22nd September 2016 is set  aside
for legal error.  The decision is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  (not
Judge Majid) for that Tribunal to rehear the matter afresh.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     06 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts


