
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28230/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 May 2013                                |On 19 June 2013              |
|Prepared 22 May 2013                          |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                               Michael Ayoade

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Adekoya of Messrs IEI Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Fisher  who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 30 January 2013 allowed the  appeal  of  Michael  Ayoade
    against a decision of the Secretary of State to  refuse  him  leave  to
    remain on Article 8 grounds.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant in the  appeal  before
    me I will, for ease of reference, refer to the Secretary  of  State  as
    the respondent in this appeal as she was the respondent in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal similarly I will  refer  to  Mr  Michael  Ayoade  as  the
    appellant as he was the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria  born  on  29  October  1971  who
    claimed to have arrived in Britain using false documentation  in  1993.
    He was encountered by immigration officials on 24 April 2008 and served
    with documentation as an illegal entrant.  He was charged with a number
    of offences of fraud and in July 2008 was sentenced to  ten  months  in
    custody.  On 12 September that year he lodged an application for  leave
    to remain under the ECHR based  on  his  relationship  with  a  British
    citizen.  Although that application was refused and indeed certified as
    clearly unfounded  the  appellant  was  then  given  a  certificate  of
    approval for marriage in April 2009 and he married  Leighanne  McKenzie
    on 25 September 2009.  Their son Jozef was born on 3 February 2010.

4.   On 27 May 2010 the appellant lodged an application for leave to  remain
    on the basis of his marriage.   The  marriage  however  broke  down  in
    January 2011 and the application was refused without a right of appeal.
     After  a  judicial  review  application  was  lodged  the  appellant's
    application was reconsidered and he was given the opportunity to submit
    further evidence.  However on 19 November 2012 a decision was  made  to
    refuse him leave to remain and directions were made for his removal.

5.   It was in these circumstances that the appellant appealed. His   appeal
    was heard by Judge Fisher.

6.   The  judge  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  from  Leighanne
    McKenzie and in paragraphs 11 onwards set out his findings of fact  and
    conclusions.  He referred to relevant case law including MF (Article  8
    - new Rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC) and to the judgment of the
    House of Lords in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  He referred to  the  relevant
    structured approach in that judgment and then wrote as follows:-

         "13. The relationship between parent and minor child is  one  which
             engages family life without more.  It was clear  to  me,  from
             the evidence of Ms McKenzie, that, at the date of the hearing,
             there was no  family  life  between  her  and  the  Appellant,
             although she was hopeful of a reconciliation if he is able  to
             overcome his problems with depression.  It is greatly  to  her
             credit that she has ensured that contact between the Appellant
             and their  child  has  continued  in  spite  of  his  parents'
             separation.  I am satisfied that she would not have done so if
             the Appellant was not a good father to his son.   Although  Ms
             McKenzie's letter of 21st September 2012 at  page  B6  of  the
             Respondent's bundle was somewhat confusing as she thought that
             the Appellant had been detained around November of that  year,
             her letter at pages B7-8 refers to him being detailed on  31st
             August 2012, which puts the September letter in to context.  I
             conclude that she was mistaken  when  she  told  me  that  she
             thought he had been detained later in the year.  Her letter at
             B7-8 and her  oral  evidence  made  it  very  clear  that  the
             Appellant has a close bond with his son.   In  her  letter  at
             page C5,  dated  10th  November  2012,  she  stated  that  the
             Appellant had returned to live with her.   Sadly,  his  mental
             health issues resulted in him leaving the  house,  although  I
             cannot accept Ms Robinson's submission that this  amounted  to
             the Appellant removing himself from family  life,  as  it  can
             still continue despite the fact that he was  not  living  with
             his wife and their child.  I am satisfied that  the  Appellant
             enjoys a close  family  life  with  his  son.   There  was  no
             evidence of any significant private life.  I did not find  the
             Appellant to be a reliable witness, given his  assertion  that
             he was cohabiting with Ms McKenzie and their child, when  that
             was plainly not the case.  I could not, therefore, find  as  a
             fact that he has been in the UK since 1993.  The Appellant did
             not  produce  any  evidence  from  the   church   which   has,
             apparently, offered him a  great  deal  of  support  recently.
             There  was  a  dearth  of  medical  evidence  in  the  appeal,
             certainly as regards the Appellant's  mental  health.   I  had
             sight of a letter dated 24th August  2012  from  the  Bradford
             Teaching Hospitals, confirming that the Appellant has  an  HIV
             infection, and that he had attended the clinic  intermittently
             since 2007.  Having been prescribed antiretroviral therapy  in
             2010, he stopped taking it after six months  because  he  felt
             that he had been cured by God.  His health issues do not reach
             the threshold of D v UK.


         14.   The  Appellant's  removal  from  the  UK  would   undoubtedly
             interfere  with  his  relationship  with  his  son.   Equally,
             however, that interference would be in accordance with the law
             and in pursuit  of  the  legitimate  aim  of  maintaining  the
             economic well-being of the State through a  robust  system  of
             immigration control.   The  core  issue  in  this  appeal  is,
             therefore, whether  removal  is  proportionate  to  that  aim.
             Following the decision in ZH (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC  4,  the
             best interests of the child have to be a primary consideration
             in the proportionality assessment, meaning that they  have  to
             be considered first.  In her refusal  letter,  the  Respondent
             accepted  that  it  was  a  generally  agreed  principle  that
             children should grow up  within  their  family  unit.   In  LD
             (Article 8 - best interests of child) Zimbabwe [2010] UKUT 278
             (IAC),  the  Tribunal  held  that  weighty  reasons  would  be
             required to  justify  separating  a  parent  from  a  lawfully
             settled minor child or child from a community in which  he  or
             she had grown up and lived for most of his or her life.  In E-
             A (Article 8 - best interests of child)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT
             00315 (IAC) it was held that,  during  a  child's  very  early
             years, he or she will be primarily focused  on  self  and  the
             caring parents or guardian.  At the date of  the  hearing,  Ms
             McKenzie was solely performing the role of the caring  parent,
             having been forced to relinquish her employment in order to do
             so, and Jozef was not quite three years old at the date of the
             hearing.  However, as I have stated, the evidence  shows  that
             he and his father have a close bond.


         15.  The Appellant has a lengthy immigration history.   He  had  no
             leave to be in the UK when he  was  encountered  in  2008  and
             served with an enforcement notice.   Various  applications  to
             remain have been made and refused.  However, Jozef  cannot  be
             held responsible for his father's previous poor history.   The
             Appellant currently has no means of supporting himself or  his
             family, and relies on the generosity of  the  church,  on  his
             account.  There is a strong public interest  in  his  removal.
             However, to do so would separate  him  from  his  son.   As  a
             British citizen, he cannot be required to leave the UK, and it
             is now well established that it is not  reasonable  to  expect
             family life between a parent and a minor child to be conducted
             electronically.  Jozef's British nationality is very important
             in the assessment of proportionality.


         16.  I find it likely that  the  Appellant  and  Ms  McKenzie  will
             reconcile.  That was her evidence, provided the Appellant gets
             treatment  for  his  depression  and  takes   the   medication
             prescribed to him.  That would result in the  reunion  of  the
             family.  The Appellant has shown, in  the  past,  that  he  is
             capable of working.  I consider that the balancing exercise in
             this case is close.  Thus, although there is a  strong  public
             interest in the removal of the Appellant as an illegal entrant
             who is presently unable to maintain himself, his removal would
             not be in the best interests  of  his  British  son.   By  the
             narrowest of margins,  I  conclude  that  the  Respondent  has
             failed to advance sufficiently weighty reasons to displace the
             best interests of the child in favour of the public  interest.
             Accordingly, I allow this appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR."

7.   The Secretary of State appealed referring to the  relevant  Immigration
    Rules dealing with the rights of an applicant under Article  8  of  the
    ECHR before going on to  argue  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for his findings and conclusions.  In particular  they
    refer to the fact that the judge had found  that  the  appellant  would
    reconcile with his wife if he got treatment for his depression and took
    prescribed medication and stated that it was  submitted  the  appellant
    had failed to provide sufficient reasons for  that  finding  especially
    given that he had failed to seek treatment in the past and  had  failed
    to take any medication prescribed to him and that that had led  to  his
    separation from his wife.  It was claimed that the appellant's  failure
    to seek treatment in the past had impacted upon his  relationship  with
    his son which led to him living apart from his son but despite that  he
    had maintained contact with his son and there  was  no  reason  why  he
    could not do that by modern methods of communication from Nigeria.

8.   At the hearing of the appeal before me Mr  Parkinson  argued  that  the
    judge had failed to give adequate reasons for his conclusion  that  the
    appellant and Miss McKenzie would reconcile and  that  his  conclusions
    were based on speculation.  He pointed out that the  judge  had  stated
    that his decision was reached on the "narrowest of  margins"  and  that
    there was no indication that the appellant was going to obtain  medical
    help which was the basis on which the judge was  speculating  that  the
    appellant and Miss McKenzie would reconcile.  He pointed  to  the  fact
    that they had been living apart for some time prior to the hearing  and
    that  they  had  previously  separated  because  of   the   appellant's
    depression.  He argued it was  not  open  to  the  judge  to  make  the
    findings which he had and on which  he  based  his  decision  that,  on
    balance, the removal of the appellant was disproportionate.

9.   With regard to the issue of the best interests of the  appellant's  son
    he stated that all factors should be considered rather than  separating
    out different factors in the proportionality assessment.  Of  relevance
    was the fact that the appellant had been convicted of fraud.   Moreover
    the judge had not considered that the appellant might be able to return
    to Britain after removal.

10.  He accepted that it  was  likely  that  the  appellant  had  worked  in
    Britain in the past as he had met his wife at work.

11.  Mr Adekoya argued the decision of the  judge  was  adequately  reasoned
    and referred to the factors relating  to  the  best  interests  of  the
    appellant's son.

12.  In reply Mr Parkinson referred again to the  fact  that  the  appellant
    had had a breakdown and had not taken his HIV medication and there  was
    nothing to indicate that he would comply with any regime  to  take  his
    medicine and  it  was  only  on  that  basis  that  reconciliation  was
    envisaged.

13.  When considering this appeal I  note  the  terms  of  the  judgment  of
    Carnwath LJ in Mukarkar v SSHD  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1045  in  which,  at
    paragraph 40 he had stated:-

         "Factual judgments of this kind are often not easy,  but  they  are
         not  made  easier  or  better  by  excessive  legal  or  linguistic
         analysis.  It is of the nature of  such  judgments  that  different
         tribunals, without illegality or irrationality, may reach different
         conclusions on the same case ... The mere fact  that  one  Tribunal
         has reached what may seem an unusually generous view of  the  facts
         of a particular case does not mean that it has  made  an  error  of
         law, so as to justify an appeal under the old system  or  an  order
         for  reconsideration  under  the  new.   Nor  does  it  create  any
         precedent, so as to limit the Secretary of State's right  to  argue
         for a more restrictive approach on a similar case in the future."

14.  I have  considered  the  conclusions  of  the  Immigration  Judge.   In
    paragraph 16 he referred to two matters.  The  first  was  his  finding
    that the appellant and Miss McKenzie would reconcile and the second was
    the issue of the best interests of the appellant's British son.  Indeed
    it appears that he placed most weight on that point in that  he  stated
    that he had  concluded  that  the  respondent  had  failed  to  advance
    sufficiently weighty reasons to displace  the  best  interests  of  the
    child in favour of the public interest.

15.  The reality is that the judge did  set  out  and  clearly  applied  the
    appropriate structured approach to the rights of  the  appellant  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  He took into account all factors including  the
    appellant's relationship with  his  British  wife  and  that  with  his
    British son.  He heard evidence from Miss McKenzie.  He  set  out  what
    evidence of the appellant he accepted and what he did not.

16.  In paragraph 13 he noted that the appellant's mental health issues  had
    resulted in him leaving the house but he did go on to say that he could
    not accept the Presenting Officer's submissions that that  amounted  to
    the appellant removing himself from family life.  He concluded that the
    appellant enjoyed a close family life with his son.

17.  He concentrated particularly in the determination on the issue  of  the
    best interests of the appellant's son referring to the judgment  in  ZH
    (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 as well as  that  in  LD  (Article  8  -  best
    interests of child) Zimbabwe [2010] UKUT 278 (IAC) and EA (Article 8  -
    best interests of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT  00315  (IAC).   He  found
    that the appellant and his son had a close bond.  He placed  weight  on
    the appellant's role in his son's upbringing and of  course  emphasised
    that his son was a British citizen.

18.  It is not the case that the judge ignored the  appellant's  immigration
    history and indeed he found that there was a strong public interest  in
    the removal of the appellant.

19.  Having stated that, however, he  concluded  that  the  removal  of  the
    appellant would not be in the best interests of his son.  He took  into
    account the evidence of Miss McKenzie and reached his conclusions that,
    by the narrowest of margins, the  Secretary  of  State  had  failed  to
    advance sufficiently weighty reasons to displace the best interests  of
    the child in favour of the public interest.

20.  As I stated above I am guided in my consideration  of  this  appeal  by
    the judgment of Carnwath LJ in Mukarkar.  I conclude that the  decision
    of the Immigration Judge was in no way perverse, that it was fully open
    to him and  was  reached  after  applying  the  appropriate  structured
    approach.  The judge's findings of facts were reached  after  reviewing
    in some detail the evidence before him and  indeed  after  hearing  the
    evidence of Miss McKenzie.

21.  In these circumstances I find that there was no material error  of  law
    in the determination  of  the  Immigration  Judge  and  find  that  the
    decision of the judge to allow this appeal  shall  stand.   It  is,  of
    course, for the respondent to decide the  length  of  leave  to  remain
    which should be granted to the appellant.



Decision

22.  This appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.






Signed                                  Date 18 June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

