
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/28801/2015
                                                               IA/28804/2015
                                                               IA/28805/2015
                                                               IA/28806/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 November 2016                  |On 30 December 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                 SASHI LAMA
                             YONZEN SHANTI LAMA
                            YONZEN SHASHANK LAMA
                             KELSUNG LAMA YONZEN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Z Malik of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction and background

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant  who  is  represented  by  Mr  Malik
    against a decision of a panel of the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  19  May
    2016. First-tier Tribunal Judges  Grimmett  and  VC  Dean  (the  Panel)
    decided that the appellant failed to satisfy the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules or to establish that there were  any  grounds  within
    the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) for remaining in the UK.



2.   The background to this matter is that the  appellants  are  a  Nepalese
    family. Mr Sashi Lama was born on 25 November 1970. Mrs  Yonzen  Shanti
    Lama was born on 25 January 1972.  Their  children  are  Master  Youzen
    Shasank Lama who was born on 29 December 2002 and Master  Kelsung  Lama
    Youzen, born on 31 August 2006 who are their children.

3.   The appellants applied  for  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  under  the
    Immigration Rules on the basis  that  276ADE  (1)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Secretary of State concluded that they have not established
    a private life here and  they  did  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE (1) (iii).

4.   The respondent also considered  whether  the  appellants  qualified  to
    remain in the UK outside the Immigration Rules. It  was  accepted  that
    the third and fourth appellants had been here for at least seven  years
    and that they were below the age of 18. However, the respondent was not
    satisfied that they met the requirements of the relevant  paragraph  of
    the Immigration Rules, which  was  E-LTRC.1.6,  because  their  parents
    failed to meet the requirements of Appendix FM.

5.   The appellants appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  On  28  September  2016
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro decided to give permission  to  appeal.
    He noted that the  findings  were  comprehensive  in  relation  to  the
    appellants' failure to meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
    but he also noted the  requirements  of  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 (2009 Act) placed a  duty  on  the
    respondent to consider the best interests of the children, that is  the
    third  and  fourth  appellants,  when  deciding  the  outcome  of   the
    immigration applications.

6.   Immigration Judge Pedro who considered the applications for  permission
    to appeal considered there to be no merit in grounds 1  and  3  of  the
    grounds. He found that the Panel had fully considered the  requirements
    of section 55 of the 2009 Act, weighing up the best  interests  of  the
    third and fourth appellants. However, it was at least arguable that the
    applications should have succeeded outside the Immigration Rules.  This
    ground (ground 2- or  ground  (b))  criticised  the  Immigration  Judge
    because it was said that he had neglected to consider  the  case  under
    Article 8.  It was  at  least  arguable,  that  there  was  a  material
    omission in the decision to consider the case outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

7.   Of course this would only be relevant if it might lead to  a  different
    outcome to the appeal and it would only be in that circumstance that it
    would be a material error of law.  Nevertheless the matter  was  listed
    before me for a hearing as to whether there was a material error of law
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The Hearing

8.   At the hearing Mr Malik  of  Counsel  represented  the  appellants  and
    submitted that findings of fact of the  First-tier  Tribunal  suggested
    that the children appellants i.e. appellants 3 and 4, had been  present
    in the UK for at least seven years. In the circumstances, based on  the
    case of MA [2016] EWCA Civ 705, the public  interest  did  not  justify
    their removal. He quoted extensively from MA. In  particular,  referred
    to paragraphs 10, 17 and 49. In paragraph  17  Elias  LJ  outlined  the
    circumstances where "the public interest" will justify removal. He said
    that Parliament had clearly stipulated that certain conditions  had  to
    be satisfied. The  conditions  here  related  to  the  welfare  of  the
    children and required the public interest to justify that removal.

9.   He argued that the panel before which this appeal came  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in  law  in  their  assessment  of  the  public
    interest. He particularly criticised paragraph 30 et  sequitur  in  the
    decision.  He said there was an  error  of  law,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had not attached sufficient weight to  the  interests  of  the
    children.

10.  As I noted in the course of his submissions they appeared to  go  quite
    a bit  further than the grounds of appeal and in fact Mr Malik did  not
    seek to persuade me that the failure to mention the  case  outside  the
    Immigration Rules was itself a material error of law. I note that  that
    was the reason on which permission to appeal was  given  in  the  first
    place.

11.  The  respondent's  representative,  Miss  Brocklesby-Weller,  helpfully
    took me through a number of other  key  passages  in  the  case  of  MA
    including paragraph 45 of  the  judgment  of  Lord  Justice  Elias.  In
    paragraph 45 Lord Justice Elias points out that, in his  judgment,  the
    court should have regard to the conduct of the applicant and any  other
    matters relevant to the  public  interest  when  applying  the  "unduly
    harsh" concept in Sections 117C(5) and should do  so  when  considering
    the question of reasonableness under Section 117B(6). He also noted  at
    paragraph 49 that in fact this was not a seven year case.

12.  Turning to the facts of the case, Miss Brocklesby-Weller said  that  it
    was of interest that the case of MA  did  not  appear  to  involve  the
    return of a family unit to a country  with  which  they  have  a  close
    familial and cultural  connection.  At  least  two  of  the  six  cases
    considered by the Court of Appeal involved  single-parent  carers  (see
    paragraphs 1-4).

13.  Mr Malik said that, essentially,  the  length  of  residence  justified
    taking a different approach to this case. In other cases considered  by
    the Court of Appeal in MA, there were no children who had been  present
    in the UK for seven years and  were  apparently  settled  into  the  UK
    school system, as was the case here.  He said there had to be "powerful
    reasons to counteract the presumption, effectively, in  favour  of  the
    children". Those powerful reasons did not exist here.

Conclusions

14.  The first ground of appeal, namely that the Immigration Judge at First-
    tier Tribunal had failed adequately to  consider  the  case  under  the
    Rules, has effectively not been pursued before me and in any event  was
    not the subject of a  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  I find that the Rules do provide a  comprehensive  code  and
    that they were fully considered by the Panel. There is no basis that  I
    can find for criticising the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

15.  Mr Malik did raise some interesting arguments in relation to  the  case
    of MA, but, in my view, he took Lord Justice Elias's  comments  out  of
    context. It is necessary to read the whole decision.  The Secretary  of
    State here has made a decision to  remove  the  whole  family  back  to
    Nepal, a country with which they have a close cultural  and  linguistic
    assimilation. The First-tier Tribunal clearly found  that  they  had  a
    number of family members there and he clearly found that it was in  the
    interests of the child appellants to return with the  adult  appellants
    to Nepal as part of one family unit.

16.  I do not agree that a different  test  applies  in  relation  to  cases
    where there are children who have been here for seven  years  or  more,
    but I do accept that the requirement  on  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    properly weigh up the welfare of the children was  a  very  significant
    obligation, which has been described  as  a  paramount  requirement  in
    these cases. However, when the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is
    fully considered it is clear that the Tribunal properly weighed up  and
    took full account of the welfare of the  children.  Indeed,  the  Panel
    looked painstakingly at the facts of this case and fully considered the
    extent to which the children would be disrupted  by  their  removal  to
    Nepal. It concluded that there was nothing in the facts of the case  to
    indicate that they could not continue to be educated in Nepal. Although
    the  education  available  in  that  country  was  different  from  the
    education available in the UK, it had served  their  parents  well  and
    would be  likely  to  serve  them  equally  well.  This  finding  deals
    effectively with ground three, again one in which  permission  was  not
    granted, and crosses over into  ground  two  on  which  permission  was
    given.

17.  In so far as that second ground (that the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed
    to consider the grounds for remaining in the UK outside the Immigration
    Rules) is concerned, in so far as it may be  treated  as  free-standing
    one, I am satisfied that the substantial ties of the  family  to  Nepal
    was a powerful factor to support the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.
    Having given the matter very careful consideration I am  not  persuaded
    that any different result could have  followed  from  considering  this
    case outside the Immigration Rules or that  MA  casts  doubter  on  the
    correctness of the approach of the First-tier Tribunal. I am aware that
    this is an area which is subject a  number  of  other  appeals  at  the
    present time and it may  be  that  guidance  is  forthcoming  from  the
    Supreme Court in due course. However, it is my conclusion  that,  based
    on the fact-findings of the First-tier  Tribunal,  no  basis  has  been
    shown for interfering with the Panel's decision.



Notice of Decision

18.  The appeal of the appellant against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is  dismissed.   Therefore  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to dismiss the case under the Immigration Rules and  on  human
    rights grounds stands.

19.  No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There  has
    been no request for an anonymity direction  and  I  make  no  anonymity
    direction in the Upper Tribunal.  In addition there was no fee award by
    the First-tier Tribunal and again that decision was not challenged.


Signed                                  Date 30 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
