
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28620/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 December 2016                   |On 13 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                               Merlene duffus
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hachemi, instructed by Ison Harrison Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Merlene Duffus, born  on  15  June  1957,  is  a  female
    citizen of Jamaica.  She entered the United Kingdom  as  a  visitor  in
    2003 and overstayed.  On 13 October 2010, she married Mitchell Lewis, a
    British citizen (hereafter Mr Lewis).  She made applications for  leave
    to remain in 2013 and 2014 which were refused.  A  further  application
    for leave was refused on 11 August 2015.  The appellant appealed to the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Myers) which, in a decision  promulgated  on
    25 May 2016 dismissed the appeal.   The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Granting permission, Upper Tribunal Judge Southern wrote:

         "It might be considered hard to criticise the judge for not  having
         had regard to  EX1  when  it  appeared  to  be  conceded  that  the
         submissions advanced on behalf of the  applicant  were  focused  on
         whether a grant of leave outside the Rules was required  to  secure
         an outcome compatible with Article 8 of the  ECHR  but  it  may  be
         arguable that the need to consider that  provisions  of  the  Rules
         arose as the evidence emerged.

         It is arguable also that the judge may have fallen  into  error  in
         declining to "assess how long separation might be" if the appellant
         returned alone to Jamaica to seek  entry  clearance  to  return  as
         there appears to be no assessment of whether a permanent  severance
         of this marriage will infringe rights protected by Article 8.

         It may be that, given her poor immigration history, the  relatively
         brief  marriage,  the  discrepant   accounts   of   continuity   of
         cohabitation and the judge's finding to the effect of embellishment
         of  the  appellant's  evidence,  the  appellant  faces   formidable
         obstacles in succeeding in this claim.  She is entitled to see that
         her claim is properly assessed and it is arguable that in confining
         the assessment to the period while entry clearance  is  sought  the
         judge fell into error."

 3. Mr Mitchell is elderly and unwell.  As Judge Myers observed  [18]  "his
    health is so poor he cannot manage  without  the  appellant's  constant
    care."  The judge "accepted it would be detrimental to Mr  Mitchell  if
    his wife was not available" but the judge did place limited weight on a
    medical report from a GP "because it is likely the doctor  is  relating
    what she had been told by Mr Mitchell and is unaware of the  family  he
    has living nearly and the fact that the appellant regularly makes trips
    to London or stays at her daughter's in Leeds."  The judge found it was
    unreasonable to expect Mr Mitchell to live permanently in Jamaica  with
    the appellant  [19]  and  that  it  would  be  reasonable  for  him  to
    "accompany his wife to that country on a temporary basis while she made
    an application for entry to the UK through the proper channels".

 4. The focus of the submissions at the Upper  Tribunal  hearing  concerned
    the judge's findings at [20]:

         In relation to the appellant's failure to respond  to  the  request
         from the respondent for information; I do not accept that  she  had
         no reasonable excuse.  She was aware that she was  unable  to  meet
         the deadline given by the respondent and had written to notify  the
         Home Office of this.  Although she was later told that the  GP  had
         responded she failed to request a copy of their letter.  It appears
         the GP did write to the Home Office on 22/7/15 as reference is made
         to this in their letter of  11/05/16  although  no  copy  has  been
         provided.  In my judgment, knowing  how  vital  it  is  to  respond
         promptly to the Home Office the appellant should have done more  to
         ensure the letter was sent and at the very  least  a  copy  of  the
         letter which she could have sent herself to  the  Home  Office  and
         would have been certain that it had been sent.  In any event, it is
         likely that the GP's letter of 2015 would have  confirmed  that  Mr
         Mitchell was fit to travel then as there was no suggestion that his
         health was worse in 2015 than it is now when  he  is  another  year
         older and there is no  reason  to  believe  that  the  respondent's
         decision would have been any different.

 5. The refusal letter of 11 August 2015 considers  the  appellant's  claim
    under  the  "Partner  Route"  (Appendix  FM  R-LTRP).   The  respondent
    considered that S-LTR1.7 had not been met by the appellant:

         S-LTR.1.7. The applicant has failed without  reasonable  excuse  to
         comply with a requirement to-

         (a)  attend an interview;

         (b)  provide information;

         (c)  provide physical data; or

         (d)  undergo a medical examination or provide a medical report.

 6. The appellant had failed "to respond to a request for information dated
    30 June 2015 with no reasonable excuse therefore your application falls
    for refusal under S-LTR1.7(b)."  The request for information of 30 June
    2015 concerned evidence of cohabitation between the  appellant  and  Mr
    Lewis "an official letter/report from an NHS consultant regarding  your
    partner's medical condition.  This document should state his  diagnosis
    prognosis whether he is fit to travel and list  any  medication  he  is
    taking."  Although there was some dispute as to whether a GP letter was
    sent, there appears to be no indication  at  all  that  a  consultant's
    letter containing the information requested by the respondent was  ever
    sent either within the deadline imposed by the respondent  or  at  all.
    It follows, therefore, that the decision  was  properly  refused  under
    Appendix FM RLTRP.

 7. The respondent also considered whether EX.1 applied:

         EX.1. This paragraph applies if

         (i)  the  applicant  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
         relationship with a child who-

         (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was under the age of 18 years
         when the applicant was first granted leave on the basis  that  this
         paragraph applied;

         (bb) is in the UK;

         (cc) is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK  continuously  for
         at least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of  application
         ;and

         (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
         UK; or

         (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled  in  the
         UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection,  and
         there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
         continuing outside the UK.

 8. However,  whilst  it  was  acknowledged  by  the  respondent  that  the
    appellant  and  Mr  Mitchell   enjoyed   a   genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship,

         your  application  falls  for   refusal   under   the   suitability
         requirements of the Immigration Rules as set  out  earlier.   These
         are mandatory requirements which apply to all applicants regardless
         whether the EX.1 criteria are met.  As you  failed  to  meet  those
         suitability requirements you cannot benefit from the  criteria  set
         out at EX.1.

 9. The purpose behind these Rules appears to be clear.  An  applicant  may
    benefit from the provisions in EX.1 but only if he or she has  provided
    to the respondent sufficient  information  to  enable  an  analysis  of
    "reasonableness" to be undertaken.  In the present case,  although  she
    may have expressed herself slightly more clearly at [20], I  find  that
    the judge has found that the appellant did not respond as  required  to
    the request for information contained in the letter of  30  June  2015.
    It is perhaps not  surprising,  therefore,  and  notwithstanding  Judge
    Southern's observations when granting permission, that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal went no further than [20] in examining whether  the  appellant
    might qualify under the Immigration Rules.  For the  reasons  given  by
    Judge Myers, she could not and the focus of the decision  then  shifted
    to Article 8 outside the Rules.

10. Although they do not constitute any threshold  or  test  as  such,  the
    judge was required to consider whether  there  existed  any  compelling
    circumstances which fell outside the circumstances  contemplated  under
    the Immigration Rules before she could allow an  appeal  on  Article  8
    grounds.  She correctly directed herself at [22].  The judge  commented
    on the appellant's bad immigration history  and  considered  it  likely
    that she would be a burden on public  funds.   The  grounds  of  appeal
    dispute that finding.  It appears that the appellant claims to  be  not
    in receipt of any state benefits herself at the  present  time  but  is
    supported  by  those  benefits  and  other  income  which  her  husband
    receives.  The appellant complains that the judge has speculated on the
    possibility of the appellant applying for carers allowance in the event
    of leave being granted.  I do not find that that submission has  merit.
    The judge  was  entitled  to  look  at  the  position  as  regards  the
    expenditure of public funds in the event that the appellant is  granted
    leave; she is unable to  apply  for  benefits  whilst  her  immigration
    status is uncertain.  Given the degree of care which she provides to Mr
    Mitchell, it seems very likely indeed that, if she were entitled to  do
    so, the appellant would apply and obtain  carers  or  other  allowances
    provided by the state.  I regard the judge's  comments  concerning  the
    likely increased burden on the public purse as entirely  legitimate  in
    the circumstances.

11. This brings me to the final  issue.   In  essence,  the  ratio  of  the
    judge's decision is that (i) Mr Mitchell cannot reasonably be  expected
    to live permanently in Jamaica but (ii) he can be cared for by  family,
    friends or professional carers if  the  appellant  were  to  return  to
    Jamaica to make an out of country application or  (iii)  it  would  not
    damage his health significantly and would therefore  be  reasonable  to
    expect Mr Mitchell to travel with his wife to Jamaica while she made an
    application  for  entry  clearance.   In  granting  permission,   Judge
    Southern appears to raise the possibility that Mr Mitchell might travel
    to Jamaica and find himself stranded there permanently because his wife
    had failed in her application for entry clearance.  I cannot find  that
    that is a legitimate objection on the facts in this case.  Judge  Myers
    appears to have been influenced to a significant extent by the evidence
    which showed that the appellant does leave Mr  Mitchell  to  be  looked
    after by others whilst she visits her daughter in Leeds or  travels  to
    London.  A visit for a finite period of time to Jamaica to make an  out
    of country application would appear to be little more than a  variation
    or extension of those arrangements.  The appellant does not  appear  to
    have adduced any evidence to show that waiting times for applicants for
    entry clearance in Jamaica are excessively long.  Further, there are no
    minor children to be considered in this instance.  The judge has  found
    that an individual with a bad immigration history and who has no  minor
    children to care for, his partner can, at least in the short  term,  be
    cared for by others or who can accompany her for a temporary  visit  to
    Jamaica should be expected to leave the United Kingdom  and  apply  for
    entry clearance from abroad.  That  was  a  finding  which  effectively
    defeated the appellant's appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  I  consider
    that it was a finding open to the judge on the evidence and  I  further
    find that she has supported her finding by cogent  reasons  based  upon
    that evidence.  The appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 10 January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there no fee order is payable.


Signed   Date 10 January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

