
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28129/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                     |               Decision and Reasons   |
|On  24th June 2015                    |Promulgated                           |
|                                      |On 3rd July 2015                      |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER Tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                             MR RAJA QAMAR ABBAS
                           (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

          the Immigration Officer - Terminal 2, Manchester airport
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Asanovic, Counsel instructed by Bankfield Heath
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

1. The appellant has been granted permission to appeal against the  decision
   of First-tier Tribunal Saffer who, in a decision promulgated on the  25th
   February 2015, dismissed his appeal against the respondent's decision (a)
   to refuse him admission to the United Kingdom, and (b) to revoke his  EEA
   Residence Card.

Background

2. The original immigration decision, which Judge Saffer upheld,  was  taken
   on the 14th July 2014. It was made on the basis that  (i)  the  appellant
   had submitted false documents (a divorce certificate and confirmation  of
   authenticity from the Union Council Shakrial Rawalpindi)  in  support  of
   his application of the 9th December 2009  for approval to  marry  in  the
   United Kingdom, and (ii)  anomalies in the  parties'  interviews  with  a
   Home Office official that gave rise to a suspicion that  the  appellant's
   marriage was one of convenience.

Decision and reasons

3. The First-tier Tribunal's decision cannot  stand  for  reasons  that  are
   identified in three of the five grounds of appeal. I take the grounds  of
   appeal in turn.

4. The appellant's EEA Residence Card had been granted on  the  strength  of
   his marriage to Ms Lucie Kroupova. Ms Kroupova had given  oral  testimony
   with a view to rebutting the respondent's claim that she had entered into
   a marriage of convenience with the appellant. In assessing her  evidence,
   Judge Saffer placed "significant weight" upon a written record of a visit
   to the matrimonial home by an Immigration Officer [paragraph  35].  Based
   upon this record, the judge concluded that the Ms Kroupova  had  lied  in
   stating that the appellant was at work at the  time  of  the  Immigration
   Officer's visit. The judge reached this conclusion  because  he  believed
   that the appellant's passport  showed  him  to  be  in  Pakistan  on  the
   occasion in question. However, as the respondent acknowledges, the record
   of the visit incorrectly stated that it took place on a date in 2014 when
   it had in fact taken place on a date in 2013. At that time the  appellant
   was undoubtedly in the United Kingdom. It is thus not surprising that the
   respondent did not rely upon this supposed anomaly as a  reason  for  the
   decision. There is force in Ms Asonovic's submission that,  whilst  there
   was undoubtedly a typographical error in recording the year of the visit,
   this was nevertheless apparent from the context within which it  appeared
   (there was reference to a visit, some two days' earlier, which  correctly
   gave the year as 2013) and that it would in any event have  become  clear
   had the judge to put his mistaken belief to the witness  directly.  I  am
   satisfied that the failure to put  to the witness the suggestion that she
   had lied about  her  husband's  whereabouts  before  drawing  an  adverse
   conclusion was a procedural irregularity  that  has  resulted  in  proven
   unfairness affecting the outcome of the appeal. For this  reason,  alone,
   the decision of the First-tier Tribunal cannot stand.

5. The respondent had originally refused the application on the  basis  that
   the appellant had submitted a forged divorce certificate in order to show
   that he was free to marry the sponsor. Judge Saffer upheld this aspect of
   the respondent's decision [paragraph 29]. This was somewhat surprising in
   view of the fact that he had accepted as genuine a document purporting to
   be from a local Union Council that confirmed the fact of the divorce.  It
   is nevertheless possible, at least in theory, for a person  to  submit  a
   false document in  order  to  evidence  a  true  fact.  To  that  extent,
   therefore, this was a finding that was open to the  judge.  However,  the
   real problem with it is that further investigation by the respondent  had
   led to the conclusion that the divorce certificate was, contrary  to  the
   findings of the original investigation, also  a  genuine  document.  This
   forms the basis of the second ground of appeal. It is not  of  course  an
   error of law for the Tribunal to make a finding of fact upon the basis of
   evidence that is subsequently found to be unreliable. However,  with  his
   customary fairness, Mr Diwnycz  informed  me  that  in  a  Minute  Sheet,
   completed at the end of the hearing, the  Presenting  Officer  had  noted
   that the divorce certificate was genuine. It is right  to  say  that  the
   Minute Sheet does not say, in terms, that this concession had been  drawn
   to the attention of the judge. It is  nevertheless  a  short  inferential
   step to conclude that it was. In any event, it is only right to give  the
   benefit of the doubt to the appellant,  given  that  he  would  otherwise
   stand wrongly condemned of involvement in fraud

6. The third ground relates to the judge's finding that  the  appellant  had
   failed to prove that his marriage was legally valid by reason of  a  lack
   of evidence that it was recognised in the EU citizen's country of  origin
   (the Czech Republic). In light of the decision in TA and  others  (Kareem
   explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 316 (IAC), it is arguable that the  validity
   of the appellant's marriage was subject to its recognition under the  law
   of the  country  of  the  sponsor's  nationality.  It  would  perhaps  be
   surprising if the law of one EU Member  State  failed  to  recognise  the
   validity of a marriage that was celebrated under the law of  another.  It
   may be that this was the reason why the appellant's marriage (which  took
   place in and is recognised under the laws  of  England)  had  never  been
   questioned by the respondent. Indeed, the respondent usually  raises  the
   issue of validity only in cases where a ceremony of  marriage  has  taken
   place by proxy in a country that is outside the EU. Whatever  the  reason
   for it, however, the fact remains that this was not  an  issue  that  had
   been raised by the respondent.  The  appellant  had  not  therefore  been
   placed on notice of the need to adduce evidence in order to  address  it.
   This procedural unfairness clearly had a bearing upon the outcome of  the
   appeal and thus provides a further basis for setting aside the decision.

7. The fourth ground of appeal takes issue  with  the  judge's  findings  of
   fact. In view of my decision with regard to the first  three  grounds  of
   appeal, it is unnecessary to consider this complaint in detail.  It  will
   suffice to say that I have concluded that the  individual  challenges  to
   the judge's factual finding on this ground are essentially based upon  an
   isolated view of individual aspects of the evidence rather than  upon  an
   appreciation of the evidence as a whole. I am satisfied that were it  not
   for the misunderstandings of  the  evidence,  to  which  I  have  already
   alluded, the judge's factual findings would have been reasonably open  to
   him.

8. The fifth ground of appeal is based upon the judge's purported  upholding
   of the respondent's decision to refuse the  application  under  paragraph
   320A of the Immigration Rules. Both the judge  and  the  respondent  were
   wrong to consider a provision that  governs  the  granting  of  leave  to
   remain under the Immigration Rules (as opposed  to  those  governing  the
   recognition of a right of residence under EU law). This error was however
   immaterial to the outcome  of  the  appeal.  This  is  for  two  reasons.
   Firstly, the judge also upheld the respondent's decision on the basis  of
   Regulation 21B of the 2006 regulations. This provision was applicable  to
   the misconduct of which the judge had mistakenly found the  appellant  to
   be guilty and it was also relevant within the context of the  appellant's
   rights under EU law. Secondly, and  more  fundamentally,  the  basis  for
   suggesting that the appellant was guilty of such conduct was in any event
   flawed, for the reasons that I considered at paragraph 5 (above).

9. I  am  satisfied  that  the  errors  of  law  that  have  been  correctly
   identified in the first three grounds of appeal are such as to infect the
   entirety  of  the  Tribunal's  decision.  It  is  appropriate  in   those
   circumstances to remit the  matter  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
   determined afresh.

Notice of Decision

10. The appeal is allowed, the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set
   aside, and the determination of the appeal is remitted to be heard afresh
   by any judge of the First-tier Tribunal other than Judge Saffer. None  of
   the original findings of fact are preserved.

Anonymity is not ordered


Signed                              Date


Judge D Kelly

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


