

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/28103/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |       Decision & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On: 30 May 2017                        |       On: 24 October 2017          |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SHPETIM MALAJ
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E. Wilford, of counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                                  DECISION

   1. Regulation 10(5) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006  ("the  EEA
      Regs") provides, inter alia, that, in order to qualify for a  retained
      right  of  residence  following  divorce,  a  non  EEA  national  must
      establish that he or  she  was  residing  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
      accordance with the regulations at the date of the termination of  the
      marriage. For this appellant, as will generally be the case,  that  is
      said by the respondent to mean that he must show that his former  wife
      was exercising Treaty rights in the UK at the date of the  termination
      of the marriage, which is, in legal terminology, the date  upon  which
      the decree absolute was issued.


   2. The question to be resolved in this appeal is whether that is in  fact
      what is required by the EEA Regs and, if so, whether that requirement,
      set out in regulation 10(5), is also a requirement of Article 13(2) of
      Directive 2003/38/EC ("the Directive"), which the  EEA  Regs  seek  to
      transpose into domestic law. In short,  the  appellant  contends  that
      there is no such requirement in the Directive and that what he has  to
      show in order to be entitled, under Article  13(2)  is  that  his  EEA
      spouse was exercising Treaty rights at the date of the commencement of
      the divorce proceedings.


   3. The Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  has  been  granted
      permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Farmer who, by a determination promulgated on 22  July  2016,  allowed
      the appeal of Mr Malaj against a decision made on  4  August  2015  to
      refuse his  application  for  recognition  of  a  permanent  right  of
      residence on the basis of a retained right of residence as the  former
      spouse of an EEA national.


   4. The only ground of challenge being pursued by the Secretary  of  State
      is to the conclusion of the judge that the relevant date for assessing
      whether the EEA national spouse was exercising Treaty rights  was  the
      date upon which divorce  proceedings  were  initiated,  it  being  the
      contention of the Secretary of State that in order to succeed in  this
      appeal, the appellant  must  establish  that  his  former  spouse  was
      exercising Treaty rights as at the date  of  the  divorce.  Thus,  the
      appeal is concerned with a question of law and there  is  no  need  to
      embark upon any discussion of the particular facts. Therefore, no oral
      evidence was required or called to inform  the  determination  of  the
      appeal to the Upper Tribunal.



   5. The starting point might be taken as recital 15 in the preamble to the
      Directive:


           Family members should be legally safeguarded in the event of the
           death of the Union citizen, divorce, annulment  of  marriage  or
           termination of a registered partnership.  With  due  regard  for
           family life and human dignity,  and  in  certain  conditions  to
           guard against abuse,  measures  should  therefore  be  taken  to
           ensure  that  in  such  circumstances  family  members   already
           residing within the territory of the host  Member  State  retain
           their right of residence exclusively on a personal basis.


   6. The Directive sought to give effect to that ambition,  so  far  as  it
      related to spouses of Union citizens whose marriages end  in  divorce,
      through the provisions of Article 13 which provides:


           Retention of the right of residence by  family  members  in  the
           event of  divorce,  annulment  of  marriage  or  termination  of
           registered partnership


           1.  Without  prejudice  to  the  second  subparagraph,  divorce,
           annulment of the Union  citizen's  marriage  or  termination  of
           his/her registered partnership, as referred to in point 2(b)  of
           Article 2 shall not affect the right  of  residence  of  his/her
           family members who are nationals of a Member State.


           Before acquiring the right of permanent residence,  the  persons
           concerned must meet the conditions laid down in points (a), (b),
           (c) or (d) of Article 7(1).


           2.  Without  prejudice  to  the  second  subparagraph,  divorce,
           annulment  of  marriage  or  termination   of   the   registered
           partnership referred to in point 2(b) of  Article  2  shall  not
           entail loss of the right  of  residence  of  a  Union  citizen's
           family members who are not nationals of a Member State where:


           a) prior to initiation of the divorce or  annulment  proceedings
              or termination of the registered partnership referred  to  in
              point  2(b)  of  Article  2,  the  marriage   or   registered
              partnership has lasted at least three  years,  including  one
              year in the host Member State; or


           b) by agreement between the spouses or the partners referred  to
              in point 2(b) of Article 2 or by court order, the  spouse  or
              partner who is not a national of a Member State  has  custody
              of the Union citizen's children; or

           c) this is warranted by  particularly  difficult  circumstances,
              such as having been a victim of domestic violence  while  the
              marriage or registered partnership was subsisting; or


           d) by agreement between the spouses or partners referred  to  in
              point 2(b) of Article 2 or by  court  order,  the  spouse  or
              partner who is not a national of a Member State has the right
              of access to a minor child, provided that the court has ruled
              that such access must be in the host Member State, and for as
              long as is required.


           Before acquiring the right of permanent residence, the right  of
           residence of the persons concerned shall remain subject  to  the
           requirement that they are able to show that they are workers  or
           self-employed persons or that they have sufficient resources for
           themselves and their family members not to become  a  burden  on
           the social assistance system of the  host  Member  State  during
           their  period  of  residence  and  have  comprehensive  sickness
           insurance cover in the host  Member  State,  or  that  they  are
           members of the family, already constituted in  the  host  Member
           State, of a person satisfying  these  requirements.  "Sufficient
           resources" shall be as defined in Article 8(4)."


           Such family  members  shall  retain  their  right  of  residence
           exclusively on personal basis.



   7. The reference in Article 13(1) to Article 7 is to the requirements  to
      be met by Union citizens for a right of residence for more than  three
      months. To qualify, a Union citizen must demonstrate that they:


         . Are workers or self-employed in the host member state; or
         . Have sufficient resources not to become a  burden  on  the  host
           state and have comprehensive sickness insurance; or
         . Are enrolled for study at a qualifying establishment, as well as
           having sufficient resources so as not to become a burden and has
           comprehensive sickness insurance; or
         . Are a family member accompanying  or  joining  a  Union  citizen
           satisfying these requirements.

      This  particular  provision  may  prove  to  be  significant  in   the
      discussion that follows. That  is  because  it  illustrates  that  the
      Directive contemplates that, during a post-divorce period during which
      a non-EEA national seeks  to  retain  rights  of  residence,  what  is
      expected of him or her is the same as had been expected of his or  her
      EEA national spouse during the currency of the marriage.  Put  another
      way, such a spouse who does not yet qualify for a permanent  right  of
      residence on the basis of 5 years' residence in  accordance  with  the
      requirements of the Directive, having retained a  right  of  residence
      despite divorce, can complete the accumulation of the necessary 5-year
      period on the basis of his or her own activity, rather than having  to
      rely upon the activity of his or her former spouse.



   8. As I have said, in the United Kingdom, these provisions are transposed
      into  domestic  law  by  the  Immigration  (EEA)   Regulations   2006.
      Regulation 10 provides, so far as is relevant:


           Family member who has retained the right of residence


           10. (1) In these Regulations, "family member  who  has  retained
           the right of  residence"  means...a  person  who  satisfies  the
           conditions in paragraph...(5).
           ....
           (5) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if--
           (a) he ceased to be a family member of a qualified person on the
           termination  of  the  marriage  or  civil  partnership  of   the
           qualified person;
           (b) he was residing in the United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with
           these Regulations at the date of the termination;
           (c) he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and
           (d) either--
           (i)  prior  to  the  initiation  of  the  proceedings  for   the
           termination  of  the  marriage  or  the  civil  partnership  the
           marriage or civil partnership had  lasted  for  at  least  three
           years and the parties to the marriage or civil  partnership  had
           resided in the United Kingdom for at least one year  during  its
           duration;...


           (6) The condition in this paragraph is that the person-
           (a) is not an  EEA  national  but  would,  if  he  were  an  EEA
           national, be  a  worker,  a  self-employed  person  or  a  self-
           sufficient person under Reg. 6...


      And regulation 14 provides, again so far as is relevant:


           Extended right of residence
           ...


           14. (3) A family member who has retained the right of  residence
           is entitled to reside in the United Kingdom for so  long  as  he
           remains a family member who has retained the right of residence.


   9. The provision of the EEA Regs that is at  the  heart  of  the  dispute
      between the parties is regulation 10(5)(b), which  requires  a  person
      seeking a retained right of residence following divorce to  show  that
      he was residing  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  these
      regulations at the date  of  the  termination  of  the  marriage.  The
      respondent contends that this  requires  that,  at  the  date  of  the
      divorce it can be established that the EEA national spouse was in  the
      United Kingdom exercising Treaty rights. I am satisfied  that  is  not
      what is required, either by the Directive  or  the  EEA  Regs.  Before
      explaining why that is the case, it is necessary to  consider  briefly
      the authorities to which the parties have referred in submissions.


  10. In Amos v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 552 Stanley Burnton LJ recorded, as  is
      uncontroversial, that although the EEA Regulations sought to transpose
      into domestic law the Directive:


           "...  the  regulations   must   be   interpreted   and   applied
           consistently with the Directive unless that  is  impossible,  in
           which case it would  be  necessary  to  disapply  the  offending
           provisions of the Regulations."


      At paragraph 29  he  identified  the  following  requirements  of  the
      Directive in the circumstances with which we are concerned:


           (1) At all times while residing in this country until their
           divorce, their spouse must have been a worker or self-employed
           (or otherwise satisfied the requirements of Article 7.1).
           (2) Their marriages had to have lasted at least three years,
           including one year in this country.
           (3) They must be able to show that they are workers or self-
           employed persons or otherwise satisfy the requirements of the
           penultimate paragraph of Article 13.2.
      From which it can be seen that it was considered to be  a  requirement
      of the Directive that the EEA national spouse  continued  to  exercise
      Treaty rights up to the date of the divorce, if a  retained  right  of
      residence was to be established by the spouse. Pausing there,  as  was
      recognised in Amos, it was made clear in Diatta v Land  Berlin  [1985]
      ECR 567 that:


           "The members of a migrant worker's family, as defined in article
           10 of Regulation no 1612/68, are  not  necessarily  required  to
           live permanently with him in order to qualify  for  a  right  of
           residence under that provision."


      In Amos it was agreed by both parties, and so not subject to argument,
      so that it was not necessary for the court to decide the point, that:


           "... it follows from that  decision  that  separation  short  of
           divorce does not affect the right  of  the  non-national  spouse
           under Article 16 of the Directive if both the EEA  national  and
           his or her non-national spouse continue to reside  in  the  same
           Member State.."


  11. Interestingly, the Court of Appeal accepted in Amos that  Article  13,
      concerned with retention of a right of  residence  following  divorce,
      used the same language as is found in Article 12, which was  concerned
      with the circumstances in which the widow of  an  EEA  national  might
      qualify for a retained right of residence:


           "It is obvious that  the  Directive  cannot  be  interpreted  as
           requiring the widow or widower, in order to retain the right  of
           residence, to show that her or his deceased spouse continues  to
           work. The same must apply to Article 13."


      Despite this, at paragraph 29 the conclusion reached was that:


           "Thus the requirements of the Directive applicable to the
           appellants were as follows:
           (1) At all times while residing in this country until their
           divorce, their spouse must have been a worker or self-employed
           (or otherwise satisfied the requirements of Article 7.1).
           (2) Their marriages had to have lasted at least three years,
           including one year in this country.
           (3) They must be able to show that they are workers or self-
           employed persons or otherwise satisfy the requirements of the
           penultimate paragraph of Article 13.2"


  12. I do not find it at all easy to follow how one arrives at  the  second
      conclusion having departed from the first.  All  that  stands  between
      them, to explain the route from one to the other is (1) a reference to
      the qualifying condition, found in article 13(2)(a) of  the  Directive
      and in regulation 10(5)(d)(i) that the marriage had lasted at least  3
      years prior to the commencement of divorce proceedings and that during
      one of those years the parties lived in the  host  Member  state;  (2)
      reference to the  requirements  of  the  penultimate  paragraph  ("the
      second sub-paragraph" ) of Article 13(2) that  the  persons  concerned
      must continue to meet the conditions there set out and (3)  note  that
      article 18 confers a  right  of  permanent  residence  after  5  years
      residence with requiring that the person seeking that status  to  have
      "lived" with the EEA national.


  13. It may be that this is explicable only by the  fact  that  in  Article
      13(2) reference is to "the persons concerned" in the  plural  and  not
      just to the person seeking to establish a retained right of residence.




  14. Thus, it was the conclusion in Amos that, one of  the  requirement  of
      the regulations was that the spouse seeking to establish that he had a
      retained right of residence had to show that:


           "He or she was  residing  in  the  UK  in  accordance  with  the
           Regulations at the date of the divorce. He or she will have been
           so residing if regulation 14 applied, i.e. if the  EEA  national
           spouse was a "qualified person", i.e., for present  purposes,  a
           worker or self-employed person (as to which see the  definitions
           in regulations 2 and 6)"


  15. This does not provide an  answer,  however,  to  the  question  to  be
      addressed in this appeal. In NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 995,
      the Court of Appeal considered an appeal from a decision of the  Upper
      Tribunal (IAC) in which it had applied the  approach  taken  in  Amos,
      described above:


           "The Court of Appeal (in Amos) said that  the  Regulations  were
           consistent with this  proposition,  and  that  regulation  10(5)
           required the divorced third  country  national  to  satisfy  the
           condition that their former EEA national spouse was residing  in
           the UK in accordance with the Regulations at  the  date  of  the
           divorce."


      However, the Court of Appeal in  NA  made  clear  that  Amos  was  not
      binding authority  for  the  proposition  that  the  regulations  have
      correctly  transposed  the  Directive  and  that  there  was  such   a
      requirement to be found in the Directive. That was because that  issue
      had been dealt with by way of a concession. The court in NA  concluded
      that:


           "While there is some force in the Respondent's textual  analysis
           of the title of Article 13 - in ordinary language a right is not
           "retained" on divorce if it does not  subsist  on  that  date  -
           there is no less force in the Appellant's  submission  that  the
           "Gateway"  construction  accords  with  the  need  to  interpret
           Article 13(2) in a purposive manner, so as  to  avoid  potential
           abuse by Union citizens who are, for example, contesting custody
           or rights of access to their children in divorce proceedings, or
           who have inflicted domestic violence upon  their  third  country
           national spouse."

      Which led the court to find that the issue was not acte clair  and  so
      posed the following question for a preliminary ruling from the CJEU:

           "Must a third country national ex-spouse of a Union  citizen  be
           able to show that their  former  spouse  was  exercising  Treaty
           rights in the host Member state at the time of their divorce  in
           order to retain a right of  residence  under  Article  13(2)  of
           Directive 2004/38/EC?"


  16. Unfortunately, the CJEU did  not  answer  that  question  but  instead
      refined it and so posed for itself a different one  to  address,  that
      being:


           "... whether Article 13(2)(c) of  Directive  2004/38  is  to  be
           interpreted as meaning that a  third-country  national,  who  is
           divorced from a Union citizen at whose hands she  has  been  the
           victim of domestic violence during the marriage, is entitled  to
           retain her right of residence in the host Member State,  on  the
           basis of  that  provision,  where  the  divorce  post-dates  the
           departure of the Union citizen spouse from that member State."


  17. In addressing this different  question,  the  reasoning  set  out  was
      founded  upon  the  opening  proposition  that  Article  13(2)(c)  was
      concerned with the preservation of rights of residence where  that  is
      justified by particularly difficult circumstances. The  focus  of  the
      enquiry drifted further from the narrow ambit of the question posed by
      the Court of Appeal in that the CJEU next  explained  that  where  the
      Union citizen spouse had left the host  member  state  before  divorce
      proceedings were initiated, it was at that point  that  the  right  of
      residence of the non EEA spouse comes to an end, so that when  divorce
      proceedings are later initiated there is no right of residence  to  be
      retained.


  18. Finally, I have been referred to the decision of the EUECJ in Singh  &
      Ors [2015] EUECJ C-218/14. This, it  seems  to  me,  is  of  not  much
      assistance either because it is concerned with the position where  the
      EEA national has left the host member state before divorce proceedings
      were initiated. It seems  entirely  clear  and  unambiguous  that,  as
      explained in NA, the right of residence had ended with  the  departure
      of the EEA national spouse and so there  was  no  remaining  right  of
      residence to be retained. Thus, the ruling in Singh:


           "Article 13(2) of Directive 2004/38/EC .... must be interpreted
           as meaning that a third-country national, divorced from a  Union
           citizen, whose marriage lasted for at least three  years  before
           the commencement of divorce proceedings, including at least  one
           year in  the  host  Member  State,  cannot  retain  a  right  of
           residence in that Member State on the basis  of  that  provision
           where the commencement of the divorce proceedings is preceded by
           the departure from that Member State of  the  spouse  who  is  a
           Union citizen."


  19. The question at the heart of this appeal, which  is  whether  the  EEA
      national spouse must be exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom
      at the date of the divorce, that is, the date upon  which  the  decree
      absolute  is  issued,  falls  to  be  answered  as  follows.  Properly
      understood, there is no tension between  the  Directive  and  the  EEA
      Regulations. Both set out two phases of requirements. First, a non EEA
      spouse cannot qualify for a retained right  of  residence  unless  the
      qualifying condition, that the marriage has  lasted  for  at  least  3
      years prior to the initiation of divorce proceedings, during at  least
      one of which years the couple resided in the United Kingdom, has  been
      met.


  20. Second, the non EEA national spouse has a  right  of  residence  as  a
      family member while the marriage subsists, provided his  EEA  national
      spouse is exercising Treaty rights in the United  Kingdom.  Therefore,
      if the EEA national spouse leave the  United  Kingdom  before  divorce
      proceedings are initiated, the right to reside ends with her departure
      and there is no right to be retained on the subsequent  initiation  of
      divorce proceedings or the termination of the marriage.


  21. Third, as a non-EEA national spouse has a permanent right of residence
      once he has accumulated 5 years' residence in accordance with the  EEA
      regulations, he will not need a retained right of  residence  if  that
      period of residence has been accumulated  before  divorce  proceedings
      are initiated.  Where,  5  years  residence  in  accordance  with  the
      regulations has not been established before  divorce  proceedings  are
      initiated by an EEA spouse who subsequently ceases to be  a  Qualified
      Person, either because she ceases to exercise Treaty rights or  leaves
      the United Kingdom, the non EEA spouse will be entitled to retain  his
      right of residence provided he meets both the gateway  requirement  of
      reg 10(5)(d)(i) and the requirements of the  second  sub-paragraph  of
      the Directive, as transposed into domestic law by regulation 10(6).


  22. In the language of Article 13 of the Directive, before  a  person  can
      acquire a right of permanent residence, he must meet two requirements.
      The first requirement is  that  of  Article  13(2)(a),  replicated  in
      regulation 10(2)(d)(i), that he demonstrates  that  the  marriage  has
      lasted for at least 3 years, during at least 1 of which he resided  in
      the United Kingdom. The second requirement is that he meets one of the
      conditions set out in the  penultimate  or  second  sub  paragraph  of
      Article 13(2). That means he must show that he is, during  the  period
      of residence sought to be relied upon, a worker or  self-employed  and
      that he has sufficient resources for himself and  his  family  members
      (if any) not to become a burden on the host member state and that they
      have comprehensive medical insurance. That requirement  is  replicated
      in regulation 10(6).


  23. The key point in this reasoning  is  this.   The  position  under  the
      Directive is that the non  EEA  spouse  potentially  qualifies  for  a
      retained right of residence once the  marriage  has  lasted  at  least
      three years at the date of the initiation of the divorce  proceedings,
      provided the couple lived in the United Kingdom for at  least  one  of
      those years. The ambition of the Directive, as set out in  recital  15
      of the preamble, is that family members should be legally  safeguarded
      in the event of divorce. That is achieved by the second sub  paragraph
      of Article 13(2) (replicated in regulation  10(6))  which  anticipates
      that, in the context of a marriage that ends in  divorce,  a  non  EEA
      spouse will continue to reside in the host member state for  a  period
      sufficient to qualify for a permanent right of  residence  by  himself
      meeting the requirements previously met by their EEA national spouse.


  24. I am reinforced in this conclusion by drawing an analogy with  Article
      12, as mentioned above, because plainly it cannot be a requirement  of
      a widower of an EEA national spouse that his late spouse, and not  he,
      continues to  meet  such  requirements  until  five  years  qualifying
      residence has been accumulated.


  25. Thus, Regulation  10(5)(b)  requires  that  the  non  EEA  spouse  was
      residing in the United Kingdom in accordance with the  regulations  at
      the date of the termination of the marriage, but the non EEA  national
      spouse may demonstrate that not just by establishing his former spouse
      continued to exercise Treaty rights in the United Kingdom  up  to  the
      date of the divorce but by showing that he met the requirements of the
      second sub paragraph of the Directive, replicated at regulation  10(6)
      of the regulations.


  26. For those reasons there is no tension between the  Directive  and  the
      regulations. It follows that the judge made no error  of  law  in  his
      approach to and application of the regulations to  the  facts  of  the
      case before him.




  27. The judge allowed the appeal because he  found  as  a  fact  that  the
      appellant's EEA national spouse was working at  the  date  upon  which
      divorce  proceedings  were  instigated.  The   grounds   for   seeking
      permission to appeal set out the only challenge pursued as follows:


           "It was accepted at the outset of  the  hearing  that  the  only
           issue that needed to be established was  whether  in  accordance
           with Regulation 10(5), the appellant's  sponsor  was  exercising
           Treaty rights at the date of their divorce on  17/09/2012.  This
           was  following  a   Case   Management   Meeting   conducted   on
           19.05.2016....


           It appears the Judge has made an error by basing his decision on
           whether the sponsor was exercising Treaty  rights  at  the  date
           divorce proceedings were instigated, rather  than  when  it  was
           finalised."


      And permission to appeal was granted in the following terms:


           "I am satisfied that it is arguable that  the  Judge  materially
           erred regarding the applicable  date  when  Treaty  Rights  were
           being considered."


      Therefore, given that the only challenge pursued against the  decision
      of the First-tier Tribunal Judge has failed, the appeal to  the  Upper
      Tribunal must be dismissed.


      Summary of decision:


  28. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no error of law and his decision to
      allow the appellant's appeal is to stand.


  29. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

                               Signed        [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 18 October 2017

