
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28019/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 November 2014                          |On 02 December 2014           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                               mehdi m anwari
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Singh instructed by Malik & Malik Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who was born on 24  September
    1991.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 23  March  2011  with  entry
    clearance as the dependent child of his mother and father  valid  until
    23 May 2013.  The appellant's father has been granted indefinite  leave
    to remain.

 2. On 26 April 2013,  the  appellant's  mother  made  an  application  for
    further leave to remain as the partner of a settled person (namely  the
    appellant's father) and her application was refused on 14 May 2013.  On
    16 May 2013, the appellant made an application  for  further  leave  to
    remain.  On 5 June 2013, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's
    application on the basis of his relationship  with  his  parents  under
    para 298 of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended)  and  also  under
    para 276ADE of the Rules based on his private life.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  No oral hearing was
    requested  and  the  appeal  was  determined  on  the  papers.   In   a
    determination promulgated on  11  June  2014,  Judge  David  C  Clapham
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 4. On 22 July 2014,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  PJM  Hollingworth)
    granted the appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the
    basis that: "an arguable error of law has arisen  in  relation  to  the
    extent of the information available to the Judge which should have been
    available."

The Submissions

 5. In his oral  submissions,  Mr  Singh  who  represented  the  appellant,
    initially submitted that the judge had erred in law  in  proceeding  to
    determine  the  appeal  without  sight  of  the  respondent's   bundle.
    However, Mr Singh accepted that  argument  could  not  succeed  when  I
    pointed out to him that the  appeal  file  contained  the  respondent's
    bundle dated as received by the Glasgow  Hearing  Centre  on  25  April
    2014.  The appeal was determined on the papers on 23 May 2014.

 6. Whilst it is undoubtedly the case that when the  appeal  was  initially
    listed for determination on  the  papers  by  Judge  D'Ambrosio  on  16
    December 2013, he did not have a respondent's bundle and so declined to
    determine the appeal and directed the respondent to serve  her  bundle,
    it is clear that bundle was subsequently served  on  the  Tribunal  and
    received on 24 April 2014.

 7. Instead, Mr Singh directed his submissions to a more general point that
    the judge had been wrong to rely on the limited information before  the
    Tribunal and had made an error of fact in stating  that  the  appellant
    had entered the UK in March 2011 as a visitor when,  in  fact,  he  had
    arrived as a dependent of his parents.  As I understood his submission,
    he relied upon this as establishing an error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.  In
    addition, he relied upon the appellant's circumstances  including  that
    he had a parent and brother in the UK at the time of the hearing  which
    should have led the judge to allow the appeal under Art 8 on the  basis
    of an interference with the appellant's family life.

 8. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Richards accepted (as had  been
    done in the  rule  24  reply  dated  13  August  2014)  that  both  the
    respondent's decision and the  judge  had  wrongly  recorded  that  the
    appellant had entered as a visitor in 2011.  Nevertheless,  that  error
    was not material to the judge's decision to dismiss  the  appeal  under
    Art 8.

Discussion

 9. This appeal was determined on the papers because the appellant did  not
    request an oral hearing.  On 14 October 2013, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    wrote to both the appellant and respondent indicating that any  written
    evidence and submissions should be sent to the Tribunal by 11  November
    2013.  It would appear that the appellant submitted no evidence  beyond
    that attached to his application form.  On that form the appellant gave
    very limited information.  He stated he was living with his parents  in
    England as an "adult dependant"; that he could not live  in  any  other
    country without his parents; and he only  had  uncles  in  Afghanistan.
    His grounds of appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are  in  the  most
    general terms, asserting  that  the  respondent  failed  to  take  into
    account all relevant circumstances and arrived at  a  decision  without
    due consideration of all the evidence.  The grounds conclude:

         "The appellant intends to particularise each ground further at  the
         hearing of the appeal and such other and  further  grounds  may  be
         urged at the hearing of this appeal."

10. Of course, there was no hearing of the appeal because the appellant did
    not request an oral hearing.  No further information was submitted.

11. Mr Singh accepted that it was for the  appellant  to  produce  relevant
    evidence but he reminded me that the appellant was not  represented  at
    the  time  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing   and   his   current
    representatives had only been instructed two weeks ago.   Although,  Mr
    Singh accepted that his representatives had been involved  in  drafting
    the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal which assert that the First-
    tier Tribunal erred in law in finding that there was no  "family  life"
    between the appellant and his family in the UK.

12. In my judgment, the  criticism  of  Judge  Clapham's  determination  is
    without merit.  Whilst it is true that he mistakenly  states  that  the
    appellant entered as a visitor on 23 March 2011, he was  clearly  aware
    that the appellant had been in the UK since that date and there  is  no
    suggestion in his determination that he considered that  the  appellant
    had been here unlawfully (which of course he had not been) at any  time
    since that date.  The fact is that the  appellant  was  admitted  as  a
    dependant of his mother and father at a time when his  application  was
    made before he reached adulthood.  Indeed, Judge  Clapham  specifically
    refers  to  that  being  the  appellant's  case  at  para  5   of   his
    determination.

13. At paras 6-10 of his determination, Judge Clapham  gave  the  following
    reasons for dismissing the appeal:

         "6.  I do not have as much information as I would expect to have in
             a case of this kind.  As the appellant is now 22 years of  age
             I would have expected to see some indication from  him  as  to
             why he did not consider he  would  be  able  to  lead  a  life
             independent of his parents.  The Grounds of  Appeal  say  that
             the respondent arrived at a decision without due consideration
             of all the evidence furnished in respect of the matter  but  I
             am not clear as to what information it is that  the  appellant
             says was furnished but was not considered by the respondent."

         7.   Although the appellant says the respondent has failed to  have
             regard to the appellant's unique circumstances I am not  clear
             as to what it is  that  makes  the  appellant's  circumstances
             unique.  The respondent's decision is said to be  contrary  to
             the provisions of the ECHR but I am not clear as  to  how  the
             appellant suggests that the respondent  has  disregarded  ECHR
             and it will be remembered that Article 8 which gives the right
             to respect for private and family  life  does  not  confer  an
             absolute right.  There is a proportionality test.

         8.   The Grounds of Appeal say that the respondent failed  to  give
             consideration to the relevant matters but I am not clear as to
             what relevant matters it  was  that  the  respondent  did  not
             consider.  The Grounds of Appeal say that the  respondent  has
             allowed herself to be influenced by irrelevant facts but there
             is no indication as to what these are.  The Grounds of  Appeal
             also say  that  it  is  the  intention  of  the  appellant  to
             particularise each ground at the hearing of the appeal but  my
             understanding is that the appellant has  indicated  he  wishes
             this case to be decided on the papers.

         9.   The reasons for refusal letter sets out  why  the  appellant's
             case does not meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
             and I do not have information in front of me to  suggest  that
             the appellant would in  fact  meet  the  requirements  of  the
             Immigration  Rules  or,  alternatively,  would  have  a   good
             arguable case outside the Immigration Rules.

         10.  As this appeal has been outstanding for some  time  I  am  not
             persuaded that there would be  any  point  in  doing  anything
             other than making a decision.  The appellant in his letter  of
             16th April 2014 has asked not to be put in limbo.  I note that
             the appellant's letter says that he needs to go to university,
             to work and pay tax but however meritorious  these  intentions
             are I do not consider that these  matters  on  their  own  are
             sufficient to allow me to conclude  that  the  respondent  has
             made a decision that she was not entitled to make."

14. As the judge noted, the appellant was 22 years of age.  Whilst an adult
    child may be able to establish family life with his or her parents (see
    for example Ghising [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC)), the appellant produced no
    evidence to show that at 22 years of age the nature of his relationship
    with his parents was such as to demonstrate continued  dependency  upon
    them other than his bald assertion that he lived with them.  Even  that
    was not supported by any independent evidence.

15. Mr Singh was unable to identify  to  me,  when  asked  to  do  so,  any
    relevant material which the judge had failed to consider.  The  grounds
    refer to a copy of a 2008 appeal determination but Mr Singh  placed  no
    reliance upon it but I was not shown a copy of that  determination  and
    it is not in the appeal file.

16. It is not suggested that the appellant can meet the requirements of any
    Immigration Rule.  He clearly cannot.  Given the almost  total  absence
    of any evidence to support his Art 8 claim, it was inevitable that  his
    appeal relying upon a claim  outside  the  Rules  would  be  dismissed.
    There  simply  was  no  basis  for  concluding  that  the   appellant's
    circumstances involved any interference with  his  private  and  family
    life  such  that  his  removal  would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences (see MF (Nigeria) v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  and  R
    (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin)).



17. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal did not involve the making of an error  of  law.
    The decision stands.

Decision

18.  The  appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is,   accordingly,
    dismissed.

19. No anonymity direction is made.


                                                                      Signed




                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



                                                                      Signed





                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

