
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28308/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination promulgated    |
|11 March 2014                                 |31 March 2014                |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                                     j h
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     no appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 12 May 1992 and is a citizen of Pakistan.  He
    appeals, with  permission,  against  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Prior, promulgated on 16 January  2014,  dismissing  his
    appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse to vary his leave to
    remain and to remove him from the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant's case is that he is a gay man and faces  persecution  on
    that account if he returns to Pakistan. He did not  make  a  claim  for
    asylum in person, but submitted an application on form FRL (O)  stating
    that he is a gay man; that this is known  to  his  family;  that  as  a
    result his engagement to this uncle's daughter  had  been  broken  off;
    that his family no longer wishes to have anything to do with him;  and,
    that his relatives threatened his life. He states he would not be  safe
    anywhere in Pakistan and thus he is entitled to discretionary leave  to
    remain as to remove him would be in breach of articles 3 6 and 8 of the
    Human Rights Convention.

 3. The respondent refused the application on the basis that the  appellant
    did not meet the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE of  the  immigration
    rules; that despite  his  claim  to  be  at  risk  due  to  his  sexual
    orientation, there were no exceptional circumstances and he could apply
    for asylum if he has a genuine fear of returning to Pakistan.

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal on the  grounds  that
    the decision was unlawful; that  the  respondent  had  failed  to  have
    regard to articles 2, 3, 6, 8 or 14 of  the  Human  Rights  Convention;
    that articles 2 and 3 are engaged as if returned to  Pakistan  he  will
    face persecution and  the  death  penalty  on  account  of  his  sexual
    orientation;  that  the  respondent  had  erred  in  having  regard  to
    paragraph 276 ADE of the immigration rule as his application  had  been
    made before 9 July 2013; that discretion should have been exercised  in
    his favour.

 5. The appellant did not appear  at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    tribunal on 3 January 2014. Prior  to  that  two  applications  for  an
    adjournment on the basis of the appellant's ill-health  had  been  made
    and refused on 27 and 31 December 2013. They were  not  renewed  before
    Judge Prior, who on the morning of 3 January 2014 was informed that the
    appellant's representative would  be  attending  the  hearing  at  2pm.
    There was no such appearance, and the judge decided to proceed  in  the
    absence of the appellant or his representative, noting the  history  of
    the adjournment  requests  and  that  the  appellant  had  arranged  an
    appointment to claim asylum on 24 January 2014.

 6. Judge Prior dismissed the appeal, finding:

          i) That the appellant had in his letter  provided  little  detail
             about the emergence of  his  homosexuality;  had  provided  no
             corroborative evidence; and, had failed to explain  the  delay
             in making his claim [12]

         ii) That the burden was on the appellant to prove his claim on the
             lower standard of proof and had failed to do so [13]

        iii) That the appeal  fell  to  be  dismissed  on  asylum  grounds,
             humanitarian protection  grounds,  human  rights  grounds  and
             under the immigration rules.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:

          i) That the judge had erred in not deciding  the  appeal  on  its
             merits and in not applying the relevant law [3];

         ii) That the appellant is entitled pursuant to paragraph  339C  of
             the immigration rules  to  humanitarian  protection  [3],  the
             judge's approach being fundamentally flawed [4];

        iii) That the judge had  failed  to  given  the  appellant  a  fair
             hearing [5];

         iv) That the judge's approach to article 3 was unlawful  [6];  and
             he had applied properly to apply HJ (Iran} [7];

          v) That the appellant has a well-founded fear of  persecution  in
             Pakistan [8];

         vi) That the judge failed to consider the appellant's rights under
             article 8 of the Human Rights Convention [11]-[17]

 8. On 31 January 2014 First-tier tribunal Judge Ford granted permission to
    appeal without specifying that this was on limited grounds. Judge  Ford
    considered  that  it  was  arguable  that  Judge  Prior  had  erred  in
    dismissing the appeal on asylum  and  human  rights  grounds  when  the
    grounds of appeal mentioned only human rights grounds.

Direction regarding anonymity

 9. Although the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  such  an  order,  we
    consider that given the  nature  of  the  claims  put  forward  by  the
    appellant, and given that he has now made a claim for asylum,  that  it
    would be appropriate to make an anonymity order.

10. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings

Proceedings on 10 March 2014

11. There was no appearance by the appellant but there was on file a letter
    from the appellant's solicitors stating that he wanted the matter to be
    dealt with on the papers. The  letter  is  accompanied  by  a  skeleton
    argument; an out patient  prescription  form  and  material  apparently
    supportive of the appellant's claim.

12. Ms Isherwood explained that in light of the fact that the appellant had
    now claimed asylum and that application was under  consideration,  that
    the respondent would be withdrawing the underlying decisions to  refuse
    to vary leave to remain and to make removal directions.

13. The effect of the withdrawal of the underlying decision in  before  the
    Upper Tribunal is that the  Tribunal  continues  to  have  jurisdiction
    under the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 to decide  whether
    the determination of the First-tier Tribunal should be  set  aside  for
    error of law and, if  so,  to  re-make  the  decision  in  the  appeal,
    notwithstanding the withdrawal  of  the  appealed  decision  -  see  SM
    (withdrawal of appealed decision: effect) Pakistan  [2014]  UKUT  00064
    (IAC).

14. This is a case where the issue of whether the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of law is still in issue.
    We have followed the detailed guidance given in SM at [66]:

    Accordingly, where the Upper Tribunal is considering an appeal  against
    the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  the  decision  that
    triggered the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal is then withdrawn,  the
    Upper Tribunal must proceed pursuant to section 12 of the 2007  Act  to
    decide whether or not the First-tier Tribunal's determination  contains
    an error of law and in doing so, the Upper Tribunal should have  regard
    to the reasons why the respondent has withdrawn her decision.   If  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not err in law, then that is  the  end  of  the
    appeal.  If the Upper Tribunal finds that the First-tier  Tribunal  did
    err in law, then whether it proceeds to  the  stage  of  re-making  the
    appeal under section 12(2)(b)(ii) may well depend on the view that  the
    Upper Tribunal takes of whether the re-made appeal  would  need  to  be
    substantively, as opposed to formally,  determined,  according  to  the
    factors we have described above.  In this regard, we  observe  that  at
    the end of its decision in KF and others,  the  Administrative  Appeals
    Chamber found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law but decided
    not to set that Tribunal's decision  aside  "as  that  would  serve  no
    useful purpose on the particular facts of this case" [62].

15. On the facts of this appeal, we consider  that  we  must  first  decide
    whether the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Prior  involved  the
    making of an error of law.

16. It was open to Judge Prior to proceed to determine the  appeal  in  the
    appellant's  absence,  having  noted  that  the  medical   certificates
    produced in support of the earlier requests did not adequately  explain
    why the appellant could not attend the  hearing.   There  is  still  no
    proper explanation for that, nor has any satisfactory  explanation  for
    the representatives' failure to attend been provided. Accordingly,  the
    judge was entitled to proceed to determine the claim  on  the  material
    before him in the appellant's absence.

17. We find no merit in the submission that the judge erred in  considering
    asylum grounds. The appellant stated in his grounds of appeal  that  he
    faces persecution on account of his sexual  orientation  on  return  to
    Pakistan. While the refugee convention is not mentioned, this ground of
    appeal engages it and it could not seriously be argued that  any  judge
    who, faced with the nature of this claim, could have acted lawfully  in
    not considering asylum grounds.

18. The burden of proof was on the appellant  to  show,  in  line  with  HJ
    (Iran) & HT (Cameroon) [2010] UKSC 31, first that he is a gay man,  and
    second, that he faces persecution as a result. The  appellant  did  not
    attend the hearing to give evidence and had failed properly to  explain
    that. The judge was entitled to find that  the  very  limited  material
    adduced by the appellant was insufficient even on the lower standard of
    proof to show first that he was gay, or had made out his case  that  he
    faces ill-treatment as a result. Given the brevity of  the  appellant's
    account, it was not an error for the judge not to  refer  expressly  to
    the background material or case law, nor can it properly be argued that
    the judge failed to bear it in mind.

19. It follows from this that the judge was entitled to dismiss the  appeal
    on asylum grounds, and his reasons, while succinct,  are  adequate  and
    sustainable.  For the  same  reasons,  his  findings  with  respect  to
    humanitarian protection and articles  2  and  3  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention are also sustainable and adequate.

20. While the judge made no express findings with respect to article  8  of
    the Human Rights Convention, the grounds fail to establish any arguable
    basis, given the dearth of material, on which any judge having properly
    directed himself as to  the  law  could  properly  have  found  in  the
    appellant's favour. The fact that he has lived  her  for  three  years,
    lawfully, and has studied here is wholly insufficient.

21. Accordingly, we consider that the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Prior did not involve the making of an error of law.

22. While the underlying decision has been withdrawn, as we have  found  no
    error of law, there is no need for us to take further  action;  had  we
    found any or all of the errors identified, we would not  have  set  the
    decision aside as there would have been no useful purpose in doing  so,
    given that the appellant's claim for asylum is now under consideration,
    and any decision to refuse that would attract a fresh right of appeal.

Summary of conclusions and decisions

 1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making
    of an error of law.

 2. The parties are reminded of the anonymity order made

Signed                                  Date:  28 March 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


