
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28642/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 January 2017                             |On 25 January 2017            |
|Extempore judgment                            |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                              Miss sarita karki

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not represented and no appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This is the appeal of Miss Karki against the decision of the  First-
       tier Tribunal subsequent to a hearing on 13 July 2016, the  decision
       being promulgated on 25  July  2016.   The  appellant  had  appealed
       against a decision by the Secretary of State to refuse  her  further
       leave to remain as a student.   The  application  had  been  refused
       under paragraph 322(1A) of the  Immigration  Rules  and  also  under
       322(2) as her previous application had  been  made  using  the  same
       false document.  Directions had also been made to remove  her  under
       Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  Her
       appeal against that decision was dismissed, the judge  finding  that
       the appellant had not provided sufficient evidence to allow  him  to
       conclude that she had not employed deception.  He found that she did
       not have a plausible and innocent explanation for  the  test  result
       and had not provided information other than she sat the test.


    2. The appellant did not attend the hearing before me.  No  reason  for
       her absence was forthcoming and from the file she  was  notified  of
       the date of hearing to her last notified address.

    3. Although permission to appeal had been granted on the basis that  it
       was arguable that the judge had reversed  the  burden  of  proof  by
       expecting the appellant to produce certain documents and that it was
       arguable that the  judge  had  not  followed  the  Upper  Tribunal's
       decision in SM and Qadir which states  that  after  considering  the
       evidential burden on the respondent to provide prima facie  evidence
       of fraud then considering whether the  appellant  could  provide  an
       innocent explanation the burden then shifted back to the  respondent
       to discharge the legal burden of proof, that in  fact  was  not  the
       basis upon which the judge had reached his decision.

    4. The judge had made a finding which was open to him having heard  the
       evidence of the appellant and considered  the  documentary  evidence
       before him that she had not been able to provide sufficient evidence
       to enable a conclusion that she had not employed  deception.   There
       was therefore no evidential burden upon the Secretary  of  State  to
       consider whether the respondent had discharged the legal burden  and
       therefore there is no error of law in this decision  and  I  dismiss
       the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

[pic]


Signed                                  Date 24th January 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
