
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/28611/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13th June 2016                    |On 14th July 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
                      (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             Mr Shane John Ellis
                        (No Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Jaufurally of Callistes Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless for the purposes of this decision I  shall  refer
    to the parties as they were described before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that is Mr Lewis as the appellant and the Secretary  of  State  as  the
    respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born  on  19th  June  1981.   The
    appellant came to the UK with his mother as a minor and  on  27th  June
    2006 he was granted indefinite leave to  remain.    On  16th  September
    2007 he was arrested and charged with robbery.  On 20 May 2010  he  was
    sentenced to 8 years imprisonment (although that sentence  was  reduced
    to six years).  On 22nd July 2010 he was notified of his  liability  to
    automatic deportation.  On 14th September 2012 it was recorded  that  a
    deportation order was made against him.  He appealed and his appeal was
    allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross on Article  8  grounds.   The
    Secretary of State was appeal rights exhausted on 13th July 2013.

 3. On 25th June 2014 the Secretary of State made a decision to revoke  the
    appellant's Indefinite Leave to Remain by way  of  Section  76  of  the
    Nationality Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  which  the  appellant
    appealed.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Shamash allowed the appeal  on  4th  December
    2015 deciding that the use of Section 76 of the Nationality Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 (NIA Act 2002) was an  abuse  of  process  because,
    when the respondent made a deportation order against the  appellant  on
    14th September 2012, she found that the appellant's indefinite leave to
    remain was automatically revoked and she recorded that the Secretary of
    State proceeded to reinstate his Indefinite Leave to Remain (ILR) after
    his appeal which succeeded on Article 8 grounds.

 5. The judge recorded paragraph 9 of her decision

         '... it was agreed between the parties  that  when  the  respondent
         made the deportation order against the appellant on 14th  September
         2012 the appellant's indefinite leave to remain  was  automatically
         revoked.   It  was  also  agreed  between  the  parties  that  once
         Immigration Judge Ross had allowed the appeal under Article 8  this
         appellant's ILR was reinstated'.

 6. The First Tier Tribunal Judge, in allowing the appeal,  found  that  it
    was  not  open  to  the  respondent  to  use  Section   76   in   these
    circumstances.  It was also recorded by the Judge [10]  that  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer accepted  that  'following  the  decision  of
    Immigration Judge Ross it was open to  the  Home  Office  to  grant  30
    months discretionary leave'.  Judge Shamash at [11] stated

         'I invited Ms Uzodinma to address me on how  the  respondent  could
         justify the revoking of ILR once it had been reinstated when  there
         was no material change in circumstances'.

    And

         '... this case turned on whether or not it was appropriate for  the
         respondent to use Section 76 NIA in the case of an appellant  whose
         case had been allowed by an Immigration Judge'.

 7. The judge then noted that the respondent agreed the appellant  had  not
    re-offended and added that Section 32 of the  UK  Borders  Act  was  no
    longer relevant since the previous First-tier Tribunal Judge had  found
    that the appellant fell within  one  of  the  exceptions  to  automatic
    deportation because his rights would be breached under Article 8  ECHR.
    She concluded that the respondent had,  after  the  deportation  order,
    reinstated ILR.

 8. No written evidence of that reinstatement was produced and I should add
    that a concession in legal error has no effect.

 9. The Secretary of State challenged First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Shamash's
    decision.   She  stated  that  the  judge  appeared  to  be  under  the
    impression that the Appellant was granted ILR following his  successful
    appeal and the Secretary of State was now seeking to revoke  that  ILR.
    It was submitted that the legal position regarding the ILR  granted  on
    27th June 2006 was defined by Section 35(2) of the UK borders Act  2007
    which inserted the following into Section  79  Nationality  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002,

         'At the end of section 79 (no deportation order pending appeal) add

         "(3) This section does not  apply  to  a  deportation  order  which
         states that it is made in accordance with section 32(5) of  the  UK
         Borders Act 2007.

         (4) But a deportation order made  in  reliance  on  subsection  (3)
         does not invalidate leave to enter or remain,  in  accordance  with
         section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971, if and  for  so  long  as
         section 78 applies'

10.  Thus,  Section  79(3)  confirmed  that  the  provision  preventing   a
    deportation order  being  made  pending  appeal  did  not  apply  to  a
    deportation order made in accordance  with  Section  32(5)  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 (automatic deportation) but also, by virtue of Section
    79 (4), a deportation order made in  reliance  on  subsection  (3)  (ie
    Section 32(5)) did not invalidate leave to enter or remain so  long  as
    Section 78 applied.  Section 78 refers to removal whilst an  appeal  is
    pending. Thus a  deportation  order  under  the  automatic  deportation
    provisions could be made but would not invalidate ILR whilst the appeal
    was pending.

11. The Secretary of State submitted that in the light  of  the  above  and
    following the appeal it was  open  to  the  SSHD  to  decide  that  the
    Appellant remained liable to deportation, by  virtue  of  his  sentence
    (section 76(1)(a)) but could not  be  deported  for  legal  reasons  by
    virtue of the finding of the tribunal that it would be in breach of his
    Human Rights (Article 8) Section 76(1)(b).  It was submitted  this  was
    not an abuse of process as asserted at [21] of Judge Shamash's decision
    but a procedure prescribed by law.

12. At the hearing before me, Mr Jaufurally submitted that  it  was  common
    ground that a deportation order had been signed by the respondent.   He
    cited Section 79(4) of the NIA Act 2002 which states that

         'But a deportation order made in reliance on  subsection  (3)  does
         not invalidate leave to enter or remain in accordance with  section
         5(1) of the Immigration Act 1071, if and for so long as section  78
         above applies'.

    Section 78 stated

         s78      (1) 'while  a  person's  appeal  under  Section  82(1)  is
         pending he may not be

                   a. removed from the United Kingdom in accordance with  a
                      provision of the Immigration Acts, or

                   b. required to leave the United  Kingdom  in  accordance
                      with a provision of the Immigration Acts, or

          2) In this section 'pending' has the  meaning  given  by  Section
             104'

13. Mr Jaufurally argued that in the light of Section 79(4) of the NIA 2002
    the fact that the appellant won  his  appeal  against  the  deportation
    order did not mean that the deportation order did not have  an  effect,
    George R (on the application of) v SSHD [2014] UKSC 28.  He argued that
    the effect of the deportation order was to invalidate  the  appellant's
    ILR and the Secretary of State had therefore chosen  to  reinstate  his
    ILR after the deportation order and subsequently  attempted  to  revoke
    it.  During the hearing Mr Jaufurally pointed to  the  letters  of  the
    Secretary of State, which he suggested, by  the  Secretary  of  State's
    conduct, showed she had chosen to reinstate  ILR.  The  effect  of  the
    successful appeal, and thus the ending of the appeal  proceedings,  was
    to induce revocation of ILR.  Section 79 NIA only had force whilst  the
    appeal was pending. Thus the Secretary of State was now  attempting  to
    revoke an ILR which had been reinstated. That  was  an  abuse  and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge should be upheld.

14. Ms Ahmed submitted that the respondent was still able to revoke ILR  as
    the appellant was both liable  to  deportation  but  there  were  legal
    reasons why he could not be deported.

Conclusions

15. The grounds of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  stated  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision was challenged on the basis that  it  was
    not in accordance with the law and that it was not in  accordance  with
    the appellant's human rights. The judge, however, finding an  abuse  of
    process, allowed the appeal but did not identify  how  the  appeal  was
    allowed.  I turn to a consideration of the challenge to the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision as set out above.

16. Sections  3(5)  and  (6)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971  contain  the
    provisions for  deportation.   Procedure  for  and  further  provisions
    regarding deportation are found in Section 5 of this  Act  and  provide
    for the actual making of an order.

17. Section 79 of the NIA 2002 relates to Deportation Orders  and  appeals,
    and states as follows

         (1)      A deportation order may not be made in respect of a person
         while an appeal under section 82(1) against the  decision  to  make
         the order

             (a) could be brought (ignoring any possibility  of  an  appeal
             out of time with permission), or

             (b) is pending

         (2)      In this section 'pending' has the meaning given by Section
         104

         (3)      This section does not apply to a deportation  order  which
         states that it is made in accordance with section 32(5) of  the  UK
         Borders Act 2007

         (4)      But a deportation order made in reliance on subsection (3)
         does not invalidate leave to enter or remain,  in  accordance  with
         section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971, if and  for  so  long  as
         section 78 above applies.

         Section 104 NIA Act as then read as follows

      1) An appeal under section 82(1) is pending during the period-

      2) (a)      beginning when it is instituted, and

             (b)  ending  when  it  is  finally  determined,  withdrawn  or
             abandoned (or when it lapses under section 99)

      3) ...

      4) ...

      5) An appeal under Section 82 (a) (c) (e) or (f) shall be  treated  as
         finally determined if a  deportation  order  is  made  against  the
         appellant.

18. Section 78 read as follows

      1) While a person's appeal under Section 82(1) is pending he  may  not
         be-

          a) removed from the United Kingdom in accordance with a provision
             of the Immigration Acts, or

          b) required to leave the United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  a
             provision of the Immigration Acts.

      2) In this section 'pending' has the meaning given by Section 104

      3) Nothing in this section shall prevent any of the following while an
         appeal is pending-

          a) the giving of a direction for the appellant's removal from the
             Untied Kingdom,

          b) the making of a deportation order in respect of the  appellant
             (subject to section 79), or

          c) the taking of any other interim or preparatory action

19. When  a  deportation  order  is  revoked  under  Section  5(2)  of  the
    Immigration  Act  1971  the  effect  is  such  that  leave,  which  was
    invalidated, is not reinstated should an appeal be successful George  R
    (on the application of) v SSHD [2014] UKSC 28.  In the case  of  George
    there is no doubt that the appellant was liable to deportation and  the
    Deportation Order had been effectively made and his leave invalidated.

20. The Supreme Court in George, however, made  clear  the  procedures  for
    making and the automatic deportation provisions are distinct  from  the
    non automatic deportation provisions although both  stem  from  Section
    3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.  At  [17]   of  George  there  was
    specific reference to the differing scheme of deportation under Section
    32(5) of the UK Borders Act and the attendant  use  of  Section  76  in
    automatic deportations.  The Court noted

         "Although the 2007 Act was not in existence  when  section  76  was
         enacted, its scheme  for  automatic  deportation  provides  another
         example of a case when section 76 would be available without  there
         being any deportation order to be  revoked.  If  the  Secretary  of
         State determines that section 32(5) of  the  2007  Act  applies  to
         render an individual liable to deportation it is not the making  of
         a deportation order but the antecedent decision that the provisions
         of the act apply which is appealable."

21. At [28] the Supreme Court acknowledged that the import of the 2007 Act

         "... needs to  be  resolved  on  facts  arising  from  it  and  not
         hypothetically on a case to which it has no application."

22. Under Section 32(5) of 2007 Act the decision which is being appealed is
    an 'antecedent decision' and whether the Secretary of State must make a
    deportation order or not.  Following  a  successful  appeal  therefore,
    there is no longer a requirement  on  Secretary  of  State  to  make  a
    deportation order. The making of  a  deportation  order  under  Section
    32((5)  of the 2007 Act is specifically subject  to  Section  33  which
    sets out the exceptions such  as  where  it  would  breach  a  person's
    Convention Rights.

23. In this case the appellant successfully appealed the requirement of the
    Secretary of State under Section 32(5)  of  the  2007  Act  to  make  a
    deportation order against the appellant.  As First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Shamash stated Section 32 (5) (that the Secretary of State must make  a
    deportation order) did not apply because the  appellant's  appeal  fell
    within an exception.  His deportation  would  still  be  deemed  to  be
    conducive to the public good under Section 33  (7)  which  specifically
    states that

         'The application of an exception

         (a)      does not prevent the making of a deportation order;

         (b)      results in it being assumed neither  that  deportation  of
         the person concerned is conducive to   the public good nor that  it
         is not conducive to the public  good;  but  Section  32(4)  applies
         despite the application of Exception 1 or 4'

24. A deportation order therefore can still  be  made  in  accordance  with
    Section 32(5), but further to Section 79 NIA a deportation  order  made
    under this provision (Section  32(5))  does  not  have  the  effect  of
    invalidating leave.   Section 79 prevents the deportation order  having
    the effect of invalidating leave where there  is  reliance  on  Section
    32(5) whilst an appeal is  pending.    Mr  Jaufurally  asked  what  the
    effect of the deportation order  was  and  further  submitted  that  in
    accordance  with  Section  79,  because  the  appeal  had  ended,   the
    deportation order had taken effect.  The appellant's leave  had  ended.
    His argument was that Section 78 would operate only whilst  the  appeal
    was pending and once the appeal had ceased under the terms  of  Section
    104 NIA Act 2002 then the Deportation Order would have effect  and  the
    ILR would have ceased.

25. The full terms of the Deportation  Order  dated  14th  September  2012,
    however, are as follows

         'Whereas Shane John Ellis is  a  foreign  criminal  as  defined  by
         section 32(1) of the UK Borders Act 2007:

         The removal of Shane John Ellis is, under section 32(4) of that Act
         conducive to the public good for the purposes of Section 3(5)(a) of
         the Immigration Act 1971:

         The Secretary of State must make a deportation order in respect  of
         a foreign criminal under section 32(5) of the UK Borders  Act  2007
         (subject to a section 33).

         Therefore in pursuance of Section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971,
         once any Right of Appeal, that may be  exercised  from  within  the
         United Kingdom under section 82(1) of the  Nationality  and  Asylum
         Act 2002 is exhausted, and said appeal is dismissed,  or  if  Shane
         John Ellis does not have a right of appeal that  may  be  exercised
         from within the United Kingdom, the Secretary  of  State,  by  this
         order, requires, the said Shane John Ellis to leave  and  prohibits
         him from entering the United Kingdom so long as this  order  is  in
         force.'

26. It would appear that  the  terms  of  the  order  are  conditional  and
    dependent on the appellant either having his appeal dismissed or having
    no right of appeal.  In  this  case  the  appellant's  appeal  was  not
    dismissed but allowed and this suggests that the deportation order  was
    not therefore activated  because  the  conditions  aforesaid  were  not
    fulfilled. In other words the appellant's ILR was  not  invalidated  by
    the deportation order during the appeal and the order lapsed  following
    the successful appeal.

27. Section 5 of the Immigration Act 1971 states as follows

         'Procedure for, and further provisions as to, deportation.

         (1)      Where a person is under section 3(5) or (6)  above  liable
         to deportation, then subject to the following  provisions  of  this
         Act the Secretary of State may make  a  deportation  order  against
         him, that is to say an order requiring him to leave and prohibiting
         him from entering the  United  Kingdom;  and  a  deportation  order
         against a person shall invalidate any leave to enter or  remain  in
         the United Kingdom given him before the order is made or  while  it
         is in force.'

28. In other words the operation of Sections 78 and 79 of the NIA was  such
    that whilst the appeal was pending the leave was  not  invalidated  and
    when the appeal was successfully completed by virtue of  the  words  of
    the order, it was no longer in force as  a  result  of  the  successful
    appeal.

29. There is no evidence that ILR has been reinstated by other means. I  do
    not accept that the letters submitted by the Secretary of State pointed
    to a 'reinstatement of leave as suggested'.  Indeed the letter  of  the
    Secretary  of  State  dated  14th  September  2012,  accompanying   the
    deportation order, to which I was referred states  that  'any  previous
    grant of leave is invalidated, at such time as your appeal is dismissed
    and finally determined in line with the  United  Kingdom's  Immigration
    Rules'.   As  stated  the  appeal  was  to  be  dismissed  and  finally
    determined, that is, read  in  the  conjunctive.  The  appeal  was  not
    dismissed.  As stated, leave was not invalidated  under  the  automatic
    deportation provisions and would not have  been  so  invalidated  until
    determination of the appeal.  That is reflected  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's letter.   On determination of the appeal  in  relation  to  his
    deportation, the appellant succeeded and thus I conclude leave was  not
    invalidated by this process or at the determination of that process and
    therefore not  as  claimed  'reinstated'  only  to  be  revoked  again.
    Indeed, Ms Ahmed submitted that  the  appellant  was  not  're-granted'
    indefinite leave to remain again. His ILR was only revoked on 24th June
    2014 and that decision was appealed and needs to be determined.

30. This was not a case  where  there  was  an  abuse  of  process  as  the
    appellant's leave had not been revoked such that it could be reinstated
    only to be the subject for further invalidation.

31. That is not the end of the narrative.  Section 76 of the NIA  Act  2002
    with the rubric 'Revocation of leave to enter or remain' sets out

         This section has no associated Explanatory Notes

         (1)      The Secretary of State may revoke  a  person's  indefinite
         leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom if the person-

             (a) is liable to deportation, but

             (b) cannot be deported for legal reasons.

         (2)      The Secretary of State may revoke  a  person's  indefinite
         leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom if-

             (a) the leave was obtained by deception,

             (b) the person would be  liable  to  removal  because  of  the
             deception, but

             (c) the person  cannot  be  removed  for  legal  or  practical
             reasons.

         ...

         (4)      In this section-

           . "indefinite leave" has the meaning given by section  33(1)  of
             the Immigration Act 1971 (c. 77) (interpretation),

           . "liable to deportation" has the meaning given by section  3(5)
             and (6) of that Act (deportation),

           . "refugee" has the meaning given by the Convention relating  to
             the Status of Refugees done at Geneva on 28th  July  1951  and
             its Protocol, and

           . "removed" means removed from the United Kingdom under-

                  (a)  Paragraph 9 or 10 of Schedule 2  to  the  Immigration
                  Act 1971 (control of entry: directions for removal), or

                  (b)  Section 10(1)(b) of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
                  1999 (c. 33) (removal  of  persons  unlawfully  in  United
                  Kingdom: deception).

32. As can be seen from above, the appellant's  deportation  may  still  be
    conducive to the public good. As set out in SS Nigeria  v  SSHD  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 550 at [54] a foreign criminal's deportation remains conducive
    to the public good notwithstanding his successful reliance  on  Article
    8.  In SS Nigeria v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550 Laws LJ has this to say

         "I would draw particular attention to the  provision  contained  in
         s.33(7):  "section  32(4)  applies  despite  the   application   of
         Exception 1...", that is to say, a foreign  criminal's  deportation
         remains conducive to the public good notwithstanding his successful
         reliance on Article 8. I  said  at  paragraph  46  that  while  the
         authorities demonstrate that there is no rule of exceptionality for
         Article 8, they also clearly show that the more pressing the public
         interest in removal or deportation, the stronger must be the  claim
         under Article 8 if it is to prevail. The  pressing  nature  of  the
         public interest here is  vividly  informed  by  the  fact  that  by
         Parliament's express declaration the public interest is injured  if
         the criminal's deportation is not effected. Such a result could  in
         my judgment only be justified by a very strong claim indeed"

33. His deportation is deemed to be conducive to the public good further to
    Section 32(4) of the 2007 Act but it is not clear that the  appellant's
    deportation has specifically been deemed by the Secretary of  State  to
    be conducive to the public good.  The  conditional  deportation  notice
    falls away but that in itself relies on the Section 32(4) of  the  2007
    Act.  There needs to be the specific deeming by the Secretary of  State
    within the meaning of Section 3(5) of the Immigration Act 1971  and  in
    accordance with Ali (s 76 'liable to deportation') Pakistan [2011] UKUT
    00250 (IAC).

         "18.     As we remarked at the hearing, it seems odd to describe  a
         person who cannot be deported as "liable to  deportation".  It  is,
         however, clear that the statutory provisions rule out a  conclusion
         based on that simple observation. "Liable to deportation" has, as s
         76(4) provides, the meaning given by subsections (5) and (6) of s 3
         of the 1971 Act. It would appear to follow from that that liability
         to deportation for the purposes of s 76 can arise  in  three  ways.
         They are the ways set out in those subsections, and are, first, the
         deeming by the Secretary of State that the person's deportation  is
         conducive to the public good (s 3(5)(a)); secondly, the making of a
         deportation order against another person to whose family the person
         in question belongs (s 3(5)(b)); and thirdly, the recommendation of
         the person's deportation by a court under s3(6).

         19.      None of those has happened in this case. Mrs Cantrell  was
         clear in her  acceptance  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  not
         indicated  that  she  deems  this  appellant's  deportation  to  be
         conducive to the public good; there is no scope for the application
         of s 3(5)(b); and, although the appellant has been convicted of  an
         offence in relation to which the court could have  recommended  his
         deportation, it did not do so."

34. Nowhere in her decision has the Secretary of State specifically  deemed
    the appellant's deportation as  conducive  to  the  public  good.   The
    decision letter dated 25th June 2014 giving reasons  for  revoking  his
    ILR only states in terms

         'I should therefore warn you that any  further  criminal  offending
         may result in you being liable for deportation in the future'.

    Reliance on Section 32 of the 2007 Act is insufficient.  Therefore  the
    appellant is not yet deemed 'liable to deportation' for the purposes of
    Section 76 and as such the decision of the Secretary of State  was  not
    in accordance with the law.

35. The decision of the Secretary of State afforded the appellant  a  right
    of appeal under Section 82(2)(f) of  the  Nationality  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  Two grounds of appeal were  put  forward  that  under
    Section 84(1)(e) (not in accordance with the law) and  84(1)(c)  (Human
    Rights).  The judge failed to consider the relevant evidence  and  make
    the necessary findings or decide on what basis the appeal was  allowed.
    This was an error of law.

36. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  For the reasons  given  above  I  set
    aside the decision of Judge Shamash and allow the appeal to the limited
    extent the appellant awaits a lawful decision  from  the  Secretary  of
    State with regards revocation of his Indefinite Leave to Remain.


Signed      Date 6th July 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Upper Tribunal Rimington
