


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28343/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 20 June 2013                             |On : 24 June 2013            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                               NOVAID MOHAMMED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Nasim, instructed by M-R Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 20 October  1971.  He  claims
to have arrived in the United Kingdom unlawfully on 10 December 1997.  There
is no evidence of his entry.

On 23 May 2012 he applied for indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
Kingdom on the basis of long residence and submitted various documents  with
his application as evidence of studies,  employment  and  residence  in  the
United Kingdom since December  1997.  His  application  was  refused  on  22
November 2012 under paragraphs 276B(i)(a) and (i)(b) of HC 395. With  regard
to paragraph 276B(i)(b), the respondent considered that  he  had  failed  to
submit sufficient evidence of  his  residency  throughout  the  period  from
December 1997. The respondent did not accept any of the  evidence  submitted
in relation to residency prior to 2007 and  only  accepted  those  documents
for 2007 onwards as being genuine and sufficient to show residency.  It  was
therefore not accepted that he had  accrued  14  years  or  more  continuous
residence in the United Kingdom. The respondent also  considered  Article  8
under the immigration rules but did not accept that the appellant  was  able
to meet the requirements of those rules. A decision was then made, the  same
day, to remove him to Pakistan.

The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard  by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Davey on 4 February 2013. Judge Davey  heard  from
the appellant and two witnesses. He found the documentary evidence  produced
by the appellant to be largely reliable. He  placed  little  weight  on  the
evidence of the witnesses as to the appellant's arrival and early  residence
in the United Kingdom, although he gave some weight to  the  evidence  of  a
third witness who had not attended,  since  it  was  consistent  with  other
evidence. The judge found, on balance, that  the  appellant  had  discharged
the burden of proof to show that he had been in  the  United  Kingdom  since
the end of  1997.  He  found  nothing  in  relation  to  the  considerations
identified in paragraph 276B(ii) to indicate that entry clearance should  be
refused. However, he found  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  meet  the
English language requirement of  the  rules  since  there  was  no  evidence
before him to show that he had sufficient knowledge of the English  language
or sufficient knowledge about the life in the United Kingdom. He found  that
the appellant was  accordingly  unable  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
immigration rules and he found  also  that  his  removal  would  not  breach
Article 8, either under the new rules or in the wider context. He  dismissed
the appeal.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on  the  grounds  that
the judge, having accepted that the appellant had shown  that  he  had  been
resident in the United  Kingdom  since  1997,  ought  to  have  allowed  the
appeal; and that the judge had not decided Article 8 properly.

Permission was granted on 2 May 2013, although on a different basis,  namely
that the judge had arguably raised the issue of English language of his  own
accord, without giving the  appellant  an  opportunity  to  respond  to  the
matter and had arguably deprived him of a fair hearing.

Appeal hearing

The appeal came before me on 20 June 2013.

Mr Tarlow and Mr Nasim were in agreement that there had  been  an  error  of
law in the judge's failure to give the appellant an opportunity  to  respond
to an issue that he had raised of his own accord  and  which  had  not  been
raised  in  the  refusal  letter,  namely  as  to   the   English   language
requirements. They both agreed that the decision ought therefore to  be  set
aside and re-made. However they had different  views  as  to  which  of  the
judge's findings were to be preserved.

Mr Tarlow relied upon the Secretary of State's Rule 24  response,  in  which
it was asserted that the judge had failed  to  have  regard  to  submissions
made by the presenting officer on the matter of the  appellant's  employment
records and the reliability of the documentary evidence. In  his  view  none
of the findings should be preserved and the appeal should be heard afresh.

Mr Nasim submitted that the judge had looked at  all  matters  properly  and
that the rule  24  did  not  challenge  his  findings.  There  had  been  no
challenge to the authenticity of the documents. The appellant had  submitted
evidence of his English language ability, and that was referred  to  in  the
covering letter from his solicitors at page C1 and in his  application  form
at B43. The judge's findings should be preserved and  the  decision  re-made
with regard only to the English language requirement.

I advised the parties that in my view  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
made errors of law in his determination and that his decision had to be  set
aside with none of the findings preserved. My reasons for so concluding  are
as follows.

Consideration and findings

It was not in dispute that the judge had erred  in  law  by  making  adverse
findings in regard to the English language requirement of the rules  without
having given  the  appellant  an  opportunity  to  address  that  matter.  I
therefore set aside the determination on that basis.

However it seems  to  me  that  the  judge's  findings  on  the  documentary
evidence and the appellant's length of residence in the United Kingdom  also
contain errors of law and have to be re-made as well.

Whilst the respondent, in refusing  the  appellant's  application,  did  not
refer to any specific anomalies or irregularities in the documents  produced
by the appellant as undermining their authenticity, the  documents  relating
to residence prior to 2007 were nevertheless not accepted  as  carrying  any
weight, on the basis that they were not official  documents  and  that  they
related to companies which had never  been  registered.  Additional  reasons
for not giving weight to the documentary and other evidence  were  given  by
the presenting officer in submissions  before  the  judge  at  the  hearing.
Those reasons included the fact  that  there  was  no  explanation  how  the
appellant had managed to work and study throughout his period  of  residence
without being asked to provide any identification (as  was  the  appellant's
evidence); that the only witness who was able to attest to  the  appellant's
residence in the United Kingdom prior to 2007 had not attended the  hearing;
that it appeared coincidental that all the companies that had  provided  the
evidence pre-dating 2007 had been dissolved  or  were  not  registered;  and
that the documents were ones that could easily have been created by anyone.

However, there is no indication in Judge Davey's determination that he  took
those submissions into account when making his findings about the  evidence.
It appears that he simply accepted the reliability of the documents  on  the
basis that evidence had been supplied to show that  the  relevant  companies
had been registered at the time the appellant was  involved  with  them.  He
did not give any consideration to, or make findings  upon,  the  credibility
of the appellant's account of having managed to study at and work  for  such
organisations   and   companies   without   providing   any   evidence    of
identification, nor to the fact that each of the companies had  subsequently
been dissolved, despite these being raised as issues before him and  despite
himself expressing  reservations  about  the  reliability  of  some  of  the
evidence, as stated at paragraph 13, and  placing  little  weight  upon  the
evidence of the witnesses owing to their lack of personal knowledge  of  the
appellant's entry and earlier residence in the United Kingdom. It  seems  to
me, therefore, that the judge failed to take  account  of  material  matters
that were raised before him and failed to give full and proper  reasons  for
his findings  in  regard  to  the  documentary  evidence  and  thus  to  the
appellant's length of residence in the United  Kingdom.  Accordingly,  I  do
not consider that his findings in that respect can be preserved.

For all of these reasons,  I  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal contains errors of law and has to be set aside in its entirety.  In
the circumstances, it is appropriate for the appeal to be  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal for all matters to be determined afresh.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is set aside  in  its  entirety,
with no findings  preserved.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal, to be dealt with afresh, pursuant to section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and  Practice  Statement  7.2(b),
before any judge aside from Judge Davey.

   Directions

   Any further documentary evidence relied upon by either  party  is  to  be
   filed with the Tribunal and served upon the other party no later than ten
   working days before the hearing.


















                               Signed                                  Date




                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
