

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28164/2012
                                                               IA/28165/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 26th June 2013                           |On : 1st July 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                           muhammad saleem akhtar
                                zakia saleem

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Michael Harris, instructed by Farani Javid Taylor
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss Emily Martin of the Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellants, Mr Muhammad and Mrs Zakia, are nationals  of  Pakistan,
    born respectively on 1st September 1944 and 22nd October 1951.  In June
    2011 they applied for visas to visit their son, Muhammad Kashif, a taxi
    driver in Northampton, as well as another son,  Muhammad  Farrukh,  who
    was a student, also living in Northampton.  The  appellants'  remaining
    son, Farhan, was still living with them in  Islamabad,  but  his  wife,
    Saiqa Jabeen, was now over here as a student, again in Northampton.  Mr
    Muhammad is a retired civil servant, and in his Visa  Application  Form
    he said that his pension yielded Rs 18,817/- per month, and  was  going
    up very shortly (from 1st July 2011) to Rs 21,640/-.  His son  who  was
    living there, Farhan, would provide sums of Rs  20,000/-  to  25,000/-,
    "as per need."  As well as this income, Rs 10,00,000/-  were  available
    in a joint account with NIB Bank.  According to a check run by the High
    Commission in Islamabad,  Mr  Muhammad's  bank  statements  showed  his
    monthly pension of Rs 18,000/- going in,  while  bank  statements  from
    Farhan showed Rs  16,00,000/-  in  total  (presumably  the  joint  bank
    account with Rs 10,00,000/- was part of  that).   The  ECO  also  noted
    previous visits by the appellants to the UK, in  2000  and  2006,  from
    which  they  had  returned  to  Pakistan.   Unsurprisingly   in   those
    circumstances, visas were issued at the end of June 2011.

2.    Although it was intimated on the Visa Application Form  that  a  visit
    of 30 days was intended, leave to enter was granted, in the usual  way,
    for six months.  Just before the six months expired in  February  2012,
    Mr Muhammad and Mrs Zakia applied for indefinite leave to remain as the
    dependants of  their  son,  Kashif,  who  had  sponsored  their  visit.
    According to Mr Muhammad, his daughter contacted him  from  Pakistan  a
    couple of weeks after his arrival here to say  that  she  had  found  a
    letter at the house where the appellants had been  living  since  1984.
    This accommodation was owned by the Government, and the letter  was  to
    inform the occupants that they were no longer entitled to  live  there,
    and would have to move out.  Their  daughter  arranged  for  all  their
    belongings to be put into storage, and they now had no home  to  return
    to in Pakistan.

3.   In their letter of 10th February 2012, enclosing the  applications  for
    indefinite leave, Farani Taylor Solicitors say that the applicants' son
    Farhan, who was living with them in Pakistan, has come to join his wife
    in the United Kingdom, with the result that there  is  nobody  left  in
    Pakistan to look after them.  Their two  married  daughters  cannot  be
    expected to do so, but Mr Muhammad has diabetes and a heart  condition,
    needing bypass surgery in 2007, while Mrs Zakia suffers from arthritis.



4.   The applications were not decided until 8th  November  2012,  and  were
    refused under paragraph 319 of the Immigration  Rules.   The  decision-
    maker also traversed the  new  rules  inserted  on  9th  July  2012  as
    paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM.  This was both unnecessary and wrong.
     Part 8 of HC 395 continued to govern these applications, as  preserved
    by paragraph A280(c)(i).  The  applications  were  also  refused  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR, and two 'immigration  decisions'  were  made  in
    consequence : refusal to vary the applicants'  leave,  and  removal  to
    Pakistan.  The validity of the latter decision was not put in issue  in
    the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal,  nor  was  it  raised
    before Judge Graham or, indeed, before me.  I only noticed the omission
    after the hearing at Field House.

5.   The refusal to vary the appellants' leave is not an  invalid  decision,
    so the dismissal of the appeals by Judge Graham should be taken  to  be
    the appeals against that refusal: see Adamally & Jaferi [2012] UKUT 414
    (IAC).  When the appeals came before Judge Graham on 12th  March  2013,
    she heard evidence from Mr Muhammad and his son, Kashif, but  not  from
    Farhan.  There was also a certificate from the NIB Bank dated 7th March
    2013, showing that the credit balance in the joint account had  dropped
    from Rs 10,00,000/- to below Rs 10,000/-.  Judge Graham's  reasons  for
    dismissing the appeals were challenged in grounds settled by Mr Harris,
    which were said by Designated Judge Lewis, who  granted  permission  to
    appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  to  "occupy  that  intermediate  legal
    territory between findings which were or were not  reasonably  open  to
    the judge from the evidence."  Those grounds were developed  very  ably
    by Mr Harris when the appeals came before me today,  and  were  stoutly
    rebutted by Miss Martin.  My conclusion, despite Mr Harris'  persuasive
    submissions, is that the judge's findings certainly were open to her on
    the evidence before her, and for the reasons she gave.

6.   In-country  appeals  under  paragraph  317  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    require the application of a 'notional  dependency'  test.   Would  the
    appellants be wholly or mainly dependent upon the sponsor if they  were
    back in their own country at the date of the hearing?  What is fatal to
    these appeals is that Mr Muhammad's pension of  Rs  21,640/-  has  been
    piling up every month in his bank account in Pakistan, and he  has  not
    drawn on it since February 2012.  Mr Muhammad failed to produce any up-
    to-date statement of the account into which his pension  is  paid,  and
    professed ignorance of the amount it contains.   The  judge  was  fully
    entitled to infer from this  reticence  that  the  appellants  are  not
    mainly dependent financially on their sponsor in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Their living costs each month were put  at  Rs  25,000/-  in  the  Visa
    Application Form, most of which could be met by the pension.

7.    Mr  Harris  protests  that  corroboration  is  not  needed   in   this
    jurisdiction.  That would be true of, say, an asylum seeker, who cannot
    ask the authorities of his country to provide evidence that  they  have
    been persecuting him.  But it is not unreasonable to expect an educated
    person who has a bank account to provide  statements  of  that  account
    when his financial means are at issue.  Miss Martin cites TK  (Burundi)
    [2009] EWCA Civ 40 as authority for the proposition that the absence of
    independent supporting evidence, which is readily available, can play a
    part in determining overall credibility where no  credible  explanation
    is provided for its absence.

8.   Mr Harris argues that, while Rs 25,000/-  might  have  been  enough  to
    cover the appellants' living costs two years ago, when they applied for
    entry clearance, it was no longer enough by the time their appeals came
    before the First-tier Tribunal.   Both  of  them  were  suffering  from
    medical conditions, for which the medication, treatment and care  would
    be much more costly on return.  But there was no proper medical  report
    before Judge Graham to support such an assertion.  The letters from  Dr
    Tariq Muhammad and Dr Shajee  Siddiqui  refer  vaguely  to  "continuous
    medical care" and  "constant  personal  attention  and  care",  without
    condescending to any particulars.  Judge Graham notes that Mr  Muhammad
    has type 2 diabetes and ischaemic heart disease, while  Mrs  Zakia  has
    arthritis in both knees.  But they had  these  conditions  long  before
    they came to the United Kingdom in August  2011.   Mr  Muhammad  had  a
    coronary bypass in 2007.  Farhan Saleem gave  no  evidence  as  to  the
    care, if any, which he provided to the appellants while he  was  living
    with them.  There was no proper evidence of any personal care needed by
    the appellants now, which could not be provided in Pakistan.  As  Judge
    Graham observes, there was no suggestion that the  appellants'  medical
    problems had worsened in the UK.  There are some prescriptions  written
    for Mr Muhammad in Northampton, but there  is  no  evidence  that  this
    medicine will not be available in Pakistan, or that its  cost  will  be
    prohibitive.

9.   A much greater expense even than the  medication,  insists  Mr  Harris,
    will be the cost of alternative accommodation for the  appellants,  now
    that they have lost their home in Pakistan.  Judge Graham, however, did
    not believe that they had lost it, and  gave  cogent  reasons  for  her
    disbelief.  It was an unlikely coincidence that  the  Government  would
    have acted so promptly in  repossessing  the  appellants'  house,  just
    after they had gone on holiday to the UK.  Also unlikely was the supine
    acceptance of the loss by Mr Muhammad, when by his own account  he  had
    fought tooth and nail in the past to retain possession.  He  had  taken
    the matter to court, he had enlisted the support of the Minister of the
    Interior, whose assistant private secretary he had been, and  his  case
    had gone all the way up to the Federal Minister for  Housing,  who  had
    let him keep the accommodation although he was no  longer  working  for
    the government.  As Judge Graham observes, even though Mr Muhammad  was
    in this country when the purported repossession of his house  occurred,
    he could have asked his previous helpers to  intervene,  or  instructed
    lawyers to take up his case.  Most tellingly, as Judge Graham observes,
    the letter informing the appellants that they must leave their house in
    Islamabad was allegedly read out to them over the  telephone  by  their
    daughter, but has not been produced.   Nor  is  there  any  documentary
    evidence that the appellants' household  goods  are  in  storage.   The
    principle enunciated in TK (Burundi) is again of obvious relevance.

10.  Judge Graham formed an adverse view  of  the  appellants'  credibility,
    noting their failure to mention in their visa applications that  Farhan
    would be travelling with them to the UK, and staying for a much  longer
    period that one month.  Their failure to produce  documentary  evidence
    which should have been readily available  added  to  this  unfavourable
    impression.  In those circumstances, the appellants could not make  out
    a strong Article  8  claim.   Besides,  as  the  judge  also  observed,
    Farhan's wife's leave to enter as a student had  been  due  to  end  in
    February 2013, and her application for further leave had not  yet  been
    decided.  Even if further leave as a student was granted, it was  still
    in a temporary category, such that both Saiqa Jabeen and Farhan  Saleem
    could be expected to rejoin the appellants in Pakistan in  due  course,
    and resume family life ties there.

11.  In fine, there is no error of  law  in  the  First-tier  determination,
    save for the failure  to  realise  that  the  decision  to  remove  the
    appellants under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006 was unlawful, having been conveyed in the same notice  as  the
    refusal to vary the appellants' leave : see now Ahmadi [2013] EWCA  Civ
    512.  Section 47 has recently been substituted  so  as  to  allow  such
    decisions to be made in tandem, but that does not affect the illegality
    of the removal decisions made in November 2012.   In  respect  of  that
    matter only, I remake the decisions on these appeals.   Mr  Harris  has
    drawn attention to the fact that Mrs Zakia has recently been  diagnosed
    with breast cancer.  That is something which  her  representatives  may
    wish to  pursue  with  the  Secretary  of  State,  before  any  further
    'immigration decision' is taken in her case.




     DECISION

     The appeals are allowed to the limited extent  that  the  decisions  to
    remove  the  appellants  are  unlawful.   Otherwise  the  appeals   are
    dismissed.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                              29th June 2013



