



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28705/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                    |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24th June 2014                               |On 28th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                               Mr Jubel ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant a citizen of Bangladesh (born 10th February 1981) appeals
    with permission to the Upper Tribunal, against a determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, in  which  his  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision of 17th December 2009 to remove him and to refuse him leave to
    remain under Article 8 ECHR, was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant claims he travelled to  the  UK  in  2000;  with  an  ex-
    employer and his family, who employed him as a houseboy. He  claims  he
    was left behind by the ex-employer who simply took him to a  restaurant
    in Aldgate, left him and also took away his passport. In  the  meantime
    he also claims that he made his way to his maternal uncle's home at  an
    address in London W2. The  Appellant  then  claims  to  have  supported
    himself in various catering establishments throughout his time  in  the
    UK.

 3. In 2009 he made application for leave to remain based on his Article  8
    private and family life that he said he had established with his  uncle
    and his uncle's family. That application was refused. It was  noted  by
    the Respondent that the Appellant had entered the UK illegally and that
    there was no evidence to demonstrate  that  any  claimed  family  life,
    extended beyond normal emotional ties. It was further  noted  that  the
    Appellant had engaged in employment which,  since  he  was  an  illegal
    entrant, he was not permitted to do.

 4. The Secretary  of  State  further  looked  at  paragraph  395C  of  the
    Immigration Rules in the context of  the  Article  8  ECHR  claim.  She
    considered whether  the  Appellant  should  qualify  for  discretionary
    leave; but nevertheless maintained the  decision  to  refuse  leave  to
    enter.

 5. The Appellant was  informed  of  the  decision  by  letter  dated  17th
    December 2009 and advised that he  should  leave  the  United  Kingdom,
    since the decision attracted no right of appeal.

 6. The Appellant did not leave the UK and on 3rd July 2013 he  was  served
    with a Section 10 removal notice; that notice did attract  a  right  of
    appeal. It is this appeal which came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge C M A Jones).

 7. The Appellant's claim is that he would suffer a grave culture-shock  if
    removed to Bangladesh and that he is at risk of inhumane and  degrading
    treatment in breach of  Article  3  of  ECHR.   He  said  his  fear  of
    returning to Bangladesh is a continuing one as the current  climate  is
    very unstable and breaches of  human  rights  are  rife.  It  was  also
    claimed that he is suffering from severe depression, risk of  self-harm
    and suicidal tendency and that he  would  have  no  medical  or  family
    support in Bangladesh. His relationship with his uncle Mr Bodral  Hoque
    and his family is one of exceptional dependency and therefore would  be
    unable to re-establish a private and family life in Bangladesh.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge having considered the evidence before her
    dismissed the appeal. The Appellant sought permission  to  appeal.  The
    grounds seeking permission are lengthy but for  the  purposes  of  this
    hearing, permission was granted only in the following terms:

         "Ground (3) asserts that the Judge erred in rejecting the  evidence
         of the appellant's uncle Mr Hoque on the basis that it  contradicts
         the appellant's  evidence  but  the  Judge  did  not  set  out  the
         contradictions. The Judge stated [at 16] that she 'cannot accept Mr
         Hoque's evidence as reliable  since  it  contradicts  the  evidence
         given in the appellant's statements'. It is arguable that the Judge
         erred in law due to failure to given reasons for finding there were
         contradictions in the evidence.

         Ground (4) argues that the Judge in considering Article 8 failed to
         take into account that under para 276ADE(vi) the appellant does not
         have meaningful ties to Bangladesh due to his residence in  the  UK
         since 2000. It is arguable that the Judge erred in law for  failing
         to start her consideration of the Article 8 claim by  reference  to
         the Immigration Rules".

    Thus the matter comes before me to decide whether the determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses an error of law of such gravity
    that the decision needs to be set aside and remade.

Error of Law Hearing

 9. Mr Coleman for the Appellant, recognising the limitations placed on him
     submitted that the First-tier Judge had not given adequate reasons for
    her rejection of the Appellant's uncle's evidence. The Judge was  under
    a duty to give clear reasons  for  finding  oral  evidence  to  be  not
    credible and such findings had to be supported by reasons.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had  stated  at  [16]  of  the  determination  what
    amounted to one line.

         "I  cannot  accept  Mr  Hoque's  evidence  as  reliable  since   it
         contradicts the evidence given in the appellant's statements".

    Mr Coleman submitted that if one compared the Appellant's evidence with
    his uncle's, there are no contradictions shown. Even if there were  the
    Judge has failed to say what they are.  This  is  material  because  it
    means that the uncle's evidence is discounted and had it been  properly
    factored in the Judge may have found that family life under  Article  8
    was engaged. So far as  ground  4  is  concerned  Mr  Coleman  sensibly
    limited his submissions to saying that the Appellant  had  been  denied
    consideration under the Immigration Rules.

10. Mr Whitwell on behalf of the Respondent relied on the Rule 24 response.
    Further to that, he emphasised that firstly  so  far  as  ground  4  is
    concerned, it is hard to see how the FtT Judge  can  be  said  to  have
    erred. It is quite correct that there was no consideration of 278ADE or
    Appendix FM of the Rules. Since the Appellant has no partner or wife he
    could not benefit from those parts of the Rules in any event.  Further,
    what is being appealed against is a decision made in December 2009. The
    refusal was based on paragraph 395C  and  Article  8,  which  were  the
    relevant Rules and jurisprudence at that time.





Has the Judge Erred?

11. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  heard  oral  evidence  from  both  the
    Appellant and his uncle. The saving grace in this determination is that
    the Judge has made a full note of both the  evidence-in-chief  and  the
    cross-examination of the Appellant's uncle Mr Hoque. In [16] the  Judge
    having taken note of the evidence before her concluded that she did not
    find the Appellant to  be  a  credible  witness.  She  gives  full  and
    considered reasons for this finding.  What is clear from a  reading  of
    the determination is that she compares the various  statements  of  the
    Appellant to his oral evidence and finds  the  Appellant's  "statements
    were glaringly at odds with the  oral  evidence".  There  has  been  no
    challenge to that finding and therefore it stands. When dealing with Mr
    Hoque's evidence the Judge reports in [16], "I cannot accept Mr Hoque's
    evidence as reliable since it contradicts the  evidence  given  in  the
    Appellant's statements". The Judge's  conclusion  is  somewhat  brusque
    perhaps, but the question is whether her reasons are adequate.

12. The starting point, in my judgment, must lie with the Judge's  findings
    in respect of the Appellant. The Judge comprehensively disbelieved  the
    Appellant's account  and  this  she  was  entitled  to  do.  She  found
    fundamental discrepancies in the Appellant's account because he said on
    the one hand that he was always in work and on  the  other  he  had  no
    regular work due to lack of papers. That contrasts with  the  Appellant
    stating that he had lived with his uncle for fourteen  years  and  that
    his uncle supported him. The latter statement gives the  impression  of
    the Appellant living  full-time  with  his  uncle  and  being  entirely
    dependent upon him. Mr Hoque however in his  statement  says  he  first
    became aware of the Appellant's presence in the United Kingdom sometime
    in December 2000 when he arrived at his doorstep in London W2.

13. Mr Hoque goes on to say that  the  Appellant  remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom and lived with him at the aforementioned  address  (London  W2)
    from time to time for up to approximately six years. He often went away
    in search of employment.  He  then  goes  on  further  in  [6]  of  his
    statement to say "Jubel has over the years also stayed with me  and  my
    family at 21 Ham Park Road for about a  year  since  from  sometime  in
    2006". All this is a far cry from the Appellant's evidence of an  uncle
    who has been providing all the support for him. The First-tier Tribunal
    Judge was entitled to reach the conclusion that she could not accept Mr
    Hoque's evidence as reliable because it contradicts the evidence  given
    in the Appellant's statements. Her reasons are adequate.

14. So far as ground 4 is concerned Mr Coleman quite properly did not press
    that matter. I accept  Mr  Whitwell's  submission  that  the  Appellant
    having applied for leave to remain outside the Rules  in  October  2009
    and the application being refused  in  December  2009,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was not required to consider the appeal  in  respect  of
    paragraph 276ADE (Edge Hill [2014] EWCA Civ 42).









DECISION

15. For the foregoing reasons  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  a
    material error of law and the Appellant's appeal against  its  decision
    is therefore dismissed.


No anonymity direction is made



Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Fee Award

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signature                                             Dated
