
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28423/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 19th August 2013                           |On 20th August 2013          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                             EYRAM YAO DOE GOMEZ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Davies of Kings Court Chambers
For the Respondent: Mr Spence - Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Hague promulgated on 6th March 2013 following  a  hearing  at
        Bradford  on  19th  February  2013  in  which  he   dismissed   the
        appellant's appeal against the refusal of his application for leave
        to remain in the United Kingdom under the provisions  of  paragraph
        276B of the Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR.


     2. Permission to appeal was granted and the matter comes before me for
        the purposes of an Initial hearing.  Following discussions with the
        advocates it was agreed that the challenge to the Judge's  decision
        under the Immigration Rules must fail, as that challenge is reliant
        upon a policy which  although  dated  prior  to  the  date  of  the
        application resulting in the immigration decision under appeal only
        applies to applications made after the application date, meaning it
        has no relevance to these proceedings. I do find however  there  is
        clear legal error in the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  under
        Article 8 ECHR for the following reasons:


     i.   Although the Judge correctly identified that it was  necessary  to
   address the questions set  out  in  Razgar,  which  is  a  correct  legal
   self-direction,  and  reminded  himself  that   it   was   necessary   to
   consider  whether   there   will   be   interference   with   family   or
   private life of such severity so as to engage  Article  8,  he  fails  to
   deal  with  the  private  life  aspects  of  the  appellant's  case  when
   the appellant has been in the United Kingdom for over ten       years.


      ii.   The  Judge  considered  the  evidence  of  Emma  Thompson,   the
   appellant's  partner,  and  found  that   family   life   recognised   by
   Article  8  (1)  existed  [11].  He  then   went   on   to   state   that
   notwithstanding  this,  it  was  reasonable  to  expect   the   appellant
   to  return  home  to  make  an   application   as   it   was   "not   the
   purpose  of  Article  8  to   evade   potential   difficulties   in   the
   provision of required levels maintenance." There is no  finding        in
   relation  to  what  application  the  appellant  will  be   expected   to
   make, based upon  his  relationship  with  Emma  Thompson,  and        no
   analysis  of  the  relevant  case  law  to  be  found       in  Chikwamba
   (FC)  v  SSHD  2008  UKHL  40  and  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
   Department   v   Hayat;    Secretary    of    State    for    the    Home
   Department v Treebhowan (Mauritius)  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1054         when
   considering the proportionality of the decision.


      iii.  In  finding  that  because   Ms   Thompson   has   transportable
   employment skills and a husband and in-laws who could           introduce
   her to Ghanaian life, that it was reasonable to expect          her to go
   live with the  appellant  in  Ghana  [13]  without  giving         proper
   consideration to all the competing factors including the         fact  Ms
   Thompson is a  British  national  with  family  in  the            United
   Kingdom and where she has lived all her life.


     3.  I  find  as  a  result  Judge  Hague  erred  in  relation  to  his
        consideration of Article 8 and that such legal errors are  material
        to  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal.   I  set   aside   the
        determination although the findings  under  the  Immigration  Rules
        shall be preserved findings.  Submissions  were  invited  from  the
        parties in relation to the remaking of the decision.







Discussion



     4. The appellant was born on the 31st December 1981 and is a  national
        of Ghana. His immigration  history  shows  he  entered  the  United
        Kingdom lawfully on 27th January 2002 as a student. His  leave  was
        periodically extended until the 31st May 2009. On 30th May 2009  he
        made an 'in time' application for leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
        Student under the Points-Based System which  was  refused  on  14th
        September 2009. On 30th November  2009  he  applied  for  leave  to
        remain as a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant  which  was  also
        refused. He appealed that decision but withdrew his appeal and made
        a further application on 15th June 2010 which was granted until  15
        June 2012. On 25th May 2012 he  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
        remain on the basis of long residence (lawful).


     5. It was found he could not meet the  requirements  of  276B  on  the
        basis of the need to have ten years continuous lawful residence  in
        the United Kingdom, as his immigration history  showed  there  were
        periods during the ten years relied upon during which the appellant
        had no lawful leave to remain.  Judge Hague found the break was for
        a period of 33 days.


     6. It is clear that during this time  the  appellant  has  established
        himself in the United Kingdom. He also met Emma Thompson  in  2011.
        In August 2011 they signed a joint tenancy although she  could  not
        find work in Leeds and so lived with her mother during the week and
        spent three to four days with the appellant at their flat in Leeds.




     7. In relation to the question whether it is proportionate  to  expect
        the appellant to return to Ghana to make an application to re-enter
        the United Kingdom I have considered  the  relevant  case  law.  In
        Chikwamba (FC) v SSHD 2008 UKHL 40 the House of Lords said that  in
        deciding whether the general policy of requiring people such as the
        Appellant to return to apply for entry in accordance with the rules
        of this country was legitimate and proportionate  in  a  particular
        case, it was necessary to consider what the benefits of the  policy
        were.  Whilst acknowledging the deterrent effect of the policy  the
        House of Lords queried the underlying basis of the policy in  other
        respects and made it clear that the policy should not be applied in
        a rigid, Kafka-esque manner.  The House of Lords  went  on  to  say
        that it would be "comparatively rarely, certainly in  family  cases
        involving children" that an Article 8 case should be  dismissed  on
        the basis that it would be proportionate and more  appropriate  for
        the Appellant to apply for leave from abroad.


     8. In MA (Pakistan) v SSHD (2009) EWCA Civ 953 Sullivan LJ  said  that
        view in Chikwamba that "return should be insisted  upon  simply  in
        order to secure formal compliance with entry clearance rules  'only
        comparatively rarely' is not confined to cases where  children  are
        involved.  Whilst the suggested  approach  in  Chikwamba  certainly
        applies in such  cases,  it  also  applies  in  family  cases  more
        generally."  In Hayat  (nature  of  Chikwamba  principle)  Pakistan
        [2011] UKUT 00444 (IAC) the Tribunal confirmed that  the  Chikwamba
        principle is not confined to cases where children are  involved  or
        where the person with whom the appellant is seeking to  remain  has
        settled status in the United Kingdom


     9. In Secretary of State for the Home Department v Hayat; Secretary of
        State for the Home Department v Treebhowan (Mauritius) [2012]  EWCA
        Civ 1054 the Court of Appeal outlined the following guidance as  to
        the effect of Chikwamba and the subsequent decision of the Court of
        Appeal in TG (Central African Republic) [2008] EWCA Civ 997 and  SZ
        (Zimbabwe) [2009] EWCA Civ 590 and MA (Pakistan) in  which  it  had
        been considered:


              (i)      Where an applicant who  did  not  have  lawful  entry
   clearance                    pursued a claim under Article 8, a dismissal
   of the claim on  the                        procedural  ground  that  the
   policy required that the applicant should                   have made the
   application    from     his     home     state     might,     but     not
   necessarily would, constitute a disruption  of  family  or  private  life
          sufficient to engage Article 8, particularly where  children  were
              adversely affected;


               (ii)      Where  Article 8  was  engaged,  it  would  be  a
   disproportionate                      interference with family or private
   life to enforce such a policy unless               there was  a  sensible
   reason for doing so;


              (iii)    Whether it was sensible to enforce that policy  would
   necessarily be                   fact sensitive, and potentially relevant
   factors included the                      prospective length  and  degree
   of disruption of  family  life  and                        whether  other
   members of the family were settled in the UK;


              (iv)     Where Article 8 was engaged and there was no sensible
   reason for                   enforcing the  policy,  the  decision  maker
   should  determine  the                       Article 8  claim  on   its
   substantive merits, having regard to all material                factors,
   notwithstanding   that   the    applicant    had    no    lawful    entry
   clearance;


              (v)      Nothing in Chikwamba was intended to  alter  the  way
   the courts                   should approach substantive Article 8 issues
   as laid down in seminal                   cases as Razgar and Huang;


              (vi)     If the Secretary of State had no sensible reason  for
   requiring the                    application to be  made  from  the  home
   state, the fact that he had               failed  to  do  so  should  not
   thereafter  carry  any  weight  in  the                       substantive
   Article 8 balancing exercise (para 30).


    10. In the reasons for refusal letter the Secretary of State refused to
        grant the appellant leave under paragraphs A277C and Appendix FM of
        the Immigration Rules as it was claimed  he  provided  no  evidence
        that he is in a subsisting relationship with a British  citizen  or
        that he was the parent of a child, or  a  child  with  seven  years
        continuous residence in the United  Kingdom.  The  application  was
        also considered under paragraph 276 ADE of the new Rules and it was
        found he could not succeed in relation to his private life  either,
        although it is noted the application  was  made  on  5th  May  2012
        before the coming into force of the new rules on 9th July 2012.


    11. In relation to Article 8 ECHR, there appears there was no  separate
        consideration of  this  in  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  and
        therefore the respondent has failed to provide sufficient  evidence
        to establish any sensible reason for  requiring  the  appellant  to
        return to Ghana solely for the purposes of making an application to
        return to allow him to continue to live with  Ms  Thompson  in  the
        United Kingdom.


    12. In relation  to  the  First-tier  Judge's  comments  regarding  the
        maintenance provisions of  the  Rules,  these  have  recently  been
        considered by Mr Justice Blake sitting in the  High  Court  in  the
        case of MM and Others v SSHD  [2013]  EWHC  1900  (Admin)  where  a
        number of issues were highlighted in  the  judgment  regarding  the
        maintenance requirements when an individual is seeking to  bring  a
        spouse into the United Kingdom and restrictions  which  Mr  Justice
        Blake considered relevant to the proportionality of a decision.  It
        is not suggested that if the appellant remains there is  likely  to
        be a need for the parties to be reliant on the public purse and  so
        the economic needs of the United Kingdom, which is commonly  relied
        upon when referring to the reason why  there  needs  to  be  strong
        immigration control, is not established in this case.


    13. If it was reasonable to expect Ms Thompson to go  to  Ghana,  where
        family life could  continue,  that  may  be  enough  to  allow  the
        respondent to succeed as the private life  elements  in  themselves
        will not be determinative.  The case law establishes that it  needs
        to be proved that it is reasonable in all the circumstances.  I  do
        not find it proved on the facts of this appeal that this is  so.  I
        accepted  the  appellant  and  Ms  Thompson  have  an   established
        relationship sufficient to amount to  protected  family  life.  The
        finding by Judge Hague to this effect [11] is not challenged by the
        Secretary of State. Ms Thompson has been born and brought up in the
        United  Kingdom,  is  a  British  national,  and  clearly  has   an
        established family and private life here, including  with  her  own
        mother who as a  result  of  recent  events  became  depressed  and
        suicidal and for whom Ms Thompson provides emotional  support.  She
        is also supportive of her brother to whom she  provides  money  for
        his children and who she helps care for. Ms  Thompson  clearly  has
        established family ties and it is necessary to consider the Article
        8 rights of the other family members as part of the proportionality
        exercise- see Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL  39.  I  find  it  not
        proved that  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  Ms  Thompson  who  has
        undergone training to enable her to work in care management in  the
        United Kingdom,  to  abandon  her  choice  of  career  and  related
        education that will be of benefit not only to herself but  also  to
        the community in general, to go to a country of which  she  has  no
        knowledge. She has devoted her studies to achieving  this  specific
        aim. She is also a British citizen entitled to  the  benefits  that
        such status confers upon her. In all the circumstances it  has  not
        been proved to be reasonable to expect Ms  Thompson  to  leave  the
        United Kingdom to go to live in Ghana.


    14. This is therefore a family splitting case.  I am not satisfied when
        all the evidence is considered that the respondent  has  discharged
        the burden of proof upon her to the required standard to show  that
        the appellant's removal from the United Kingdom, for  the  purposes
        of  making  a  fresh  application  to  enable  him  to  return,  is
        proportionate. I therefore the allowed the appeal under  Article  8
        ECHR.


Decision

    15. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is allowed.




   Anonymity.


    16. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make no such order as there was no application for anonymity and
   no basis       making such an order has been established.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 19th August 2013












